 moby-.txt the chapel in this same new bedford there stands a
 moby-.txt the pulpit i had not been seated very long ere a man
 moby-.txt the sermon father mapple rose, and in a mild voice of
 moby-.txt a bosom friend returning to the spouter-inn from the
 moby-.txt nightgown we had lain thus in bed, chatting and
 moby-.txt biographical queequeg was a native of kokovoko, an
 moby-.txt wheelbarrow wheelbarrow next morning, monday, after disposing of
 moby-.txt nantucket nothing more happened on the passage worthy
 moby-.txt chowder it was quite late in the evening when the
 moby-.txt the ship in bed we concocted our plans for the morrow.
 moby-.txt the ramadan as queequeg's ramadan, or fasting and
 moby-.txt his mark as we were walking down the end of the wharf
 moby-.txt the prophet shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?
 moby-.txt all astir a day or two passed, and there was great
 moby-.txt going aboard it was nearly six o'clock, but only grey
 moby-.txt merry christmas at length, towards noon, upon the
 moby-.txt the lee shore some chapters back, one bulkington was
 moby-.txt the advocate as queequeg and i are now fairly embarked
 moby-.txt postscript in behalf of the dignity of whaling, i
 moby-.txt knights and squires the chief mate of the pequod was
 moby-.txt knights and squires stubb was the second mate. he
 moby-.txt ahab for several days after leaving nantucket,
 moby-.txt enter ahab; to him, stubb some days elapsed, and ice
 moby-.txt the pipe when stubb had departed, ahab stood for a
 moby-.txt queen mab next morning stubb accosted flask. such a
 moby-.txt cetology already we are boldly launched upon the
 moby-.txt the specksynder concerning the officers of the
 moby-.txt the cabin-table it is noon; and dough-boy, the
 moby-.txt the mast-head it was during the more pleasant weather,
 moby-.txt the quarter-deck (enter ahab: then, all.) it
 moby-.txt sunset the cabin; by the stern windows;
 moby-.txt dusk by the mainmast; starbuck leaning
 moby-.txt first night-watch fore-top ( stubb solus, and
 moby-.txt midnight, forecastle harpooners and sailors ( foresail
 moby-.txt moby dick i, ishmael, was one of that crew; my shouts
 moby-.txt the whiteness of the whale what the white whale was to
 moby-.txt hark hist! did you hear that noise, cabaco?
 moby-.txt the chart had you followed captain ahab down into his
 moby-.txt the affidavit so far as what there may be of a
 moby-.txt surmises though, consumed with the hot fire of his
 moby-.txt the mat-maker it was a cloudy, sultry afternoon;
 moby-.txt the first lowering the phantoms, for so they then
 moby-.txt the hyena there are certain queer times and occasions
 moby-.txt ahab's boat and crew. fedallah who would have thought
 moby-.txt the spirit-spout days, weeks passed, and under easy
 moby-.txt the albatross south-eastward from the cape, off the
 moby-.txt the gam the ostensible reason why ahab did not go on
 moby-.txt the town-ho's story (as told at the golden inn.)
 moby-.txt of the monstrous pictures of whales i shall ere long
 moby-.txt of the less erroneous pictures of whales, and the true
 moby-.txt of whales in paint; in teeth; in wood; in
 moby-.txt brit steering north-eastward from the crozetts, we
 moby-.txt squid slowly wading through the meadows of brit, the
 moby-.txt the line with reference to the whaling scene shortly to
 moby-.txt stubb kills a whale if to starbuck the apparition of
 moby-.txt the dart a word concerning an incident in the last
 moby-.txt the crotch out of the trunk, the branches grow; out
 moby-.txt stubb's supper stubb's whale had been killed some
 moby-.txt the whale as a dish that mortal man should feed upon
 moby-.txt the shark massacre when in the southern fishery, a
 moby-.txt cutting in it was a saturday night, and such a
 moby-.txt the blanket i have given no small attention to that
 moby-.txt the funeral haul in the chains! let the carcase go
 moby-.txt the sphynx it should not have been omitted that
 moby-.txt the jeroboam's story hand in hand, ship and breeze
 moby-.txt the monkey rope in the tumultuous business of cutting-in
 moby-.txt stubb and flask kill a right whale; and then have
 moby-.txt the sperm whale's head—contrasted view here, now, are
 moby-.txt the right whale's head—contrasted view crossing the
 moby-.txt the battering-ram ere quitting, for the nonce, the
 moby-.txt the great heidelburgh tun now comes the baling of
 moby-.txt cistern and buckets nimble as a cat, tashtego
 moby-.txt the praire to scan the lines of his face, or feel
 moby-.txt the nut if the sperm whale be physiognomically a
 moby-.txt the pequod meets the virgin the predestinated day
 moby-.txt the honor and glory of whaling there are some
 moby-.txt jonah historically regarded reference was made to
 moby-.txt pitchpoling to make them run easily and swiftly,
 moby-.txt the fountain that for six thousand years —and no one
 moby-.txt the tail other poets have warbled the praises of
 moby-.txt the grand armada the long and narrow peninsula of
 moby-.txt schools and schoolmasters the previous chapter
 moby-.txt fast-fish and loose-fish the allusion to the waifs
 moby-.txt heads or tails de balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat
 moby-.txt the pequod meets the rose-bud in vain it was to rake
 moby-.txt ambergris now this ambergris is a very curious
 moby-.txt the castaway it was but some few days after
 moby-.txt a squeeze of the hand that whale of stubb's so dearly
 moby-.txt the cassock had you stepped on board the pequod at a
 moby-.txt the try-works besides her hoisted boats, an american
 moby-.txt the lamp had you descended from the pequod's
 moby-.txt stowing down and clearing up already has it been
 moby-.txt the doubloon ere now it has been related how ahab was
 moby-.txt leg and arm the pequod, of nantucket, meets the samuel
 moby-.txt the decanter ere the english ship fades from sight, be
 moby-.txt a bower in the arsacides hitherto, in descriptively
 moby-.txt measurement of the whale's skeleton in the first
 moby-.txt the fossil whale from his mighty bulk the whale
 moby-.txt does the whale's magnitude diminish? will he perish? inasmuch, then
 moby-.txt ahab's leg the precipitating manner in which captain
 moby-.txt the carpenter seat thyself sultanically among the
 moby-.txt ahab and the carpenter the deck—first night watch
 moby-.txt ahab and starbuck in the cabin according to usage they
 moby-.txt queequeg in his coffin upon searching, it was found
 moby-.txt the pacific when gliding by the bashee isles we emerged
 moby-.txt the blacksmith the blacksmith availing himself of the mild,
 moby-.txt the forge with matted beard, and swathed in a
 moby-.txt the gilder penetrating further and further into the
 moby-.txt the pequod meets the bachelor and jolly enough were
 moby-.txt the dying whale not seldom in this life, when, on the
 moby-.txt the whale watch the four whales slain that evening
 moby-.txt the quadrant the season for the line at length drew
 moby-.txt the candles warmest climes but nurse the cruellest
 moby-.txt the deck towards the end of the first night watch
 moby-.txt midnight—the forecastle bulwarks stubb and flask
 moby-.txt midnight aloft—thunder and lightning the
 moby-.txt the musket during the most violent shocks of the
 moby-.txt the needle next morning the not-yet-subsided sea
 moby-.txt the log and line while now the fated pequod had been
 moby-.txt the life-buoy steering now south-eastward by ahab's
 moby-.txt the deck the coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between
 moby-.txt the pequod meets the rachel next day, a large
 moby-.txt the cabin (ahab moving to go on deck; pip catches
 moby-.txt the hat and now that at the proper time and place,
 moby-.txt the pequod meets the delight the intense pequod
 moby-.txt the symphony it was a clear steel-blue day. the
 moby-.txt the chase—first day that night, in the mid-watch,
 moby-.txt the chase—second day at day-break, the three
end of the project gutenberg ebook of moby dick, by herman melville
***** this file should be named .txt or .zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org///
produced by eugene f. irey
updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away—you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.f.. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section . information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in , the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections  and 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
section . information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
(c)() educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is -. its (c)() letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.
the foundation's principal office is located at  melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, ., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at
 north  west, salt lake city, ut , () -, email
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org
for additional contact information:
dr. gregory b. newby
