 who had already about killed a former poacher, would make short work
 of him if he did; adding, in a sneering tone, that he would take
 care of the gun and bag, and all that it contained.
 mat was now left to his own reflections, which were not of the
 pleasantest.
 drenched to the skin, he paced the room for the best part of an hour,
 to keep himself warm, revolving in his mind all manner of means of
 escape, but only with the gun. he had just concluded that if only
 the keeper would leave the house for a few minutes, he would have a
 chance, because, he argued, he must think i’m a greenhorn to fear
 the dog. why, he ain’t even loose. i se’ed him chained in the shed,
 a fine-looking beast too, and keeper he’ll—but here
  his meditations
 were interrupted by a noise which sounded like the clinking of a
 glass, and applying his eye to a chink in the logs, he saw his captor
 with his legs stretched out before a turf fire, filling a glass from
 burns’ flask, which he had appropriated from the game-bag.
 mat could scarcely suppress his joy on witnessing this sight. he now
 remembered that burns had refilled his flask at the lodge with old
 whisky.
 “drink away, my fine fellow,” he almost whispered; “drink away; that’s
 not public-house tipple. i know the strength of that whisky, as i
 drank burns’ health with it.” and then he softly resumed his walk.
 it was now quite dark, and shortly again applying his ear to the logs,
 he could hear the keeper’s steady snore.
 now or never was his time. so cautiously getting out of the window,
 mat crept round to the front door, taking care to go round the
 building on the side opposite to the shed of the bloodhound. in the
 porch he saw the shimmer reflected on the barrels of burns’ gun,
 and might then have made straight off with it; but “no,” he said to
 himself, “keeper didn’t ax me if i’d like a drop, after all my hard
 work, so i’ll just help myself.”
 gently opening the door, he dropped on his hands and knees, and guided
 by the heavy breathing of the keeper, who was now in a drunken sleep,
 he approached that worthy, reared himself up to the table,
  found the
 flask, slipped it into his pocket, felt that the keeper was sitting on
 the empty game-bag, so left it to keep that worthy man warm, retreated
 as silently to the porch where he had left the gun, and picking it
 up, he got clear out without disturbing man or dog, and with long
 strides made off in the direction of vinney ridge, and in little
 over an hour’s time was taking a breather under his old friends, the
 great trees of the herons. throwing himself down at full length, he
 pulled the flask from his pocket, and was just finding fault with the
 greediness of the keeper for having drunk so much of its contents,
 when in the far distance he distinctly heard the baying of a hound!
 “so soon!” angrily exclaimed mat, as he jumped up. “lucky it’s a still
 night; but i’ve almost ‘drove it off’ too long. however, here’s my
 health, and good luck,” as he applied the flask to his lips. “now
 for the stream, and the scheme, which i’ve been planning!”
 in two minutes he was down to the river, and, knowing every inch of
 the ground, quickly found the object of his search. this was a rude
 bridge, formed of a couple of saplings, which spanned the swollen
 stream. this he crossed, and, from the opposite side, threw the logs
 in, when they were quickly carried away by the current. he then cut
 down a very thin, whippy, seedling oak, and twisted it round and round
 until he had a supple rope strong enough to hold an
  unbroken colt;
 then, ensconcing himself behind a bush, he awaited events.
 for the first time mat felt a bit nervous—nervous as to the
 approaching contest, which he knew now to be inevitable; and nervous
 in that his body had been for hours in wet clothes. he could hardly
 bear the tremendous strain of waiting. the tension was almost
 overpowering, for he was aware that he had to deal with one of the
 fiercest of the fierce breed of bloodhounds lately imported into the
 forest.
 nearer and nearer came the bell-like notes of the hound, now
 apparently dying away, then again breaking out into a deep roar, as
 the intervening timber shut out the sounds or let them be heard again.
 at last a most appalling roar, which seemed to mat to thunder into his
 very ear, told where the animal had come on to his resting-place on
 the ridge, and then all was silent.
 mat took another little refresher from the flask, and had hardly
 replaced it on the ground beside him when the great hound burst into
 sight in the moonlight. “that’s a bit of luck,” thought mat, as the
 clouds cleared away, and allowed him to see the animal’s movements.
 coming to the water’s edge, the beast quested up and down, and then,
 throwing his head up with another roar—of satisfaction, as it sounded
 to mat—prepared to spring into the river exactly opposite to where his
 would-be prey was watching.
 at this moment the hound was completely at mat’s mercy; our forester
 could have blown his head to atoms with the gun which was lying loaded
 by his side, but no such thought crossed his mind. on the contrary,
 his one idea for a brief second was, “what a noble beast!”
 the next moment the animal plunged into the stream; but, before it
 could rise to the surface, mat, holding his rope in his teeth, with
 a lightning-like bound was on to him, and, seizing the dog’s huge
 throat, at first endeavoured to keep him under water, but the animal,
 though taken at a disadvantage and half-choked, fought so with its
 muscular paws that it knocked mat off his legs, and, as he lay for
 a second underneath, made a grab at his throat. had he secured his
 grip, then and there would our gipsy’s life have ended; but mat was
 too quick for him, by plunging his head under water. the beast thus
 lost sight of this most vulnerable part of his foe, but gripped him
 instead through his buskins and deep into his thigh. mat felt during
 this terrible struggle that his only chance of life was getting into
 deeper water. the pain of the bloodhound’s teeth was excruciating;
 but, securing a grasp of the loose skin of the dog’s throat, he never
 let go, only struggled with his free leg to get into deeper water.
 thus locked in a deadly embrace, man and hound rolled down stream.
 at length, by a lucky touch of his foot on the bottom, mat got
 uppermost, and by keeping his full weight
  on the dog, caused it at
 last to open its jaws for a gasp. had not the water rushed into that
 gaping chasm of teeth, mat’s chance would still have been small; but,
 excited now to frenzy, and watching eagerly for the chance, he, by a
 quick movement, bitted the animal with the rope, which he had held
 on to with his teeth as if it had been the rope of a life-buoy, and
 as quickly took a half-turn round the lower jaw, over the upper, and
 had time to make all fast before the hound had sufficiently recovered
 to prevent him. then mat crawled exhausted out of the water and lay
 motionless, hardly caring whether the animal followed him or not,
 so faint did he feel from loss of blood. but the beast came after
 him, and, striking savagely with its heavy fore-feet, caused him to
 get up once more. however, finding it could not use its teeth, it
 acknowledged mat as master for the time being, and made no further
 attempt at fighting; but giving a shake, and with a last ferocious
 glare out of its bloodshot eyes, turned and trotted sullenly off into
 the moonlit glades.
 mat felt it an immense relief to hear his own voice, as he said in a
 low tone, “well, thank god, i’m out of that business! he’s tied up
 like a ferret, and every knot is good. he’d have killed me if we’d
 fought on the shore, that’s certain. the bratley stream served me a
 dirty trick a few hours ago, but the blackwater saved my life this
 night.” pulling off his cotton handkerchief, he bound up the wound in
 his thigh tightly, emptied his flask, and limped off at once before
 his leg should get stiffer than it was, and to make good his way to
 lyndhurst ere the hound should have returned to the keeper, whom he
 surmised had only been prevented from coming up to help his hound by
 being too “boosy” to make his way quickly over the rough ground.
 “he, by a quick movement, bitted the animal with the rope.”
 mat bids farewell to the forest—the young austral—tim and jumper on
 board.
at length, shortly after midnight, as far as he could judge by the
 moon, mat arrived once again at braken lodge, and knocked up burns,
 who, though astonished to see him at that hour, immediately routed
 out the old housekeeper to light a fire, brew some coffee, and get
 provisions, whilst he found a change of clothes for mat, and bound up
 his wound with a healing ointment. and all these things he did without
 asking our gipsy any useless questions, wherein he showed his sense.
after mat had thoroughly refreshed himself, he said,—
 “now, mr. burns, i’ll just stretch out afore the fire—that’ll ease my
 limb—and tell you all about it.”
 he then related shortly but accurately every detail from the time of
 their parting in boldre wood down to the termination of his fight with
 the hound, adding that he was very sorry for the loss of the game-bag,
 which burns said did not matter a snuff.
 “perhaps not for itself,” continued mat, “but they might trace you by
 it.”
burns listened with intense interest to the narrative, and remarked,—
 “i should have shot that hound, i know i should; but then, you see,
 i would not have thought of that dodge of yours of tying him up;
 besides, i could not have done it, i’m not so quick and handy.”
 “and now,” went on mat, “i’ll ask you a favour: help me to get away in
 that ship you spoke of this very night, and the matter’ll blow over,
 for they can’t really prove anything ’gin you.”
 burns looked at his watch; then pondered awhile over this suggestion.
 at last, after several vigorous puffs at a black clay pipe which he
 was smoking, he spoke:—
 “it would be a very mean trick to send you out of england because i
 have broken the law—for i find it’s true what you said,—were it not
 that a few hours ago, before all this happened, you were wishing to be
 off as soon as you could earn some money. now promise, if i help you
 to start, never to go back on me by saying, when you find what a hard
 life it is out there, ‘if it had not been for burns i might have been
 home now.’”
“yes, i promise,” answered mat eagerly.
 “then i’ll start you fair. you shall have enough money to keep you
 until you can look about, and the gun you stuck to so bravely is
 yours. you must get more clothes in london, and i will write a line
 to the captain for you to take; i will also send a letter to my
 brother on the darling downs about you, and give you his address. and
 now come round to the stable; you have no time to lose if you wish to
 catch the mail at southampton. you can leave the horse at the station
 inn there.”
when bidding good-bye, the gipsy wrung burns’ hand and said,—
 “i thank you for what you’re doing for me; it’s just what i’ve set my
 heart on this long time, and if hard work will do it, i shall make it
 a first matter to pay you back the money as you’ve started me with.
 and there’s one thing, let them know at my camp all about my going. it
 won’t go no farther, anything you tell ’em; and bid good-bye for me to
 my old dad, and mother and sister, and tell my brother—we’re twins,
 you know—and i can’t abide not saying good-bye to him,—tell him all
 about broomfield’s colt, and—”
 here mat’s feelings entirely failed him, wearied with pain both in
 body and mind, he clambered stiffly on to the horse. burns called out,—
 “i’ll tell them all you say, and send your brother to see you off;
 there’s time yet before she sails.”
 “thank you for that,” replied mat. and, waving his arm, rode off, with
 his gun on his back, and a bundle of things strapped to the bow of the
 saddle.
 as mat rode along, he found plenty of time to
 ponder over the events
 of the last few hours. curiously enough, he first considered the
 matter of the forsaken colt, and its owner, broomfield.
 “he’ll think it mean of me,” he mused, “when he finds i’ve bolted
 clean away, and left the colt; but, after all, he ‘jacked out’ when we
 once settled to work our way to australia together. burns he’s behaved
 like a man, and i’m a lucky chap; ten guineas to start with, and
 passage found me; yes, and i’ll work to pay him back, and send some
 money to the old folk.”
 thus soliloquizing, he found himself at the station, and had just
 time to put up his horse and feed him, when the train came in. buying
 a ticket, he jumped into an empty compartment, and though it was the
 first time he had ever travelled by rail, his fatigue was so great
 that he fell asleep at once, and only woke up as the train drew up at
 the london terminus. here he procured a cup of coffee, and then made
 his way in a cab to the docks, whilst the great city was still asleep.
 with some difficulty the driver of his hackney carriage found the
 young austral. on going on board mat was told that the captain would
 not be there for some hours, and that the ship would possibly leave
 the docks next evening. so leaving his gun and bundle on board in
 charge of a good-natured mate, and telling him that he was expecting
 his brother, he hobbled out to get his leg dressed
  again, and to look
 at the shops, which were just being opened.
 strolling down wharfgate street, mat encountered an old man in the act
 of taking down his shutters. perceiving that it was a bookseller’s, he
 asked the owner whether he had any good novels.
 “yes, plenty,” was the reply. “come in; what will you have? dickens,
 thackeray, or something racy?”
 “why, zomething what’s useful on a long voyage,” answered mat, who was
 somewhat puzzled for an answer.
 “you don’t look much like a sailor,” remarked the shopkeeper, “more
 like a youngster bolted from home.”
“well, what if i have? i want some books all the same.”
“here you are, then; take this second-hand lot for three shillings.”
 so the bargain was concluded, and mat found afterwards that the old
 man had given him a liberal selection of all sorts of literature.
 strolling on he entered a second-hand clothes shop, where he concluded
 his purchases with the addition of a few clothes and necessaries; and
 some hours later returned to the ship, the mate of which accosted him
 with,—
 “heart alive! if ’twasn’t for your ‘duds,’ i’d a thought you’d been
 the same youngster that came
 here an hour ago, but he’s down below overhauling the ship.”
so down jumped mat, and found his brother and jumper.
 “hullo, tim,” he shouted, “this is splendid! how quick you’ve got
 here—brought the old dog to take care of you, eh?”
 “no, fact is, father thought you ought to have jumper to take care of
 you, amongst the niggers; and i’ve brought your clothes and some
 tools, and i didn’t forget the axe, and the ‘print,’ that garrett the
 smith made for you; maybe you’ll want to print yer mark on to a horse
 out there. and i got all the books the squire gave you, and a lot more
 mr. burns shoved into a box for you. he drove me to the station in
 his own trap, else i’d never a’ caught the train.”
 for the rest of the day, and indeed far into the night, the brothers
 sat up; for mat had not only much to relate concerning his late
 adventures, but also many instructions to give tim with regard to
 colts, which he had undertaken to break in; besides, there were
 innumerable messages to be conveyed to his family and friends, more
 especially to the squire. at length their conversation was interrupted
 by the voice of the mate singing out,—
 “now then, youngsters, turn in, you can find bunks in the emigrants’
 quarters to-night.”
 whilst looking for these night quarters they passed the doctor’s
 cabin, and mat had his leg dressed; this
 he had forgotten to have
 done ashore. the doctor, a kindly hearted irishman, told him he must
 lie up as much as possible for some days, or he would have—so mat told
 his brother afterwards—“hurryslippiness.”
 next morning the emigrants began crowding on board, and mat and tim
 found plenty to occupy and amuse them in scanning the new arrivals,
 and witnessing in particular the various farewell takings of the irish
 families.
 “it’s pretty nigh time for us to part too,” said mat, “for the day’s
 wearing on, but i’ll write a letter home for you to take.”
 having finished this epistle, he gave it to his brother, and grasping
 his hand said,—
 “good-bye, tim, we’ve been long mates in t’vorest, mind and write to
 me when i give you the address.”
 another grasp of the hand, and tim walked slowly down the planks for
 the shore, and mat thought that he had seen the last of him, and was
 turning away, when back he came, crying,—
“where’s jumper?”
 but jumper could not be found amongst the crowds of people and heaps
 of deck gear.
 tim ran ashore, calling and whistling, but came back without having
 found him. then they attempted to search the ship all over, but no
 result: at length they bethought them of looking into a cabin, into
 which tim had entered on first coming on board. with some difficulty
 they found it, when there, sure
 enough, they found the faithful
 beast, with his paws stretched over mat’s bundle which tim had
 deposited there.
 but so much time had been lost in the search, that upon ascending to
 the deck again, they found the vessel on the point of being tugged
 down the river by a small steamer.
 tim was in despair, which being observed by one of the sailors, the
 man inquired what ailed him.
“why, i want to go ashore.”
 “oh! is that all,” laughed the sailor, “you can get away in one of the
 shore-boats, or the pilot’s, later on, for that matter.”
 so tim resigned himself to the situation, which so far pleased him, in
 that he should now enjoy a few more hours of his brother’s society.
 after some hours towing the tug cast off, and they found themselves
 scudding down towards the channel under a fair breeze. night was
 coming on, so the brothers turned in for a short sleep, intending to
 wake in good time for tim to get away with the pilot: but when they
 came on deck again, at daylight the next morning, what a sight met
 their view! to their judgment they were far out in a tempestuous sea,
 whilst between them and the distant shore they descried what appeared
 to be a heap of furious foam-swept whirlpools.
 after viewing this strange scene for a moment, tim anxiously asked his
 brother whether he thought they
 could find the pilot; in vain they looked about for such a personage.
 “but that’s the captain, no doubt,” said mat, pointing out a
 weather-beaten man on the poop, and before he could be prevented, tim
 had walked up to and commenced addressing the skipper with,—
“if you please, sir—”
 “don’t bother me,” answered the latter, without looking at him, “till
 i’m clear of portland race—get off the poop.”
“but i want to go ashore.”
 “so you will,” said the captain in a tone which admitted of no further
 argument, “so you will, in about three months’ time, please the
 pigs—go.”
 following the direction of the captain’s eyes, tim saw that they were
 fixed alternately on the whirlpools which had attracted the attention
 of his brother and himself, and the sails of his ship. feeling that
 he had made a mistake, he returned dolefully to mat, who was for’ard,
 saying,—
“it’s all up, i’m in for the whole journey.”
 “never mind,” answered his brother, who was secretly rather pleased,
 “we must make the best of it, and we’ll talk to the captain, if we see
 a good chance, but it musn’t be yet a good bit.”
 “i wouldn’t mind so much,” said tim, “if it wasn’t for the old folks;
 they’ll think i’m lost in london.”
 shortly after this conversation, the emigrants were divided into
 “messes,” and tim found from inquiries he made that he was indeed in
 for the whole trip.
 life on board the young austral—the wreck—a swim for life—safe
 ashore.
thus it was that both brothers joined the full-rigged ship
 young austral, bound for moreton bay direct, joining a band of sturdy
 britons who were going to seek their fortunes in the new colony.
 though tim started against his will, he very soon did “make the best
 of it,” seeing that there was no present hope of returning. mat, too,
 helped to cheer him, telling him that the voyage would do him good,
 and buying him clothes and a few necessaries from those emigrants who
 had any to part with.
 a day later on, mat was summoned to speak to the captain, who, until
 then, had not had time to read the letter from burns, which mat had
 sent into his cabin upon first coming on board.
said the skipper, as mat made his appearance, followed by tim,—
 “i understand your story, this letter from my friend explains all;
 that’s your brother alongside you, i’ll be bound. mr. burns has
 arranged it all, so that you will get better accommodation than the
 ‘free’ passengers, and your stowaway brother can mess with you; i’ve
 been hearing about him from my mate, and i’m not sorry that he’s on
 board. if we speak a homeward-bound ship, we may have a chance of
 sending a letter home before long—that’s all”—and the skipper waved
 the two lads out of the cabin.
 comforted by these words, soon perceiving that this gruff,
 hard-featured captain was a good-hearted man, mat and tim
 congratulated themselves now with having had the luck to ship under
 him.
 it is not our business, nor indeed our wish, to go into the many
 details of a long sea voyage, tedious alike to either passengers or
 readers: voyages which have been described in many hundred volumes, in
 many thousands of private letters. the emigrant-ship has no battles to
 recount, no running down of slavers, in fact no life of the tar pure
 and simple, further made interesting by his adventures and exploits
 ashore. the emigrant-ship, though just as useful in her line, runs the
 same humdrum voyage year after year, unrelieved by any adventure, save
 the inevitable meeting with shark or whale, the capture of albatross
 or cape pigeons, varied with such innocent amusements as a little
 dancing, and a very fair amount of interesting scandal. in fact a
 little world, of no interest scarcely to any one excepting those on board.
 but as far as mat was concerned, the voyage promised to be full of
 interest. he had long wished to better himself in reading, in general
 knowledge, and, as he himself said, in speaking better english, and
 here, in three months’ idleness, as the landsmen chiefly regarded it,
 was the opportunity he had sought for.
 the first few days after leaving the channel were devoted by officers
 and crew to getting the vessel ship-shape, by the emigrants in
 arranging their “kits,” and generally “shaking down,” not, however,
 that they were shaken down or up by the action of the sea, for
 light breezes and calms prevailed for the first week after losing
 sight of the coast of devon, and it was not until the twelfth day out
 that the island of madeira was sighted.
 at the period of our story, many ships went to sea underhanded; the
 young austral was one of these, and the captain, who had been
 casting his eyes over any likely lads, one day called all hands aft
 to say, that if any men liked to form themselves into a volunteer
 crew, it would not only give them plenty to do during the voyage, but,
 besides, they would have the opportunity of gaining general knowledge.
 for that he would be glad to hold a class during his spare hours, for
 instruction in matters connected with working and steering a ship,
 that a willing volunteer crew would be of great help in the manual
 working of the ship, and that though he could not compel any one
 to attend to his duties, which would be often hard, and sometimes
 monotonous, yet he expected
 that any one that joined would stick to his word and obey those over him.
 at the conclusion of this speech, most of his audience retreated,
 saying they had had work enough ashore, where they were paid: but
 some sixteen, differently disposed, stepped forward, amongst them mat
 and tim, and offered their services. these men were divided into port
 and starboard watches, and by the wish of the majority, mat was made
 lieutenant of port watch, with tim as “bo’sun.”
 it was in the “doldrums” that the young austral signalled a
 homeward-bound ship, which, in answer to a request from the former,
 said she would take letters home, so a boat was lowered, bearing a
 small mail, and containing amongst other letters one from mat to the
 squire, begging him to make the acquaintance of burns, by taking a
 letter, which he enclosed, to him. tim wrote to his father, explaining
 all the circumstances of his absence, winding up by saying that he
 was very happy, with plenty to do, and that he did not try to get a
 passage in this homeward-bound ship, the asia, because the captain
 said that “the old tub was one hundred days out from akyab, and that
 we would never get home at this rate.”
 as time passed, our voyagers found that they were making good
 progress; the rough sports connected with crossing the line were
 forgotten—the brothers vied with their messmates in zealously taking
 their share of the working of the ship, keeping watches,
  washing
 decks, and to such efficiency had they attained in going aloft, that
 by the time that their good ship was in the “roaring forties,” they
 sometimes drew forth praise from even the old “salts,” who, at the
 commencement of their apprenticeship, had watched their proceedings
 somewhat contemptuously.
 more than one of the volunteers by this time had “jacked out,” as mat
 said, and others appeared likely to follow their example, some from
 sheer inability to go aloft.
“probably never been up anything bigger than an apple-tree,” said tim.
 the captain complimented the remainder on “sticking to their guns,”
 and both he and the doctor gave them regular instructions. with the
 latter, our twins worked hard, both in writing and also reading out
 loud, whilst their time was also taken up with the captain, in some of
 his leisure hours, in studying geography, also working the ship both
 by sun and stars, and afterwards learning how to prick off her track
 on the chart.
 nor was this the only tuition which they strove for. during a
 succession of calms, they asked permission to borrow the dinghy, which
 was readily granted them, and our lads, accompanied by a young cabin
 passenger who knew the rudiments of swimming, took long lessons in
 the art, not forgetting to practise treading water for long periods
 at a time;
 this latter accomplishment was, their instructor told
 them, under certain circumstances more useful to learn perfectly than
 the simple one of swimming. he himself usually stayed in the boat,
 whilst the brothers were paddling, as sharks were about, so it was
 said, though none were seen on these occasions.
 before the calm weather ceased, the brothers found that they could
 keep up with the ship, when she was just moving, for long periods at a
 time.
 no bad weather of any consequence was met with, until off the
 “crozets,” when a stiff gale came on, accompanied by a violent
 thunderstorm. these storms and gales continued for several days,
 obliging the captain to take the ship south of tasmania instead of
 going through bass’s straits.
 whilst rounding the tasmanian coast, they exchanged signals, “all’s
 well,” with a homeward-bound ship.
 it was on the eighty-fourth day out, and when nearing their port, that
 an ominous-looking bank of black clouds showed itself astern. this was
 early in the morning; by noon they were enveloped in partial darkness,
 with wind and sea increasing in fury; at night both elements had risen
 to a terrific pitch.
 tim told his brother that he had seen the captain consult his glass
 many times, and on the last occasion shake his head, “and he looked
 awful solemn, mat,” he added.
 the wreck of the young austral.
“it does seem hard, too,” said mat, “just when we expected to land.”
 the storm raged for three days and as many nights; the days seemed as
 the nights in their utter darkness; no reckoning could be taken; any
 sail they attempted to get on the ship was at once blown clean out of
 the bolt-holes. captain and officers consulted together frequently,
 poring over the chart.
 as it proved later, they were well aware that they must already be
 nearing a portion of the “great barrier reef,” and that unless the
 wind changed, they would be carried surely and rapidly to destruction.
 all deck gear had long since been either washed overboard or smashed,
 and two of the boats carried clean off the davits. the emigrants were
 battened down; whilst on deck remained captain, crew, and volunteers
 gazing into the gloom ahead with calm but anxious faces.
 the brothers, with some half-dozen other passengers, were holding on
 to the shrouds for bare life—silent, because talking was out of the
 question in the fearful din of the elements.
 seeing the crew at the pumps, they joined them, all labouring till
 well-nigh exhausted, when suddenly tim cried,—
“look at the line of white waters.”
 the next instant there was a crash and a shock,
  followed by several
 heavy bumps, which threw all hands to the deck.
“where are we,” shouted tim, as soon as he could muster breath.
 “on the reef,” roared the captain, who was standing close by, “but
 work and trust in god, my lads—clear away the masts.”
 this was a work of great peril, owing to the huge seas which, breaking
 one after another on the reef, rose over the doomed vessel.
 all the boats had now been swept away but one; crew and volunteers
 were clinging to anything and everything they could lay their hands on.
 no tool was forthcoming—none could be found; when the captain had
 ordered the masts to be cut away, men shrunk from crossing that
 terrible storm-swept deck, even our hero who had faced the bloodhound,
 felt his spirit quail, but only for an instant. turning to get a
 view of the captain, he saw that which decided him. the skipper was
 standing with one arm round the mizen-shrouds, his hair and beard
 apparently almost swept from his head by hurricane and brine; but the
 expression on his face!
 mat had once seen a copy of one of the grandest faces that he had
 conceived possible—it was that of an ancient martyr.
 there he saw the same look, at the same moment of death in life, on
 his beloved captain’s features. as mat turned round, their eyes met,
 the skipper
 gave him one sad nod, which contained a world of meaning;
 mat, without thinking of either storm or wave, made a rush, burst open
 the cabin-door, and returned safely with his forest axe to his post of
 temporary shelter, the next moment an enormous billow swept the deck
 he had lately trod.
 watching his opportunity, with a few sharply delivered strokes, our
 forester sent the mizen-mast overboard, this was shortly followed
 by the main-mast, for two of the crew having witnessed mat’s daring
 act, had seized his axe, prevented his following them, and felled
 the main-mast before another wave covered the spot where they stood;
 the fore-mast then went by the board, and as if the gallant ship had
 made an effort to shake herself free, by thus heaving over this last
 obstacle to her righting—she had been on her beam ends—relieved now
 of her top weight, she rose again, but alas! only to be lifted in one
 wild plunge farther on to the reef.
 this last shock was too much for her solid timbers, and she broke her
 back.
 “let the emigrants up,” hoarsely shouted the captain; and then
 commenced a scene which, if it were possible, added fresh horrors
 to the situation. in hundreds they came on deck, some of the men
 yelling and cursing, others the picture of fright and despair; but all
 struggling and fighting to get to the one boat left. the poor women
 screaming, praying, and beseeching, the whole forming a maddened
 crowd of human beings, most of whom were washed about the deck, till
 stunned and bleeding, they were swept overboard. some dozens of both
 men and women had seized the boat, and managed in the frenzy of
 despair, and despite the efforts of captain and crew to prevent them,
 to get it overboard; but the few that succeeded in jumping in were
 at once engulfed with the craft in the whirlpool of mighty waters: a
 last despairing shriek being heard even above the horrible din as they
 disappeared, a huge sea overwhelming them, as it careered onwards with
 its white crest towards the land, a glimpse of which could now be seen
 for an instant looming through the lurid sky.
 another moment, and the poor old ship parted asunder, the brothers
 finding themselves clinging to the poop, together with the captain and
 two others.
 “every man for himself, and god for us all,” cried the skipper; “but
 i stick to this last bit of my old ship; if any one thinks he can
 swim ashore, he can try; but i hardly advise it.”
 “we’ll stand by you,” said the brothers in a breath, as they grasped
 each other’s hands.
 that portion of the hull on which stood the last few survivors, was
 evidently being impelled by a current, and at this moment was drifting
 past a headland, which appeared to be some quarter of a mile away.
 all eyes had been anxiously watching this, when the captain again spoke.
 “my lads, there’s a slight lull in the storm, and there is just a bare
 chance of a good swimmer reaching that shore; two minutes more, and it
 will be too late.” then turning to the brothers, “go, lads, and make a
 brave fight; he who remains has no hope.”
 drifting along as they were, on the ship’s poop, their chance of ever
 being able to swim ashore seemed small indeed, and the prospect of
 casting themselves into such a stormy, raging sea, was enough to awe
 the spirits of even such stout-hearted lads as our forest twins; but
 it was their only hope of escape, and slender as it seemed, they did
 not hesitate, at the captain’s suggestion, to make that last effort
 for dear life.
 the brothers looked at one another, and saw in each other’s eyes that
 a brave hope remained. they then turned to the captain to bid him
 farewell; but they only saw his broad back shaken with emotion, his
 face buried in his hands.
 hurriedly divesting themselves of their clothes, they slid down into
 the billows by means of some of the ropes which were dangling over the
 bulwarks. as mat came down last, he was aware of jumper springing into
 the sea after him.
 everything now depended on strong arms and a cool head. as each
 roller came they found that they had to give up striking out, and let
 themselves be
 carried on in its dark and roaring body, then up they
 would come again, and strike out until overwhelmed once more. with the
 strength of despair, our lads continued to forge ahead for that land,
 which appeared to their eyes as passing them. after this struggle
 had continued a cruelly long time, they were aware that the billows
 did not break so heavily, and that therefore they could the more
 easily keep on the surface of their crests.
 the land was now to the right of them, when mat, who was slightly
 ahead, heard tim shout, “go on; never mind me.” this sounded so like
 a despairing cry that mat turned himself slightly round, and shouted
 back, “tread water!” and here came in that part of the science of
 swimming which is so often neglected; but the brothers had learnt
 their lesson well, as we shall see.
 keeping their mouths tightly shut to avoid the spoon-drift as much
 as possible, treading water enabled them to rest their arms and legs
 alternately for a minute or so, then on they swam again; but they
 were both, more especially tim, getting very exhausted, and were on
 the point of giving up in despair their struggle against the waves,
 when the sight of a piece of wreckage being drifted landwards, showing
 them that they had got into a current setting that way, revived their
 drooping energies, and gave them spirit to make a final effort.
 an undercurrent now caught mat, and carried him
  rapidly round the
 point; he raised a feeble shout of joy as his feet touched bottom. tim
 ranged up alongside him, and being now under the lee of the point in
 shallow water, both lads were enabled to wade hand in hand over the
 sharp coral bottom to the shore.
 utterly spent with their tremendous exertions, they threw themselves
 down upon the sandy beach, thanking god for their merciful
 preservation.
 the island—the gigantic cockle-shell—amongst the blacks—the
 corroboree.
after getting out of the water, mat and tim remained stretched on the
 sand without moving a limb, enjoying the sense of perfect security
 from the sea; but at length they felt that they must commence to look
 for water, their thirst was so great after all the salt water that
 they had swallowed. on trying to rise, they found they could scarcely
 stand, so numbed and weary were their limbs; but by stamping and
 running, they caused the blood to flow through their veins, and were
 thus enabled to start on a small voyage of discovery.
 the island, as it proved to be, consisted of large rocks full of caves
 with a few bushes and ferns growing here and there. there was no lack
 of water in the crevices of the rocks, and astringent though it was,
 it seemed like nectar to the thirsty lads. in one of the caves they
 found that the sand was deep, dry, and even warm, and in this spot
 they determined to take a good long rest, which they felt themselves
 sadly in need of. tim had proceeded to explore one
  of these caves,
 when mat heard him call, “look here,” and proceeding to the spot,
 found his brother examining the floor of the cave, which was covered
 with oyster shells; a further search showed the remains of several
 small fires with more shells round them.
 “some one has had a good feast here, mat; let us have a nap, and then
 we’ll look for oysters.”
 so without more ado, they buried themselves in the sand up to their
 necks, and fell into a sound sleep.
 how long they slept neither of them knew, but mat was awakened by a
 cold feeling about his nose, and jumping up, found to his astonishment
 and delight, his faithful dog, which greeted him with short, sharp
 barks of delight; the noise woke tim, who perceiving his favourite,
 seized him, and the two rolled over together with joy. they found to
 their surprise that jumper’s coat was quite dry, and on emerging from
 the cave, perceived that whilst they had been sleeping, the storm had
 abated, and the sun was now shining, also that the tide had run out,
 leaving their island connected with the mainland by a spit of sand.
 the tracks of the dog plainly showed that, having landed farther down
 the coast, he had been trying along the edge of the water for his
 masters, until led to them by this streak of sand.
 congratulating themselves upon the recovery of their dog, which they
 had given up for lost, mat and tim proceeded to gather a supply of
 oysters—these
 being rock oysters were easily detached by the tap of a stone.
 in the pools, left by the receding tide, amongst the rocks and coral,
 many kinds of fish were imprisoned, and there were quantities of crabs
 in a muddy belt of mangroves, so that there was no lack of food,
 which, however, had to be eaten raw.
 “we’ve always eaten oysters raw,” quoth mat, “and why not fish that
 swim?”
 but tim was too much engaged to answer, he had seen some large mullet
 endeavouring to escape out of a channel in the rocks, and was wading
 about amongst the green weed, piling stones across the outlet of this
 creek, previous to pursuing the fish, when suddenly under water, in a
 cleft of the rocks, he felt his foot seized, and held in a vice-like
 grasp. the shock nearly threw him down, but recovering himself, he
 shouted,—
“mat! here, quick!”
the latter rushed up at once, crying,—
“got a rock on your foot?”
 “no,” gasped tim, “it’s more like a dozen rat-traps, and it’s pinching
 fearful.”
 mat by this time had cleared away the weed, and at length, through the
 dark water could be seen the outlines of a gigantic double shell, with
 his brother’s leg imprisoned in its jaws.
 “look, how awful!” cried tim; “i can never get loose from that big
 brute of a cockle.”
 mat tugged and tore at the shell, and, being a powerful lad, he
 expected to be able to rip one side off by the hinge, but he could no
 more move it than he could the rocks to which it was attached.
 “it’s no good, old man, it’s too far for me to reach it yet, but,
 thank god, the water’s falling; if ’twere rising we’d be done. do you
 feel you can last out an hour or so?”
 “i don’t know, mat, i feel awful queer and sick, but i can find the
 pain is out of my foot, for i can’t feel the limb at all.”
 the first thing that mat did was to pile up rocks under his brother,
 by this means getting him into a more restful position, he then wedged
 stones into the jaws of the fish, hoping thus to take some of the
 frightful pressure off the foot, and, bidding tim be of good cheer,
 started for the shore, returning presently with a heavy, waterlogged
 piece of wreckage, and—
 “see here, tim!” he cried, as he approached him, and triumphantly held
 up an iron spike, “i knocked this out of the old timber, this’ll do
 the job.”
 the water had now fallen so much that the jaws of the huge shell were
 well exposed.
 first scraping the mud and stones, so as to get down to the base of
 the fish, mat placed the heavy spike against the shell, which tim
 had graphically enough described as a huge cockle; such, indeed,
 it exactly resembled, but on a gigantic scale, measuring along the
 jaws over three feet; he then dealt his piece
 of iron a heavy blow
 with the piece of timber, but the iron would not penetrate—flew off
 at a tangent: recovering it, he proceeded to examine the shell more
 closely, and for this purpose baled out most of the remaining water
 with his hands, then inserted the end of the spike at another angle;
 the next time he essayed he drove the bolt right through the shell up
 to the hilt; this, however, had no effect upon the clasping powers of
 the monster, the foot was jammed as tight as ever.
 “oh! for my axe!” said mat, “but never fear. now to get the spike out.
 i’ll kill this devil somehow.”
 it seemed a long time before the spike could be released, but at
 length, succeeding in this, mat drove it in every direction through
 the living, leathery substance of the creature itself.
it would not relax.
 he then rammed the piece of timber in, and, exerting his full
 strength, attempted to prise open the shell, he felt that the enemy
 was slowly opening, when snap went his rotten lever, broken short off.
“it’s too ‘brow’” (brittle), gasped tim.
 nothing discouraged, mat set to work with the remaining bit of his
 stick, but after another hard struggle, and sweating at every pore,
 he had to sit down a moment to recover; literally a moment, for he
 had hardly settled himself in a position to catch the breeze, turning
 towards the open sea for this
 purpose, when his ear caught the dull
 moaning of the tide, which had turned!!
 without a word, but with an agonized feeling in his heart, mat jumped
 up, and driving his lever far down into the mutilated fish, and
 planting his feet against the opposite rock, gave one long and frantic
 “prise;” when, oh, joy! through the blinding streams of perspiration
 that ran over his face, he first saw the stones falling in, and he
 plainly felt the double shell slowly give.
 “pull, tim!” he yelled; and his brother was free, being, however,
 forced to lift his crippled foot with both hands out of the jaws of
 the fish, whilst mat never relaxed his hold of the lever.
 the instant that the foot was released, and the timber thrown aside,
 the stones fell completely in, and the shell closed with a sudden
 snap. mat, however, did not wait to see more, for merely administering
 a furious blow on to the beast, which only had the effect of
 splintering the lips, he seized the almost unconscious tim, hoisted
 him on his shoulders, and hurried as fast as he could over cruelly
 sharp rocks to the shore, somewhere about a quarter of a mile distant.
 with a couple of rests he got over the distance, and at length sank
 down with his burden under some shady trees, through which a little
 stream of water flowed on its way to the sea.
 “i believe that pure water has saved my life,” said tim, after he had
 drunk his fill, and had his leg,
 which was terribly swollen and cut,
 swathed in some soft bark, which was hanging down in ragged tatters on
 a large tree close by, and which mat wetted in the sweet water before
 applying.
 our foresters, it must be borne in mind, were in a woeful plight.
 true, they had escaped the one great danger which they shared during
 that terrible swim; but what had been their experience, so far, on the
 shore? in the first place, they were aware that savages were about,
 for they had seen their lately-used camping-places, at all events
 their fishing resorts, and remains of their recent fires. then the
 action of the salt water and wind on their skins; still worse, the
 powerful rays of a tropical sun, subsequently, had caused a sort of
 boiling-peeling process to set in. added to this, tim, as we have
 seen, had had his ankle-bone nearly crushed through, and mat, now
 that he had a moment of leisure, found that his old wound—that one
 inflicted by the bloodhound—had broken open, a fact which he was aware
 of during the last two hours from the pain he felt. it is doubtful,
 had they not found shade and good water, whether our lads would not
 have left their bones on the strand.
 after mat had made up a soft bed of grass and bark for his brother,
 and covered him over with the same material, he stepped outside the
 timber to have a look round.
 having finished his survey, he was returning to
  doctor his own leg
 when he descried a thin column of smoke, which seemed suddenly to
 shoot up in the distance. hastening to tim, he told him what he had
 just seen, and that he believed the fire must have been just lit, for
 that there was no appearance of smoke when he first quitted him to
 look round.
 “now, tim,” he continued, “men have lit that fire, and, be they
 friends or foes, we’d better seek them out when we can travel; for
 i know we can’t last long without fire or clothes, and both of us
 wounded; but i’ll strap up my leg tight with this soft bark stuff, and
 then after a bit i’ll be able to carry you. i can easily do it, with
 rests; anyhow, we’ll get away from this salt water, there’s too much
 danger in it.”
tim answered wearily enough,—
 “let’s rest here a day or so, and then, i think, with your help, in a
 cool night or early morning, i can get along.”
 so mat brought up a heap of shell-fish to the camp, and by evening had
 made their sleeping-quarters a little more comfortable by means of
 boughs and bark.
 the night passed without further incident; but it was a period of
 feverish nightmare to both brothers; lie how they would, their skins
 were so blistered that the pain was almost unendurable, and mat,
 besides, was up many times to cool his brother’s wounded leg with
 water.
 at daylight they were awakened from a doze by the barking of jumper.
 mat was on his legs in a moment, and, proceeding cautiously to the
 spot, discovered the dog trying to claw up a tree, evidently striving
 to get at something in the branches. this proved to be a huge lizard,
 which was lying out on a limb a few feet from the ground.
 being an adept at “squirrelling” at his old home in the forest, mat
 knocked the animal off his perch with sticks; and jumper, who had been
 intently watching the proceedings, had it in his jaws almost before it
 reached the ground.
 near this spot mat observed lying on the ground some tempting-looking
 fruits, in colour and shape somewhat resembling an orange, which had
 evidently fallen off a kind of stunted palm-tree. these he gathered
 up, and, together with the lizard, carried them back to their camp.
 with a sharp shell he cut out the fat from the lizard, and put it by
 to dress their wounds with; but the raw flesh of the beast proved
 quite uneatable by reason of its utter want of taste; whilst the
 delicious-looking fruit was far worse from the opposite reason—it was
 so intensely bitter and acrid that they quickly spat it out again.
 however, jumper made a hearty meal off the lizard, the poor dog not
 having had anything but raw fish up to this time.
 the view from their camp was a calm and peaceful one. the pacific
 ocean, which had so lately
 belied its name, now stretched, as far as
 the eye could reach, in one unruffled surface; beautiful bays indented
 the coast both north and south, whilst huge grey-looking forests
 seemed to mingle with the now blue waters, growing apparently to their
 very edge. not a sail of any description had the brothers seen upon
 the ocean; the only sign of man was the smoke, or rather smokes, for
 by the second day the fires had evidently increased in numbers.
 our foresters found that the fat of the lizard well rubbed in did them
 more good than cold water bandages, and one afternoon tim said he
 thought he could travel. they both agreed that it would be a relief
 even to move camp, though they might take a long time before they
 reached the strange fires. mat procured a couple of stout sticks to
 lean upon, remarking, as he gave one to his brother with a smile,
 “we’ve no call to trouble about the luggage;” which, indeed, so far,
 was lucky.
 as long as they travelled quite slowly, with long rests, they found
 they could “keep going” very well. mat—by far the most able man,
 though they were both cripples—carried tim over bad bits of ground;
 but on level country the latter managed well enough by resting one
 hand on his brother’s shoulder. having thus covered some miles of
 country, they came to a water-hole with several small tracks leading
 to it; round the margin were prints of numerous feet freshly stamped
 in the sand.
 “here they be,” whispered mat, pointing to the signs, “big feet and
 little feet, a whole tribe of ’em, and can’t be far off neither. we
 must go careful like.”
 resuming their journey, they crossed a plain of treeless waste, and
 then entered a country thickly overgrown with scrub.
 jumper, who was ahead, and had entered the thicket, returned growling,
 with bristles erect, and at the same moment some dark forms could be
 seen rushing into a lagoon, which now appeared in a sort of clearing.
 then all was still.
mat, whose eyesight was specially sharp, whispered,—
 “i can see what looks like a black nose shaking the water by that
 great water-leaf.”
the brothers stood quietly, hesitating what to do next.
 suddenly jumper commenced growling again, with his gaze fixed on one
 side of the lagoon. at the same instant more than one black fellow
 could be seen stealthily approaching through the long grass, their
 bodies glistening with beads of water.
“some have got behind us,” again whispered mat.
and indeed the white men appeared to be surrounded.
“you hold the dog tight, tim, and i’ll try and make friends.”
 perceiving that jumper was held, an old black fellow,
  armed with
 club, spear, and shield, walked boldly up to mat, jabbering loudly the
 whole time, with chin in the air, and after feeling him all over, was
 about to do the same to tim; but this jumper would not stand, and tim,
 by signs, implored the native to keep back.
 the old man understood, and called to the other blacks, who
 immediately flocked up, and, hearing the white men talk, were
 evidently relieved to find that they were human beings like
 themselves, and thereupon made signs to know from whence they came.
 mat, for answer, pointed to the sea, imitating the action of swimming.
 one of the blacks, who seemed to be the chief, comprehended at once;
 and the brothers saw by his gestures that he was explaining to the
 others what was meant, at which there was much jabbering and guttural
 ejaculations.
 mat pointed out how blistered and wounded their bodies and legs were,
 and explained by pantomime that they were hungry.
 the natives now seemed satisfied, and led them by the hand, or rather
 conducted mat in this manner—for they were afraid to approach tim
 again, on account of the furious growls of jumper—to the camp fires,
 where they intimated to the white men they should lie down; they then
 gave them a couple of cloaks of ’possum skin to cover their bodies
 with, and a quantity of roasted roots and fish to eat; this
  fare seemed to put new
 life in the brothers as they reclined on their soft rugs.
 a black fellow then cooe’ed loudly, and several women and children
 seemed to spring up from the long grass around, where they had
 doubtless been hiding until the men knew with whom they had to deal.
 mat so far knew, as the whole tribe had now surrounded them, that
 he and his brother had fallen amongst blacks of the mainland of
 australia, for he not only recognized types of visage, pictures of
 which he had seen in the squire’s museum in the forest, but also most
 of the camp equipment, of which the squire had many specimens. thus
 he was able to point out and name to tim spears, woomeras, yelamans,
 boomerangs, stone tomahawks, and nullah-nullahs; also their dilly
 bags, large and small, containing fish and roots, and many small
 articles wrapt up in ’possum skins.
 whilst they were regaling themselves the tribe kept up an incessant
 jabbering, as they pointed out the white men to each other.
 one of the blacks showed by signs that there were other white men, but
 men clothed; he seemed to imply far, far away to the west. this gave
 the brothers hope that there might be a settlement in that direction,
 until by repeated signs they surmised that they must be white men
 travelling to the north.
 it was almost night when our gipsies encountered
  the natives, and by
 the time that they had finished their meal, the camp was wrapped in
 darkness, save for the light given out by the tiny fires.
 seeing that the white men had eaten up all their food, the blacks gave
 them a gourd of water, and then, taking mat by the hand again, and
 signing to tim to follow, conducted them to a gunyah, or hut, which
 was made of saplings and covered with bark. it contained a tiny upper
 story, also made of sheets of bark, just large enough for two men to
 lie down in. pointing to this, they intimated that the white men might
 sleep there, which, indeed, they were nothing loth to do.
 mat, having first placed some cool green leaves on his brother’s
 ankles, pulled the rugs over them, for the night was chilly, and
 prepared to sleep.
 before darkness had quite set in they had observed two blacks start
 off on their back trail towards the coast, which caused mat to remark
 that he “had read that blacks never travelled at night. however,” he
 added, “we shall know more about it in the morning. if i’d a pipe of
 ’baccy now, i’d be all right, but we can’t have everything, and these
 chaps don’t seem a bad lot, though they’re rum ’uns to look at.”
 “that they be,” said tim; “we shall know all about ’em in a day or
 two. if they’d meant badly you said as they’d have killed us at once.”
 “yes, from what i’ve been told, it was a good sign their bringing up
 the women and children so soon.
 we might get them to take us to the white men they spoke about, who knows?”
 the conversation, which took place as they were lying in their hut,
 was at this point interrupted by the sound of a high-pitched voice
 singing a sort of mournful ditty; presently other voices joined in.
 “hullo! let’s see what’s up,” said tim; and from the opening in their
 gunyah they witnessed a curious sight.
 three or four women, or “jins,” were seated on the ground, singing
 and beating time with pieces of stick; a dozen little freshly-lit
 fires were burning in a circle, and in the midst of them were some
 fifteen painted warriors, white paint and red paint was daubed in
 regular lines over their faces and jaws, causing them to resemble so
 many death’s heads, whilst their bodies were streaked with broad white
 stripes, each rib being distinctly marked.
 these white lines followed the course of their limbs, giving them the
 appearance of so many skeletons, as they appeared in the flickering
 light cast upon them.
 “what a rum sight!” said tim, who, with his brother, was intently
 watching these proceedings, as we have said.
 “yes, a sort of free-and-easy, i should fancy, but, look!” for as mat
 spoke each warrior took up the refrain of the “jins,” and, whilst
 singing a hoarse chant, sprang high into the air, descending so
 heavily that the earth seemed to shake under them; then
 shaking
 their spears with a quivering motion, and uttering tremendous yells,
 they sprang again into the air and ran “amuck” against each other.
the “corroboree.”
 as they pursued these ferocious antics, the sight made the white men’s
 blood curdle, for they thought that this must be the prelude to a rush
 upon themselves.
 the “corroboree,” as they afterwards found was the right name for this
 peculiar form of black-fellow recreation, waxed louder and fiercer,
 each man working himself up to a perfect frenzy, now darting in and
 out of the fires, and even in some cases plunging into them, and
 scattering the blazing embers, till exhausted, they would here and
 there “fall out” and beat time to recover.
 their aspect appeared terrible and unearthly, the brothers were
 spell-bound, not knowing whether fury or joy was the cause of this
 extraordinary scene. then the infernal din died away, only to be
 renewed louder than ever, as fresh warriors took the places of those
 pumped out, until the exhibition reached, as it seemed, a fight in
 terrible reality, as man closed with man, fending off each other’s
 spears and clubs with their “yelamans,” showing surprising feats of
 agility as they sprang high into the air, shouting fiercely a sort of
 war-cry the whole time.
 the ceremony was brought to a close by all stamping their feet with
 heavy thuds on the ground, and then each coiled himself up by his
 fire, exhausted.
our foresters breathed again.
 “well, if they ain’t the most bloodthirsty-looking devils i ever
 seed,” said tim; “but i suppose it’s all sham; the women don’t dance,
 and ain’t painted, they’re what’s called the ‘orkistry’ in the
 playhouse, i suppose.”
 “just about a rum go,” joined in mat; “i reckon we’re all right to
 sleep now, though.”
 it was about midnight when the whole camp had retired to rest, so the
 brothers followed the general example.
 wild honey—they find the wreck—the thunderstick.
during the voyage out tim had proved to his shipmates that he had a
 fair voice for singing, and on the strength of this was deputed to
 lead the hymns, when the captain performed the little sunday service
 on deck.
 so it struck mat, upon awakening the next morning after the
 “corroboree” in the native camp, that tim should give them one of
 the hymns they had learnt on board ship. so, whilst lying in the
 “gunyah,” tim struck up at the top of his voice, “from greenland’s
 icy mountains,” and mat joining in, the black fellows flocked round,
 squatted themselves, with awe-struck faces, on the ground, and stared
 in utter amazement.
 but just as the singing concluded, the two blacks who had been to the
 coast, returned, and evidently conveyed some important news to the
 tribe, for they all began talking excitedly together, and pointing to
 the direction from which the white men had come, intimated that they
 must go with them there.
 the possibility of some of their late shipmates being cast ashore
 occurred to the brothers, and they signified their readiness to go.
 “i must have something to eat first though, mat,” said his brother,
 “for i feel terrible ‘leer.’” so, in response to their signs, the
 natives brought them more roots and fish, and after partaking of a
 good breakfast, the whole party started.
 the blacks noticed before they had proceeded far that both brothers
 were lame and weak, so cut them each a stout “yam” stick as staves,
 and purposely walked very slowly. mat tried to explain that a dog
 bigger than jumper had caused his wound; however, his black brethren
 concluded that that animal itself was the culprit, and in consequence
 gave it a wider berth than ever.
 the tribe of blacks who had received our lads in such a friendly
 way were a fine body of men, as mat and tim perceived now that they
 appeared in broad daylight with clean skins—minus the paint of
 the preceding night. their bushy but finely-textured hair was now
 ornamented with tufts of the white cockatoo and other feathers; their
 brows encircled by a band of reddish-coloured material; their eyes
 were dark and glittering.
 though small of bone as to their wrists and ankles, and fine in
 loin, yet their every movement denoted perfect muscular strength and
 agility. many of them were over six feet high, though mat found by
 subsequent experience that this stature was more peculiar to the
 coast-tribes, owing probably to the better class of food which they
 were able to procure.
climbing for honey.
 upon starting for the coast our young adventurers found that the
 natives were conducting them step by step over the very route which
 they had traversed from the island.
 “they’re terrible good trackers,” said mat, who had been watching
 them; “i thought i knew something about it, but i’d often have lost
 the trail here. why, their eyes are everywhere, staring into the
 trees, and looking into the tops of them too. whatever can they be
 after?”
 these examinations puzzled the lads vastly, till suddenly a black
 stopped, and uttered an exclamation, and looking up to where he was
 gazing, a quantity of diminutive insects could be indistinctly seen
 hovering about a broken “spout” in the highest part of a tall gum-tree.
 to mat’s astonishment, the black evidently intended to ascend this
 tree. “how on earth is he going to get up there?” said he, as he eyed
 the tall, smooth trunk, without branch or break for sixty feet. “why,
 that tree’s a good three feet through; he can’t ‘swarm’ it, and they
 haven’t climbing-irons here.”
but the black fellow soon showed them how ’twas done.
 first he cut a thick ropy vine, or creeper, out of the shrub, and
 joined it in a circle round the base of the
 tree and his own body,
 then hanging a dilly bag round his neck, in which he had placed his
 tomahawk, he commenced the ascent by planting his feet against the
 trunk, and by this means literally walked up the great tree, shifting
 his hoop at every step, and getting a purchase by pressing his loins
 against the circle of the vine which supported them. when he had
 reached the first branch he paused to take breath.
 “that beats anything i ever saw,” said mat, gazing up in
 astonishment; “if ever i get back to the forest, i’ll try that game
 too.”
 meanwhile the climber arrived at the dead limb, and commenced
 chopping, brushing off the swarms of insects every now and again which
 had settled on his face. but this cutting was the slow part of the
 process; it took a long hour before the little stone axe had opened up
 the old branch sufficiently for the black fellow to insert his hand.
 meantime his brethren below had lit a fire, having brought a
 smouldering brand with them for that purpose; whilst all this delay
 afforded a welcome rest to our lads.
 at length the man in the tree descended, and opening his bag,
 displayed about a quart of dark-coloured honey, swarming all over with
 a diminutive bee, which proved to be stingless. it was evident that
 this was an immense treat to the natives, for they quickly ate up
 honey, bees and all, giving the brothers only sufficient to make them
 wish for more.
 resuming their journey, our party shortly afterwards arrived opposite
 the island on which the brothers had landed, and two of the black
 fellows pointed down the coast for mat to look.
 “i can only see something like a black rock,” he said, in answer to
 tim’s query, as he strained his eyes.
“why, it might be a bit of the wreck,” suggested tim.
 “yes; that must be it, tim. it’s what i saw drifting when we were
 coming ashore.”
 the natives were now very excited, and, as was their wont when in
 this state, “jabbering” unceasingly together; but as darkness was
 coming on, they evidently meant to go no farther that night, for they
 proceeded to make several fires on the sand, and lying down, bid the
 white men do the same. these latter found themselves comfortable
 enough, excepting for the mosquitoes, to which they had been a prey
 ever since they landed.
 before they went to sleep, a black fellow appeared with a huge
 hammer-headed shark, which he had speared in shallow water. this
 proved large enough to furnish a meal for all. a black threw a piece
 of the cooked fish to jumper, who, however, resented the way it was
 given him by growling and refusing to eat it then.
 mat was interested in the way the blacks made their fires. all the
 little sticks were pointed to the
 centre of the embers, and each man had his own fire.
 next morning at daylight the camp was broken up, and after broiling
 and eating more fish, they started along the margin of the salt water.
 as they approached the wreck they noticed that there was a larger
 portion of it than had appeared when viewed the previous evening,
 the whole of the bows and a portion of the waist being visible. the
 brothers had hoped that the poop might be farther down the coast, and
 the blacks evidently thought this might be possible too, for one of
 their number was sent off to reconnoitre past the next headland; but
 he came back after awhile, presumably without having seen any more of
 the old ship, but that he had found something was evident by his
 gesticulations.
 upon clambering on board with their companions, our lads found that
 the portion of wreck they had arrived at, though much battered and
 riddled like a sieve, yet by the strength of her outer timbers,
 held together, and thus had saved a portion of her contents. some
 barrels and chests could be seen, and mat found the place which had
 been occupied by his bunk; and to his great delight, on looking
 closer, he espied his gun jammed by the stock between the beams, but
 otherwise uninjured, excepting by the action of salt water. these
 beams, however, he could not part; no axe could he find, so he and
 tim collected the black fellows, and on pointing out the
  gun, they
 at once understood what was wanted, so by their combined effort, and
 bringing their little tomahawks into play, the gun was freed.
 “the gun’s no use without powder, tim,” remarked his brother as he
 fondly handled the weapon. “didn’t robinson crusoe make powder? oh! if
 i could only come across my chest!”
 the black fellows soon carried everything ashore that they could
 lay their hands on, and the result of their labours made quite a
 respectable pile on the beach. they then returned to strip every
 single nail, bolt, and bit of ironwork and lead from the wreck; from
 the way they went about this, it was evident that it was not the first
 time they had been so engaged.
 on further examination it was seen that most of the chests were
 smashed and empty. mat threw these aside, looking, however, first
 carefully at their marks; on scraping away the sea-weed and sand from
 one at the bottom of the pile, and turning it over, there, oh! joy!
 stood out plainly the two letters m. s., burnt into it with the forest
 print, which tim had brought to the docks on leaving home.
the chest was full and locked.
“hurrah!” shouted mat.
 “hurrah!” joined in tim, when he found what had caused mat’s joy,
 exclamations which so startled the blacks that they came crowding
 up and wanted to knock the chest to pieces at once, but mat gently
 prevented them, and showed them where to prise the
  lock open. then
 out came the greater part of his outfit and that of tim, not much the
 worse for wear, but drenched into many colours. mat promptly put
 on a shirt and a pair of moleskin trousers. tim arrayed himself in a
 light coat and pair of drawers, and the black fellows observing this,
 a most ludicrous scene ensued.
 one tall black drew his legs through a pair of trousers, holding the
 garment upside down, the consequence was that when he tried to walk
 he waddled a few steps and fell prone; another slipped on a pair of
 canvas ducks hind part before. one young “buck” pulled the sleeve of a
 shirt on, the balance of the garment, to his great delight, fluttering
 in the wind: whilst yet another sat down into tim’s best felt hat,
 thinking that article could only be meant for a seat.
 all these antics were accompanied with shouts of laughter, the dark
 men chasing each other about like so many children. this festive scene
 much relieved the owners of the property, pleased as they were to find
 their comrades in such good-humour.
 as suddenly tired with this buffoonery as they had been ready to
 commence it, the natives pulled off their eccentric-fitting garments,
 and signed to the white men to come along the shore. these wanted to
 examine further into the chests and casks, but were not allowed any
 further delay.
“what can they want down there?” cried tim.
 “why, i expect that chap they sent down the coast found another
 chest,” suggested mat.
 “come along, then, my darkies; more clothes, perhaps!” laughed his
 brother.
 when they turned the point of the cliff it was clothes, sure enough,
 that they found, but clothes enveloping a corpse.
 “the poor old doctor!” murmured mat, as he went down on his knees
 beside the body, and recognized the portly form. “he’s awfully
 battered, but not been touched by the fish or anything. he wasn’t on
 the poop, so there’s a small hope yet for the skipper and those we
 left with him. let’s bury him right up there, above high-water mark.”
 up to this the blacks had held aloof, but now made signs that they
 would divide the body or burn it, and seemed offended when the
 brothers showed that they could not have their own way in this. mat
 wished to bury his old comrade without making them angry, so he
 pointed to the body, then to the sky, shaking his head solemnly, upon
 which the natives fell back, and did not attempt to interfere again.
 the brothers then bore the corpse up the low cliff, scooped as deep a
 hole as they could in the sand, placed it there, rolled a great rock
 on the grave, and walked away silently from the spot.
 many an anxious glance did they cast seawards that day in hopes of
 seeing a vessel, but not a sign of one was visible on the placid
 ocean.
 returning to the scene of the wreckage, the black fellows shouldered
 everything that had been found in or on the wreck, and the whole party
 returned to their camp in the woods without further adventures.
 our foresters had hoped that when they should have arrived at what,
 for the present at any rate, they designated “home,” they would have
 had ample time to rummage into the chests and casks which had been
 saved. but what was their astonishment to find some fifty or sixty
 strange natives assembled at the camp. these had evidently arrived
 from some distant part, and had only come into camp shortly before the
 brothers and their friends, for the “jins” had not all disencumbered
 themselves of the children, whom they carried on their backs, the
 infants’ legs hanging straight down, according to the native custom.
 directly these freshly-arrived blacks saw our white lads—who were now
 clothed—they scampered off in every direction, only returning when
 the friendly natives went after them and explained matters, when they
 at length summoned up courage to come up to where the brothers were
 standing. they finally felt them all over, looked into their mouths,
 and with gestures begged them to strip. this request being also
 acceded to, their examiners seemed satisfied, and squatted themselves
 on the ground to talk the white men over.
 but it was soon evident that these visitors had arrived for a special
 purpose, for, on a signal being given,
 every man assembled was formed
 up so as to make a large circle. a corroboree on a grand scale was
 about to take place.
 whilst the brothers were led into the circle the “friendlies” went
 away to the chests, soon to reappear, not only in war-paint, but
 clad in every conceivable form. these northern blacks—men and women
 alike—were never in the habit of wearing the most minute particle of
 dress, or even covering.
 the contrast, then, between the friendly tribes and the strangers was
 very great, and the lads took the liberty of attending to the costumes
 in small particulars. tim this time clapped his hat on the head of his
 dark friend, who thereupon assumed a look of conscious pride; for,
 though it was the only article of dress he had on, yet he guessed
 that for this occasion the hat had been placed upon the real seat
 of honour. a pair of spectacles had also been brought to light in one
 of the rescued boxes. these were being passed around in wonder by the
 blacks, when our boys placed them on a very skinny old jin, and led
 her into the ring.
“she looks quite grandmotherly, don’t she, mat?” said tim.
 when the proper place for spectacles was thus seen, the nude old woman
 became the envy and delight of the admiring natives.
 then the whole crowd, dressed and undressed, stepped into a ring
 formed of spears stuck into the
 ground, all bearing on their faces
 a look of extreme dignity, which gave them even a more ludicrous
 appearance than when they were gambolling in like attire on the
 sea-shore. but when our foresters saw the old granny standing up, as
 if for her picture to be taken, with nothing on but a pair of big
 goggles, they could scarcely forbear from going into fits of laughter;
 however, by great efforts, they controlled their mirth, seeing how
 grave were the faces of all around them.
 this corroboree commenced with a song, which seemed as if it would
 never terminate, and which evidently entirely referred to the presence
 of the white men, as they were constantly pointed to.
 the strange natives looked on silent and open-mouthed, till it was
 over, when they all turned to, to examine the shirts and other
 clothing; after this the brothers were conducted to their gunyah, and
 upon making signs that they were hungry, food and water were quickly
 set before them, and they stretched out in their bark hut for a rest:
 they could see the natives after a time drop off one by one and go to
 sleep.
 more than once that night a visitor would steal up to have a peep at
 the white men, but jumper’s ominous growl forbad a too close approach.
 night after night was the same scene enacted, corroboree and singing,
 as fresh tribes came to take the place of those who had already
 seen the wonderful white men. at length this trotting-out became so
 wearisome that mat and tim flatly declined upon one
  occasion to go
 and be overhauled, and pinched, and have their mouths looked into by
 every fresh lot of black fellows.
 this refusal enraged the natives, who rushed towards them, fiercely
 swinging their waddies, or clubs, over their heads. our foresters
 stood perfectly unmoved, which conduct evidently pleased the dark
 men, as they dropped their weapons, and did not call for any more
 exhibitions for some time to come. most of the tribes also living
 within “calling distance” had satisfied their curiosity by seeing the
 strange men; and matters resumed their usual course, the “friendlies”
 keeping the brothers always well supplied with food, to their great
 comfort.
 mat had now time to examine the remaining stores, which had not as
 yet been interfered with. at the bottom of his sea-chest he found his
 books, amongst them his beloved “crusoe;” and what was of far greater
 importance, he discovered in a water-tight barrel, a tin of gunpowder
 stowed away amongst a quantity of rice.
 the brothers had many a talk over this powder, as they surmised that
 if they proved to the natives that they possessed the power of dealing
 instantaneous death, it would cause them to be respected by all in the
 district. so they resolved to show the power of the weapon.
 mat set to work to clean and burnish up the gun thoroughly, whilst tim
 cut up some slugs from the lead.
 the black fellows had looked at this gun, smelt it, and could not make
 it out.
said tim,—
 “i was talking with our good old doctor, whom we buried the other
 day—about the blacks, and he said as they thinks a thing’s a kind of
 spirit if you go into a lot of fooling over it; so now do you shoot a
 bird, but afore you fire we’ll have a game round the old gun.”
 there happened, on this day of the conversation, to be several hawks,
 which were fully gorged with odds and ends thrown out of the camp,
 placidly blinking on the branches of the trees high overhead.
 having made their arrangements, the brothers collected their friends
 and pointed to a particular bird, which was sitting on a branch by
 himself, some forty yards above their gunyah.
 “old joe” was then brought out, mat bringing it along with mock
 humility, as he crawled on his knees; the weapon was then placed on
 the ground at a spot which tim had been carefully dusting and removing
 twigs from, burying this rubbish with the greatest care. then, with
 a great appearance of solemnity, tim knelt at the muzzle, mat at the
 stock, as the gun was placed carefully on the sacred spot. this was
 all done so far in perfect silence. the natives remaining awe-struck
 at these proceedings, commenced to whisper.
“hush-sh!” said both brothers, putting their fingers to their lips.
 then sang out mat, “high cockelorum, jig, jig, jig,” and at the last
 jig was on his brother’s back with a flying leap, both in this
 fashion careering round the gun; jumper lying perfectly still beside
 it, as he was told. they then suddenly stopped, and in sepulchral
 tones sang bits of every song they had learnt when working the ship,
 commencing with, “oh, a bully ship and a bully crew,” following this
 with another solo, “and what do you think we had for dinner?” then
 both taking up the refrain, “blow, boys, blow,” “a goose’s lights and
 a louse’s liver, blow, my bully boys, blow.”
many other ditties followed, finishing with,—
“now upon my life and upon my soul,
i never knew a nigger but had wool on his pole,”
&c., &c.
 “now we’ll conclude the performance,” whispered mat; so first gently
 speaking to the lock of the gun, and then emitting a most atrocious
 noise down the barrel with his lips, he loaded, took a steady aim and
 fired, whilst tim was making horrible faces in the background.
 there was a death-like silence for an instant after the report had
 died away; and then, amidst the shrieks of the jins, the howls of the
 children, and the terrified yells of the men, who knocked each other
 over in their frantic efforts to escape, the camp was deserted.
 mat and tim fairly rolled on the ground, convulsed
  with laughter,
 whilst jumper amidst all this uproar rushed joyfully in, and worried
 the remains of the carrion bird.
 not a black skin could be seen, excepting a couple of unfortunate
 babies, who had been deserted by their mothers in the general
 stampede, and who were now squalling on the ground.
 “i think that act went off pretty tidy,” remarked tim, as soon as he
 could speak.
 “not much the matter with it,” answered his brother, “i reckon they
 won’t ‘ankor’ us, they were just about scared; but i won’t put five
 fingers of powder into ‘old joe’ again, she’s nearly taken my shoulder
 off. if we always handle the gun as if ’twere an evil spirit, i expect
 we’ve more power in it than we think of; it’s very certain they never
 heard that noise before; besides, she went off like a young cannon.”
 by-and-by the blacks stole silently, one by one, into the camp;
 amongst the first arrivals were two women, who seized the sprawling
 infants they had left behind, and then retreated quickly into the
 scrub.
 mat and tim, peeping out of their hut, to which they had retreated, as
 became properly behaved wizards, at length saw their friends gathered
 round one man, who was examining the defunct hawk with trembling
 fingers, to see what had killed it.
 there was a dead silence amongst the tribe that night, not one moved
 from his fire.
 next morning a native braver than the rest, the chief in fact, asked
 by signs whether he might approach the gun, which he saw peeping
 out from the hut; but the brothers, by pantomime, showed that the
 consequences would be too awful if he awoke the evil spirit, and he
 was glad to make his escape back again to his mates. no more inquiries
 were made after this, but both brothers were watched whenever they
 came out, to see that they had not the evil thing in their hands.
 however, the startling incident was gradually forgotten, as the gun
 was carefully put by, and no more powder used, for they never knew
 when they might really want it.
 spearing geese—killing ducks with boomerangs—’possum-hunting—how to
 make fire—the tribe shift camp—the boorah—mat and tim’s journal.
after our boys had been with the tribe for seven months, as near as
 they could guess, by means of a notched stick on which they nicked
 off the days, they began to acquire a smattering of the dialect, so
 that both black and white men could understand each other to a limited
 extent.
 in this way the brothers made out that in four moons many tribes would
 visit them.
 they now went out regularly hunting with their black friends, and in
 this way learnt much concerning the habits of the native game; also
 where to look for edible roots, of which there were many sorts; and
 though they found that the blacks were adepts at snaring all sorts
 of fowl, yet from their experience at home, and the many lessons in
 knots which they had picked up from the sailors, the brothers soon
 became even more successful in their art, more especially with regard
 to snaring animals. they also made strong kangaroo nets out of a fine
 flax, which the natives
 showed them how to prepare; these they turned
 out very rapidly, and with superior knots to those formed by the
 tribe, which pleased the latter.
 but if the blacks were surprised at the quickness of the white men,
 the clever way in which they learnt their habits and customs, and
 quite confounded at the effects of the “thunderstick,” by which name
 they had dubbed the gun, in their hands, still more on their side were
 the brothers astonished at the prowess displayed by the former in
 using their spears.
 upon one occasion there was great preparation in the camp; dilly
 bags were filled with food, large bundles of small light sticks were
 brought in and fashioned into spears, and mat and tim were invited
 to attend an expedition over the plains, to which the natives kept
 pointing, and repeating the word “noorgooral.”
 the constant repetition of this word, coupled with the preparations
 for the hunt, raised the curiosity of the brothers, and they were glad
 to have the chance of going; so, divesting themselves of their scanty
 and now ragged clothes, which they found irksome to them when away
 from the camp, they prepared to follow the tribe.
 after walking for several hours, the party came in sight of a long
 chain of narrow lagoons. this was towards evening, and geese could
 be seen coming in flocks of tens and twenties, and dropping into the
 pools.
 “flight time,” whispered mat, who felt all his sporting instincts
 aroused at this sight.
 the blacks no sooner saw the geese than they dropped into the long
 grass, bidding the white men do the same. each native had a bundle of
 the spears in his hand, and thus crawling through the blady grass,
 they stealthily approached the nearest pool, when all formed a line
 along and directly over the water, without having disturbed a single
 bird.
 at a given signal, up jumped each black fellow, and, as quick as
 lightning, hurled spear after spear into the dense bodies, or flocks,
 of the affrighted geese as they rose clamorous from the water.
 “why, guns couldn’t do better!” exclaimed tim in astonishment, seeing
 the water covered with dead and dying fowl.
 “no, a lot of them hit with guns would go away wounded,” said mat,
 “and see, each bird that’s struck with those spears drops.”
 these spears at short ranges flew like arrows from a bow, many birds
 fell dead, more were struggling in the water; but other flocks were
 approaching, so down went the blacks again, and, rising up just as
 the fresh arrivals had discovered their mistake, and before they had
 settled, hurled their darts as before, until they had no spears left.
 with the exception of a whispered sentence or two between the
 brothers, not a sound had escaped the lips of the hunters up to this;
 but now, with wild
 yells of triumph, they gave vent to their
 pent-up feelings, plunged into the lagoons and their reedy edges, and
 commenced to retrieve both game and spears.
 the brothers were rushing in like the rest, when they were seized
 and implored by the natives, by signs, not to go into the water;
 however, they laughingly shook themselves free, and dived in off the
 bank, bringing geese to land, and returning for more. when the blacks
 saw how completely at home they were in the water they raised joyful
 exclamations, and afterwards explained that they thought the white men
 had been blown ashore at the time of the shipwreck on a piece of the
 vessel.
 subsequently our lads accompanied their friends on a similar
 expedition, but this time the birds they were after proved to be
 ducks—a large black duck, and another sort, brown and white in colour,
 which perched on trees. on this occasion the weapons used were
 boomerangs. keeping a bundle of these under the left arm, the natives
 hurled them one after another into the midst of the scared fowl, as
 they rose from the water, bagging over forty birds before darkness
 terminated the sport.
 the remarkable tameness of all the water-fowl struck our foresters,
 for unless when being actively pursued, both geese, ducks, and smaller
 water-birds would simply swim a few yards away from the bank on the
 approach of a human being, and this
 when the whole lake was thickly covered with them.
 by dint of long practice the white men at last succeeded in using the
 boomerang effectively; the spear came to them much more readily; but
 the boomerang required far greater patience and practice to learn than
 they could have conceived possible. at length they could hurl it even
 to the satisfaction of the natives.
 they had been told by men on board the young austral that a black
 fellow could so hurl a boomerang that it should cut off his enemy’s
 head, and then, after taking a little circular flight, presumably to
 examine the country, return obediently to the feet of its master.
 their tribe soon exploded this absurd fable, for they showed them
 that when the weapon struck full, there it stayed; if it glanced off
 an object it might terminate its flight anywhere; if it met with no
 resistance they had to go after it and pick it up. but they also
 showed them one or two other boomerangs, which, owing to some unseen
 peculiarity in the cutting, did come back, in this way. a group of
 seven tall trees grew on the edge of a water-hole, which was situated
 on a plain close to the camp. an able-bodied black beckoned the
 brothers to follow him; then, taking his stand some thirty yards from
 the trees, he selected three boomerangs. taking a short run, he cast
 one so as to shape its course to the right of the clump of timber,
 the weapon whirled
 gracefully upwards, higher and higher, turned
 completely round the topmost branches to the left, and descended
 with a heavy thud to the feet of the thrower. the second failed in its
 perfect flight by striking a small twig, whilst the third was as great
 a success as the first.
 the worst wound a boomerang could make (our brothers were informed)
 was by either of the sharp points entering; each end terminating in
 one of these.
 that which mat and tim had all along been most anxious to learn was
 the art of making fire, and an opportunity soon presented itself.
 one of the natives, who was recognized as the chief, and named
 “dromoora,” a man who with his jin had always proved most staunch and
 friendly to the white men, invited them one day to go ’possum-hunting
 in some high ranges, a considerable distance from the camp.
 both mat and tim had often hunted these animals before, and knew how
 to seek them, and when found, how to cut them out; but they at once
 accepted dromoora’s invitation, as he was such a good fellow.
 having arrived at the range, mat soon picked out a tree where the
 recently ascending marks, cut by the claws of the little beast through
 the white bark, showed that it had gone up the preceding night, whilst
 there were no tracks to denote its having come down again. so mat cut
 little steps up the tree,
 sufficiently large to afford a hold for the
 big toe, ascending by this means till he reached the branches, when he
 found the hole, and after chopping for a considerable time, dragged
 out the little animal and knocked it on the head.
 when they had collected some dozens of ’possums amongst them, mat
 explained to the jin, whose name was “terebare,” that he wanted to
 make fire, whereupon, with a good-tempered smile, which displayed her
 beautiful row of white teeth, she disappeared into a neighbouring
 scrub, and brought back a bit of very rotten dry wood, the size of an
 ordinary walking-stick: this was a branch of the black fig-tree. she
 then split it down the middle, and placed it on the ground, flat side
 uppermost, holding it down with her well-shaped little feet. dromoora
 meantime had cut a sound piece, round and straight about a foot long.
 placing this round piece straight up on end, the girl rolled it with
 her hands round and round on the split wood under her feet, pressing
 it with some force into it, until after the lapse of a minute or two,
 she had bored a hole nearly through the latter, then cutting a notch
 on the under side of this, the fine dust fell through on to some fine
 dry grass which she had already placed there. she then resumed the
 rolling motion until sparks appeared, when, picking up the dry grass
 and blowing into it, it flamed up.
 “that’s a secret worth knowing,” said mat, as he saw the small fire
 kindled; “fancy, if we’d been able
 to do that when we were wrecked.
 i expect it isn’t as easy as it looks.” and mat went to work to make
 fire himself. he slaved and he rolled until the perspiration ran off
 him, being much laughed at by dromoora and his wife in consequence,
 who told him he must stay there until he succeeded. after repeated
 failures he at length saw his heap of grass begin to smoke and tim
 kneeling down and blowing into this, the flame of victory flashed up.
 they then shouldered their game, and returned in good spirits to camp.
 heavy rains setting in soon after this, dromoora’s tribe shifted camp
 to higher ground some miles away.
 there was another reason for this movement on the part of the natives,
 the fact that their old district was getting short of roots and game.
 of salt-water fish there was plenty, though some distance off.
 the blacks made many more excursions to the coast, on rare occasions
 accompanied by our twins, always returning with fish and odds and ends
 in the shape of nails and other portions of metal.
 after one of these trips dromoora brought his white friends something
 which he had carefully wrapped up in ’possum skin, telling them as he
 unfolded the precious flotsam, that he had found it floating near the
 shore, and that he thought it must something to do with the gun, or
 “teegoora,” as the weapon was known in the tribe.
 when the parcel was unfolded mat saw that it was a pencil—an immense
 “find,” as he could now jot down notes, and keep a rough journal
 on the margin of his books, which he had long since dried and put
 carefully away.
thus time passed on.
 once a report was brought to the brothers by blacks of a distant tribe
 that a white man had been seen again far to the west; but upon asking
 whether they could not go and find him, they were told that it was
 impossible, as not only was the distance enormous, but there were many
 hostile tribes between them and the country where the white man had
 been seen.
 after the rains had ceased, numbers of strange natives began to
 collect. these were the tribes that dromoora and his men had spoken
 about.
 some eight tribes were represented amongst these new arrivals, and at
 one time our foresters counted over  on the ground together.
 after the usual examination of the white men, which was rendered
 more bearable by dromoora being present, and giving orders to the
 blacks that they were to treat them as warriors, the strange tribes
 introduced themselves to the “friendlies” by organizing a grand
 “corroboree,” which lasted two nights. at its conclusion it was
 evident by the preparations made that something unusual was about to
 take place.
 upon inquiry it was found that they were about to
  celebrate a
 “boorah,” or “boree,” a ceremony to make the lads young men.
 dromoora explained that for eight months previous to this event the
 lads have to go into the bush and cater for themselves, that during
 that period they must on no account see a female, and that after this
 term of independence they are brought in, and cane rings are placed
 round their arms, and twisted tightly.
 upon this special occasion the brothers were prevented from sleeping
 all night by the hideous cries and howls of the youths, who were
 enduring agony from the pressure of the rings.
 when daylight at length came, they saw forty of the victims seated
 on the ground, surrounded by their mothers, sisters, and female
 relatives. these women were crying and cutting themselves all over
 with sharp stones, in token of joy at seeing them.
 the youths they had put comfortably to sleep in shady places, while
 the old jins were away in the swamps to get roots to make them cakes.
 the older men had collected the spears of the youngsters, which they
 had been carrying with them during their eight months’ absence; these
 they had fixed in the earth in a semicircle, fastening grass festoons
 from head to head of each spear.
 in the evening the young men were placed under the decorated spears,
 and their sisters and female cousins lay with their heads on the
 swollen arms.
 next morning the young men were taken into the bush, and returned
 decorated with shells and feathers, generally painted up and made to
 look becoming, when they set about choosing their sweethearts, and
 another grand “corroboree” closed the proceedings.
 but there was much quarrelling and fighting after this, for these
 newly-fledged warriors commenced stealing the old men’s daughters,
 and even their wives; so that the brothers on this occasion presently
 found themselves amongst a lot of infuriated savages fighting chiefly
 with their clubs.
 however, dromoora came to their rescue, and, leading them into their
 gunyah, bid them lie quiet, and on no account in any way to interfere
 with the jins, for that they always caused these troubles; advice
 which mat thought was quite uncalled for, as they had long seen that
 whenever there was fighting it was invariably about the women; but he
 answered the chief good-humouredly enough, remarking that white men
 also were known to have trouble about women in their own country.
 however, in the present case the fierce uproar did not last long, and
 no one was killed, though some terrible blows were exchanged. the
 combatants had to leave off to go and find food.
 though mat and tim would not be separated from each other, they
 gradually joined other tribes in the district, or rather stayed with
 them during hunting expeditions; and though both were now so far
 settled
 that they got on well with the natives, were accomplished
 and keen hunters, and never lacked food, yet they often thought and
 conversed together concerning their white brethren and civilization.
 the time had now dragged along until they were aware that they had
 been more than five years amongst the blacks, and still they saw
 no chance of release from their somewhat degrading life. one great
 comfort which supported them amidst their hardships was that they
 could keep up their spirits in each other’s society—in their own
 language, with their own books. had there been only one white man, he
 must have almost forgotten his own language by this time.
 during this long period of “free captivity,” our foresters had
 acquired half a dozen different dialects, which they had picked up
 amongst neighbouring tribes. they had often spoken of trying to work
 their way south, but had been dissuaded by their friends, who told
 them that the danger was too great, the tribes in that direction being
 fierce, and that they dare not go themselves beyond a certain limit.
 at the same time it was judged by our boys that their friends wished
 them to stay, and possibly exaggerated these dangers.
 though at first they “got out” very much in their dates, the brothers
 kept a journal as regularly as circumstances permitted, putting
 down everything of interest in their own lives, but more especially
 entering
 into a description of the manners and customs of the natives.
 tim contributed also by giving specimens of the language with their
 equivalents in english; also he mentioned with accuracy the edible
 plants, describing the places where they should be looked for, and
 their native names, as “kaourou,” a blue water-lily, of which the
 natives eat seeds and roots. “kadolo,” good root, something like a
 carrot, grows in every valley, plain, or creek bank, has three narrow,
 long, sharp-pointed leaves. he also mentioned the native yam, the wild
 banana, and a sort of tobacco. many of these fruits and roots mat
 guessed the english names of from pictures which he recollected.
 there was not much order in their journal, as both brothers simply
 jotted down events and descriptions independently of each other. for
 instance, mat wrote on the fly-leaf of the largest volume:—
 “this book we hope to carry with us into civilization; but if god
 wills that we both die here, it may be found some day amongst our
 black brethren, who look upon our books as a sort of white man’s
 spirit, and they promise always to take care of them. tim and i
 are now as naked as when we landed from the wreck of the young
 austral, our clothes having rotted long ago; but our bodies are
 sun and weatherproof. tim gets a touch of rheumatism now and again,
 but otherwise we are very well, though rather thin. we don’t know
 what ’tis to be tired; when
 we’re caught by darkness far from camp
 we just lie down where we are with our dog, and sleep as soundly as
 ever we did at home. we know two sorts of trees that always hold good
 drinking-water; tim is going to describe them, he says, so we hope
 never to die of thirst. food we can get as easily as the natives can.”
 mat then went on to describe the blacks in the same somewhat
 unconnected manner:—
 “these natives amongst whom we are living are called the ‘waigonda;’
 they are not really black, but more the colour of an old penny. when
 a child is born ’tis a sort of dirty white; but the jins squeeze
 their milk over it, when about three days’ old, and rub charcoal into
 its skin. many of the natives are treacherous and cunning: they have
 broad, flat noses, sunken, black eyes, and terrible great mouths.
 “sometimes twins are born, and we’ve known the father kill one of them
 to save the trouble of bringing up two.
 “they are awful lazy, the men have—some of them leastways—eight or
 nine wives, who do most all the work for him, and often supply him
 with food for days together.
 “i’ve known a man sell a wife for a new kangaroo net; or lend one
 for some article they want. they eat everything that creeps on the
 earth; snakes they are very fond of, particularly one that’s not
 poisonous, called “manoo.” many of the fruits look like english
 ones, but they’re just about nasty, and mostly all stone. one fruit
 looks like a big orange, but it will just turn your throat inside out
 if you try to suck it, but the blacks pound and soak it, and then bake
 it, and it makes good flour. there’s a little fig the size of a cherry
 that’s really good.
 “the blacks use the juice of different sorts of bark for making
 fish stupid, so that they float belly upwards and can be caught.
 fish-hooks they cut out of fresh-water turtle shells. sometimes they
 eat human flesh, but only a friend killed in battle or by accident,
 never their enemies. the bodies of these they cut into strips, dry,
 and divide the pieces amongst the tribe: then they think that the
 strength of the dead man is added to their own. they sometimes get
 killed by crocodiles and snakes. they have no remedy for snake-bites;
 if they get bitten by a poisonous one, they just lie down and die,
 and the whole tribe howls for hours. they cannot in any way write
 their language, but can send messages by notched sticks, which are
 understood. they can’t count above five; more than that they show by
 their fingers.
 “they speak very thick in the throat, but the young women speak nice
 and soft. they measure time by wet and dry seasons, and by moons. they
 fear some sort of spirit, and don’t like to move about at night.
 “there’s a great mountain near us; tim and i have
  often hunted on
 it. the blacks tell us that their forefathers once saw a great flood,
 which drowned all the tribes, but that they got away in time and ran
 up this mountain, and built a big canoe and escaped. tim and i judge
 from this that their forefather’s name was noah, as mentioned in our
 bible, which was saved. these natives cut their bodies into all sorts
 of queer patterns, and make the wounds heal with the lips open. they
 haven’t much hair on their faces, as a rule; i’ve only once or twice
 seen good whiskers or beards. they cut the hair on their heads when
 they are boys with tomahawks. tim and i have long beards.
 “in their language a canoe or any ship is ‘woolgoora;’ water,
 ‘doongalla.’
 “they believe that the moon is a human being like themselves; that
 one tribe throws it up, and it rises, and then comes down again, when
 another tribe catches it to prevent its hurting itself. falling stars
 mean danger or something extraordinary, in the direction in which
 they fall. they declare that some fell over the sea just before tim
 and i landed; we didn’t see them, however. an eclipse frightens them
 terribly, and they cower down and mumble grass till it is over.”
 much more to the same effect wrote mat, and to his jottings copious
 notes were added by tim. these dilapidated books, the margins of which
 were covered with their pencilled notes, they preserved with the
  most
 jealous care; noting also the seasons as they passed, and the hot
 christmas time.
 nothing very eventful had, so far, happened to them; the same routine
 of hunting and fishing every day, varied by an occasional tramp to the
 beach, partly to collect crabs and shell-fish, but more particularly
 to look out for any passing vessel; and though more than one was
 seen during these years, they always proved to be far beyond any
 signalizing by smoke.
 and what was jumper doing all this time? though beyond the middle age
 of dog life, he was as fleet and strong as ever; the only ailment he
 suffered from was a slight deafness, which first became apparent after
 his long swim from the wreck. he had long got over his dislike to the
 natives, though suspicious of any belonging to other tribes. he proved
 of great use in running down wounded kangaroos and wallaby, but more
 especially did he distinguish himself when the great nets were set and
 the hunters drove the game into them; then the dog was in his glory,
 helping, as he had before done at home when cattle had to be driven in
 a certain direction. he was a great favourite with the waigonda tribe,
 and the dingoes, or half-wild dogs, belonging to the camp, treated him
 with the greatest respect.
 gold—hostile natives—flight by night—the great battle—clubs—fists—new
 forest wrestling—“old joe.”
though our foresters were looked upon and treated as brothers by
 the waigonda tribe, signs were not wanting to show that some of the
 neighbouring blacks, who had been present at the boorah, were envious
 of their position, and of the goods which they possessed, and an
 incident happened before long to prove this in an unpleasant way.
 the brothers had gone on a distant hunting expedition by themselves;
 they eventually reached a country of dry gullies which they knew of
 old. resting after their long march, tim happened to scrape in the
 sand for water under the roots of a tree, when he suddenly called to
 his brother with a startled exclamation.
 “what’s up?” answered mat, running up, thinking he had been bitten by
 a snake.
 “look here, if this ain’t gold, i never saw a sovereign!” cried tim,
 as he displayed a water-worn piece of the precious metal.
 mat could hardly believe his eyes, and whilst yet examining the
 nugget, tim brought forth another from under the bank of the dried-up
 watercourse in which he was standing.
 both brothers now fell to with pointed stakes to dig in the sand,
 and, before another hour had passed, had unearthed several nuggets of
 various sizes.
 at length this “pocket” of treasure ceased, and their digging-sticks
 came on to hard rock, which, at length, laying bare and following up
 the creek, they discovered was milky white, with distinct veins of
 gold running through it.
 “why, the gully is full of gold! our fortune’s made!” panted tim, as
 he sat down to rest, and surveyed the beautiful rock beneath him.
 “so it might be if we were away from here, tim; as it is, it’s not so
 much use to us as if ’twas a lot of lead; all the same, we’ll take the
 bearings of the gully, and as it’s late, and we’ve lost the best of
 the day digging, we’ll camp to-night with the tinguras, they seemed
 friendly enough with the waigondas, though dromoora says they’re
 thieves.”
 the brothers marked the trees slightly, took up their spoils, and
 moved away from the “golden valley,” as they christened the spot, and
 by sundown were at the camp in question, which they intended to make
 their headquarters for a few days.
 upon arriving they showed the blacks one of the nuggets they had
 found, but these merely remarked
 that such “stones” had often been found by them, and that they were of no use.
 it struck them that this tribe did not receive them very cordially
 upon this occasion, for they made uncalled-for remarks, said there was
 no food in the camp for strangers, never showed them where they might
 sleep, and behaved generally in a rough and uncouth manner.
 however, this behaviour did not trouble our lads, they merely took the
 precaution to load their gun that night; this weapon, together with
 ammunition, being their constant companion, when away from home.
 next evening the brothers were engaged a few yards from their
 sleeping-quarters, when a black fellow took the opportunity to steal
 up, with the intention of taking the gun, which was lying under
 their ’possum rug, not having the respect for that weapon which the
 waigondas had, but coveting it on account of the beautiful engravings
 upon the locks. jumper had always considered the weapon as under his
 especial charge, and no sooner had the black stretched out his arm to
 take it than his wrist was seized in the dog’s powerful grip.
 howling and yelling, the native tried to shake off the dog, but
 jumper, who owed more than one grudge for insults put upon him by
 black skins, took this opportunity to make his teeth meet in the bony
 wrist, nor would he let go, until another black fellow,
  coming to the
 rescue, hit him a violent blow on the head with his club.
 mat and tim hurrying up at the uproar which ensued, found their
 faithful dog lying half stunned and bleeding on the ground, whilst
 the blacks were “jabbering” together in angry knots about the camp,
 casting fierce glances towards them, and handling their weapons in a
 menacing manner.
 before he appeared in view mat distinctly caught the words, “kill all
 three.”
 upon seeing that the white men were calmly sitting down with their
 gun, the natives, who had heard some rumours of the death-dealing
 powers of the “teegoora,” appeared to quiet down, and retired in a
 body, discussing matters in an undertone.
 but the brothers had lived long enough amongst these tribes to know
 them and their ways, and turning to his brother, mat said, in a quiet
 tone, “they mean murder to-night.”
 “i was thinking the same thing,” was tim’s reply, as he attended to
 the dog’s wound. “we’ll clear out.”
 so directly it was dark enough to slip away unobserved, the brothers,
 carrying gun and jumper, glided silently out of the camp, and, taking
 a “bee line” for the waigonda country, never paused from a long,
 slinging trot, until they drew up at midnight at a water-hole.
 “it’s something to know how to work yer way in the dark,” said mat,
 as he put down the dog.
 the fact was that the brothers were as good bushmen as the blacks, and
 in one respect even better, in that they were accustomed to travel at
 night whenever there was any reason to do so, whereas the blacks had a
 great horror of moving after dark.
 mat and tim had hit off the very pool of water which they had intended
 to, and now meant to take a rest, eat something, and bathe the dog’s
 head.
 they felt, now that they were so far safe, that a whole night’s start
 would enable them to reach the country of their friends before the
 tinguras could overtake them.
 the rest refreshed them all, more especially jumper. the brothers had
 carried him, up to this point, by turns, but when they started again
 they found that he could follow fast enough to keep up with them.
 thus the little party of fugitives continued through the night, going
 at a more leisurely pace during the greater part of the next day, and
 towards evening had gained the new camp which their waigonda friends
 had formed.
 no sooner were the brothers in sight than their friends turned out
 with shouts of joy to receive them; but upon hearing the reason of
 their sudden appearance—for they had not expected them for some days
 later—they looked grave, and without more ado hastily summoned a
 council of war, for they told mat that the black which had been bitten
 by jumper was
 the chief of the tribe, a revengeful brute, who would
 be sure to come, with all his fighting-men, after them, and that, so
 far, it was lucky they had got into camp when they did.
 “and they will come,” said dromoora, after he had commanded silence.
 “we must fight, and we shall be glad to fight them; but you white men
 must kill with the ‘thunder-stick,’ for they number two to our one.”
 so the brothers consulted together, and resolved to do as the chief
 had requested, and use the gun, but only at the last moment, their
 intention being to fight the enemy fairly with their own wooden
 weapons, in the use of which they were proficient. but they resolved
 that if they saw that the waigondas were driven back, and that the day
 was almost lost, then and only then, at the chief’s command, would
 they show the power of “teegoora.”
 so they informed the chief and his warriors of their decision, adding
 that the “thunder-stick” was already prepared to strike and kill.
 at this news the blacks expressed their deep sense of gratitude with
 many guttural exclamations, and hoped, they said, that the white men
 would “thunder” all the enemy dead, for that this tribe had often
 molested them, and had even stolen their women.
 mat replied to these remarks by requesting his friends to give him
 all the lead which they had kept after stripping it from the wreck.
 this they joyfully
 agreed to do; and the brothers went away to cut
 up slugs, and see that “old joe” was prepared to back them up at a
 critical moment.
 whilst thus employed, dromoora informed them that he and his wife
 would have the honour of decorating them for the battle.
 scouts had already been sent out to bring in all stragglers, whilst
 the men and women in camp were busily engaged in trimming up spears
 and other weapons, and preparing food and filling many gourds with
 water.
 the brothers soon cut up a goodly heap of slugs, divided their one
 canister of powder into exact loads, and freshly chipped the flints of
 “old joe.” they had now reason to congratulate themselves that they
 had never wasted this powder, and that, besides that, they could rely
 upon its strength, having often tested its fitness.
 by nightfall all preparations were completed to give the enemy a warm
 reception.
 none of the scouts had reported the appearance of any of them yet; and
 as three sentries were to be on the alert all night, dromoora said
 that they might sleep in camp tranquilly, for that no attack would
 take place before early dawn.
 besides carefully arming themselves, mat and tim had, with the help
 of the natives, prepared a cunningly-devised trap, in the shape of
 concealed kangaroo nets, the use of which we shall see further on.
 in one respect mat’s nature was a peculiar one, or, as he thought,
 peculiar to himself only; and this was, that he would shake like
 a leaf when waiting for a foe. it had always been the same. once,
 when a boy, a burly lad had tripped him up purposely on the ice. mat
 walked to the bank of the pond, took off his coat, and told the bully
 to “come on.” but the bigger boy had walked away, having forgotten the
 circumstance. mat still remained, sending a messenger to say he was
 ready. when this was known, a crowd of his companions collected around
 to see the fun. the other lad was a long time coming, and it was
 noticed, to the astonishment of all, that, during the whole time of
 this “waiting,” mat was trembling in every limb. but the village lads
 better understood their mate when, a few minutes later, after half a
 dozen rounds, they saw his antagonist lying, stunned and bleeding,
 on the ice, having been knocked clean off the bank by one of mat’s
 terrific “facers.”
 so it was on this eventful night before the great battle. mat said to
 his brother, “it’s no good, i can’t sleep; feel just as i did before
 the bloodhound came at me.” and in fact he passed most of the night
 pacing, with short, quick steps, amongst the fires.
 the sun had scarcely risen next morning when two of the scouts came
 rushing into camp to say that the hostile tribe was coming in full
 war-paint, singing their war-chant, and that they might be expected by
 the time that the sun was high in the heavens; further,
 that there were no women with them, and only a couple of lads
 accompanied the warriors.
 dromoora, on hearing this, ordered all the women and children to
 disappear and hide in the scrub, and at the same time asked our
 foresters to accompany them, “for,” said he, “if you are killed, we
 cannot use the ‘thunder-stick,’ as you only know its secret; besides,
 they will all try to kill you first.”
then up spoke mat,—
 “we will not obey you in this, dromoora; i and my brother will be in
 the front rank fighting the enemy, with wooden weapons; if we are all
 driven in, we will retreat to the gun, and when you give the order,
 but not before, we will make it speak. if we are both killed, which
 is not very likely, you will save the thunder-stick, and our books,
 and fly with them to the white man.”
 this speech was received with grunts of satisfaction; and the chief
 answered in the name of the rest,—
 “so be it. we have taught you how to use our own weapons; you are
 brave men; when i call the word ‘teegoora,’ but not before, give forth
 the death-dealing noise, it will end the fight.”
 terebare and other of the women, before retiring to their
 hiding-places, proceeded to decorate the white men, under the eyes of
 the chief. when this was completed, tim very truthfully remarked,—
“that their own mother would never know them.”
 in truth our foresters, both men of splendid
  physique, presented a
 noble, and at the same time somewhat strange appearance.
 at this period they were only a shade lighter in colour than their
 black brethren; their hair had been cut moderately close to their
 heads, by means of tomahawks, and now it was adorned with heavy plumes
 of the black and scarlet feathers of the parrot; beards black, and
 reaching down over their chests; bodies painted with white, yellow,
 and red ochre, in all sorts of grotesque patterns; their appearance
 was calculated to inspire awe even amongst the natives themselves;
 whilst, to complete their terrible appearance, terebare insisted on
 tying to the forehead of each one of the damaged old books saved from
 the wreck, in such a manner that at each movement the leaves opened
 and shut.
 the natives gathered round the brothers when their toilet was
 completed, and could not forbear a shout, and even a short corroboree
 for the occasion.
 this, however, only lasted a few seconds, for the enemy were now
 reported as being near, and every warrior at once got into position.
 but long before the hostile band appeared one of their youths, as
 forerunner, hailed a waigonda scout, and signified that he wished to
 speak.
 dromoora sent a young man to ask him what he wanted, and this was the
 answer brought back,—
 “we, the tribe of tingura, have come openly, not creeping in upon you,
 and we intend to kill you all if
 you do not give up the white men, their dog, and the white men’s stick.”
 “tell the messenger,” bellowed the enraged waigonda chief, as soon as
 he could get over this audacious threat, “that neither white men nor
 stick will be given up—that the tingura may prepare to lay their bones
 here; that we shall take all their women, and that we have long wished
 to see how the cowardly, thieving dingoes will fight.”
 when dromoora’s message was conveyed to the enemy, who were now quite
 close, tremendous yells, mingled with derisive cries could be heard,
 accompanied by the thunder of rushing feet, and the next moment, as it
 seemed, a whole flight of boomerangs entered the camp.
 these were dodged or warded off by the yelamans (or shields), and
 dromoora and his warriors rushed forth to meet the foe, and with clubs
 and spears the battle commenced in earnest.
 for the first few minutes mat and tim had their attention entirely
 engaged in warding off or dodging the numerous blows aimed at them,
 and whilst so engaged had not received a scratch, though more than one
 assailant had felt the power of their arms.
 at the very first onset, by sheer weight of numbers, the friendlies
 were driven temporarily back a few steps, when mat, who towered
 above most of his assailants, caught sight of a stoutly-built black
 fellow, wearing an enormous head-dress of emu feathers,
  fighting his
 way through friends and foes to get at him. at the same moment he
 recognized tim’s voice, roaring out in english above the awful din,—
“look out! the devil who the dog bit.”
 and he it was, sure enough, with his wrist bound up with some animal’s
 skin, and with fury gleaming out of his deep-set eyes.
 the man got close enough to mat to hurl two heavy spears at him; but
 our forester was now in his element. never taking his steady eye off
 that of his adversary, he received the first spear on his shield, and
 the second, which followed instantaneously, he escaped by springing
 high into the air.
 recognizing the fact that two great braves had met to fight to the
 death, friends and foes in the immediate vicinity suspended their
 struggles for the moment, to watch the combatants.
 after, as we have seen, escaping the spears, mat rushed upon his
 opponent before he could raise his club, and, profiting by a lesson
 which he had learnt at home, namely, the use of his fists, he dropped
 his shield, and at the same moment feinted with his left. these
 tactics, evidently new to the black fellow, somewhat disconcerted him,
 and for one instant he was irresolute; that moment proved fatal to
 him, for mat brought down his club with terrific force on the mass of
 plumes.
 down went the tingura chief half stunned, but the thick, stiff
 feathers of the emu had deadened the
 force of the blow, and he was
 up and on his feet again, club in hand, but before he could raise the
 weapon mat repeated the blow behind his ear, driving in his skull.
 on seeing the chief fall to rise no more, the friendlies gave a loud
 shout, whilst the enemy yelled with rage, and the fight waxed fiercer
 than ever.
 mat was well aware that there was a concerted effort to kill him at
 any price. yet for the moment, having seen the power of his arm, and
 never having thought that the white men could fight them with their
 own weapons, the enemy held aloof, until, amidst loud tingura cries,
 another warrior advanced upon him. at the same moment, in an effort to
 defend himself from a side blow, mat’s club was dashed from him.
 our forester was now unarmed, but to the astonishment of his enemies
 and admiration of his friends, this fact seemed not to discourage him
 in the very least.
 striking out right and left with his fists, he felled a couple of his
 immediate opponents, with a bound was over their prostrate forms, and
 had this fresh warrior in his grasp, when, wrenching his club from him
 as he seized him, but disdaining to use it, he threw it high overhead
 to where he judged his waigonda friends would be.
 it now became a question of brute force between the white man and the
 black, the advantage being
 slightly on the side of mat as a wrestler.
 had the native been brought up in the same school as our forester, the
 issue would have been doubtful as to which would have come off the
 victor; for two finer proportioned men it would have been difficult to
 find.
 although the battle was raging before and behind them, again were the
 two combatants left to themselves for the time being. mat had seized
 his man by the wrist in disarming him, but at once found that the
 black could twist this wrist round and round like an eel, no matter
 how firmly he grasped it; the thin muscular arm was too slippery to
 hold still. so, changing his tactics as the fellow “screwed” away
 from him, mat let go suddenly, got a partial grip round his loins, and
 for a brief moment held him as in a vice; but a sudden wrench, and
 again mat’s hands partially slipped. owing to this final exertion the
 tingura fell, dragging mat with him. there they rolled together in the
 thick dust, locked in a deadly embrace; but the black, not relishing
 this kind of fighting, by a violent effort was on his legs again, yet
 still in the partial embrace of our forester.
 thus for an instant stood the two gladiators, with quivering limbs,
 their muscles standing out like cords ready to burst, when mat got
 a full grip, this time round the loins of the tingura, and with one
 tremendous heave, aided by his knee, threw him completely over his
 shoulder, and left him, stunned and bleeding, a good three yards
 behind him.
 mat throws the tingura.
 the chief cause of mat being at length able to give his man this
 deadly fall was the fact that when they rolled together on the ground
 he was enabled to secure a handful of grit, and thus secure a firm
 grip of the black’s skin. he had never before attempted to hold a
 black fellow, and he now realized that when he tried to, there was a
 natural sort of grease in the native skin which prevented him. he had
 thus, during the struggle, been watching for an opportunity to grab
 some sand; an effort which we have seen he succeeded in.
 our forester was now pretty well exhausted, and had it not been that
 the waigonda formed round him, and covered his retreat towards the
 “thunder-stick,” he must have been either struck down or made prisoner.
 tim, meantime, with dromoora and the rest of the tribe, had been
 bravely fighting against overwhelming odds. they were being driven
 slowly but surely back to the point at which they had previously
 determined to make their final stand, but it looked as though they
 could not be forced to reach it, so stubborn was their defence.
 thinking by means of a bold dash to finish the battle, the tingura
 made a rush, and tim found himself separated from his tribe.
 one assailant, who rushed at him with a “waddy,” he knocked down
 with his right fist, receiving the intended blow from the club on
 his shield. whilst
 still staggering from the shock of this, another
 native hit him a crushing blow on the ribs, which knocked tim down.
 the black was in the act of raising his club again to give him a
 finishing blow on the head when a yellow form seemed to spring out
 of the long grass, hurl itself on to the native’s back, and by sheer
 weight bear him to the earth, and there fix its teeth firmly in his
 throat. mat, having been a witness of this act, rushed to the spot,
 and shouting, “cheer up, tim, i’ll put this brute out of his misery,”
 finished the tingura by a blow on the head, which, seeing that jumper
 had torn the savage’s throat open, was the most humane act to perform.
 but though fortune had so far befriended the brothers, yet she had
 not altogether acted in like manner with dromoora and the rest of his
 tribe.
 the tinguras were so enraged at the unexpected opposition, that with a
 savage yell the only surviving chief gathered his men round him, and
 determined to annihilate the waigondas by their still overpowering
 numbers.
 they had succeeded in driving dromoora and all his fighting-men into
 the timber, where “throwing weapons” were of no avail, so that each
 side relied on their clubs only.
 many fell at this spot, both friends and foes. blows were given and
 received which would have rendered any white man hors de combat; not
 so these wild men. during this last struggle mat saw more than
  one
 knocked down apparently dead, and the next instant this man would be
 on his legs again, fighting more fiercely than ever.
 the yells and shrieks were positively appalling. mat and his brother,
 who was on his legs again, had never heard or read of anything to
 resemble this last effort for victory.
 the blacks, both friends and foes, seemed literally to increase in
 stature as they sprang from side to side to avoid each other’s blows,
 whilst the countenances of the combatants were positively fiendish.
 at this period of the battle it was evident that the tingura were
 doing their utmost to kill dromoora, and in their efforts to
 accomplish this did not now attack the brothers to the extent that
 these latter had anticipated.
 but numbers told; many of the waigondas had dropped in that clump of
 timber, never to rise again, whilst a devoted band rallied round their
 beloved chief.
 the brothers were in an agony of doubt, and mat had more than once
 said, “i’ll shoot!” as he handled the gun, which he had snatched
 from its hiding-place; but tim had begged him to wait for dromoora’s
 command.
at last mat said, “i’ll wait no longer!”
 as he uttered these words, two blacks, one of whom was the last
 survivor of the tingura chiefs, sneaked suddenly round a large tree,
 behind the group of
 waigonda warriors, and, with a fierce war-whoop,
 threw themselves on dromoora, who, wounded as he already had been in
 the earlier part of the battle, was no match for this sudden onslaught.
 one black had already knocked him against the tree by a blow, which
 was luckily partly fended off by the shield of the chief; the other
 was in the act of striking him with a heavy wooden sword, when
 dromoora, holding his hands high over his head, shouted,—
“teegoora!!!”
 mat had seen the signal coming, and, thundering out a loud british
 “hurrah!” to call off the attention of the attacking party, in one
 bound he was up to the combatants, and, holding “old joe” out at arm’s
 length, he simply blew off the head of one of his chief’s assailants,
 and with the remaining barrel scattered the entrails of the other, as
 he stooped from the shock of the explosion. this happened in the very
 nick of time, for dromoora at the same instant fainted from wounds and
 exhaustion, thus making it appear to all excepting the brothers that
 all three men had been shot.
 “quick!” sang out mat, as soon as he had fired; “quick, powder and
 lead!”
but there was no need for such haste to load.
 with the reports of the gun the weapons of the attacking party fell
 from their hands, and, without looking for a way, they fled in a
 frenzy of terror.
 our foresters had calculated on this final panic, had foretold it to
 their friends, and had laid their plans accordingly.
 at the signal of the double report up jumped a number of youths from
 the grass, and, aided by the jins, “rounded up” and drove the greater
 part of their bewildered enemies in a body towards a previously
 prepared cutting in the scrub, whilst mat on one side and tim and
 jumper on the other, kept them from breaking away.
 when mat saw the fugitives fairly entering the cleared path, he gave a
 loud war-whoop, and fired a dose of slugs at their retreating forms,
 which, owing to the distance, did not wound them; but it had the
 desired effect; for, never looking for any impediment that might be
 in their path, the tinguras fell one over the other into two rows of
 kangaroo nets, which had been set there to entrap them.
 leaving the waigondas, who had passed him in pursuit, to deal with the
 prisoners, mat and tim returned to dromoora.
 after the battle—burial rites—the waigonda wish to make chiefs of the
 white men—our “twins” leave with dromoora and terebare for the south.
when the brothers returned to dromoora they found that chief lying on
 the ground, surrounded by terebare and her maidens, who had not joined
 in the pursuit.
 these were weeping and wailing, supposing him to be dead; but tim
 brought a gourd of water and poured it over his face and head. this
 act aroused terebare, and she quickly procured some young shoots
 of the rough-leaved fig, then making poultices of the milky juice,
 applied them to her lord’s wounds.
 “i knew he warn’t dead,” said tim; as, after the lapse of a few
 minutes, the wounded man commenced to breathe heavily. “but i expect
 they’d ’av gone on howling till he was, unless we’d flung the water
 over ’im.”
 the brothers then helped to place the chief in a little arbour of
 boughs, which was erected for him, and left him there in the hands of
 his wife.
 the whole of that night were the waigonda
 lamenting their dead, the howls of the jins being specially erie and dismal.
 it was noticed with surprise by the brothers that, notwithstanding the
 length of time that the fight had lasted, and the numerous crushing
 blows given, they could not find more than a score bodies on the
 battlefield; but it was explained to them that many of the tinguras,
 stricken down apparently to death, had so far recovered that they had
 crawled away, most probably to die later on; and, besides this, that
 many more of the enemy had been clubbed to death by the waigondas,
 when caught in the nets.
 next day the natives proceeded to burn their own dead, reserving the
 body of a youth for a feast. after the bodies were burnt, the ashes
 were tied up in pieces of bark and put carefully away; whilst portions
 of the defunct tinguras were divided into thin strips and portioned
 out amongst the tribe, mat and tim each receiving a share of the two
 blacks who had fallen to their gun.
 as they were supposed to receive these relics with great pride and
 solemnity, they wrapt them up with extreme care and gravity in the
 presence of the black, and, as carefully, a few days afterwards, left
 them within reach of the dingoes or wild dogs.
 this is how it happened that jumper appeared so opportunely on the
 scene of battle.
 before the fight commenced he had been tied up, but fancying, no
 doubt, that his masters were in
 distress during the uproar which
 ensued, he had bitten through the cord, or rather vine, which held
 him, had made his way to tim, whose voice he heard, and had fastened
 on the very black who had struck him a day or two previously, when
 guarding his master’s gun.
 the native whom mat had thrown so heavily was found moaning near a
 water-hole, to which he had dragged himself, his spine being injured.
 as soon as he was discovered, he was brought up by the waigondas to be
 butchered by mat, as they said that they had reserved that honour for
 him; but on being told that white men were not such cowards as to kill
 a helpless prisoner, one of the natives jumped up and said that he
 would willingly club him then and there.
 the brothers insisted that the life of the prisoner should be spared,
 but it was not until mat threatened them with the gun if they
 attempted to carry out their threat, that they agreed to spare the
 life of their enemy for the present.
 shortly afterwards he was brought up before a council of the elders,
 who told him that he was not to be killed because the white men so
 wished it, that that being the case he should be cared for until he
 recovered, when he was to go back to the remnant of his tribe, and to
 tell them and certain other tribes that the first time they molested
 man, woman, or child of the waigondas, the white men would at once
 come and crush the whole lot by thunder.
 the effect of this speech was to cause the prisoner to tremble
 violently, for when lying helpless in the grass he had been a witness
 of the death of dromoora’s assailants, and, as he acknowledged, had
 nearly then and there died of fright at the reports of the weapon, and
 the result of the discharges.
 our foresters tended the man carefully, as the waigondas would
 have nothing to say to him, yet the tingura man never showed the
 slightest sign of gratitude for this conduct, but scowled, at mat more
 especially, to the last, and at length departed, cured, but with a
 look of hatred in his eyes.
 as soon as he was sufficiently recovered, dromoora sent for the
 brothers, having heard that they wished to get rid of their war-paint.
 when they appeared before him, he thus addressed them,—
 “two such brave men, who have saved our tribe, must be made chiefs,
 and for this ceremony join in a ‘corroboree’ of triumph as well.”
 mat and his brother, who hated this everlasting foolery, as they
 termed a “corroboree,” begged to be excused from taking part in it, on
 account of their bodies being so bruised and stiff from the effects of
 the late strife, and for the same reason requested that the ceremony
 of making them chiefs might be deferred.
the chief said there was reason in their request, and continued,—
 “if it had not been for you, oh! brave brothers,
  dromoora and his
 tribe would have been swept away, i will give you all i have, anything
 you want, if you will give me the ‘stick’ and tell me its secret.”
 when dromoora had sent for the brothers, they had partly suspected
 that the conversation would take this turn, and had therefore agreed
 upon their answer.
so mat replied,—
 “you, oh, noble chief, and your brave tribe, have saved our lives
 from the beginning, ever since we landed on your coast. we were able
 to fight and kill in this battle because we knew things that the
 tingura did not, and because we possessed the teegoora ‘stick.’ we
 have also a favour to ask. you shall have a ‘thunder-stick,’ and be
 taught the secret; you shall have iron tomahawks, and many other
 beautiful things, if you will take us to where we can meet the white
 man.”
 “that cannot be,” answered dromoora, “the strange white men might kill
 me.”
 “then,” eagerly broke in mat, “let your tribe keep me as prisoner,
 till you return safely—take only my brother with you.”
 this idea seemed to strike the chief, and saying he would talk it over
 with the elders, the conversation terminated.
 “that’s very pretty of you saying you’d stay while i went,” said tim,
 as the brothers walked towards their hut, “but i don’t stir without
 you, not a step.”
 after some farther discussing the pros and cons of
  the matter, our
 foresters received a summons to attend the elders.
 they found the whole of their friends seated upon the ground, awaiting
 them.
 upon their making their appearance, the chief at once proceeded to
 cross-examine the brothers as to their wishes, telling them that he
 utterly declined to have anything to do with their going west, as the
 tribes in that direction were very hostile and treacherous.
 mat answered this by saying that they had long wished to go to the
 south, as they were convinced that there were white men there, many
 moons distant.
 the chief said that he would go nowhere were it not for the fact that
 the brothers held the power of life and death in their hands; would
 they kill a white man if he attempted to murder him, dromoora?
to this question the brothers answered together,—
“without the slightest hesitation.”
 after much desultory talk it was agreed that both brothers might go
 with the chief, who should also be accompanied by his wife, if they
 promised to bring the two natives back again unharmed, under care of
 white men armed with “thunder-sticks;” and, further, that all the
 tribe should receive presents, which dromoora would choose, and that
 no member of the tribe would be harmed.
 to these terms mat joyfully agreed, with the proviso that amongst the
 presents there should be only
 one teegoora “stick,” and that for the
 chief, and that to him alone would they impart the secret.
 our foresters were so overjoyed at this decision that they wished
 to start off at once; but dromoora said he should not be ready for
 ten days’ time, holding up the fingers of both hands to express the
 number; so they were forced to curb their impatience, occupying
 themselves during the now long days in looking through the small
 stock of belongings which they had managed to keep all these long
 years, and throwing away such as would no longer be necessary.
 at length the eventful day arrived, and gathering up their weapons
 of wood, “old joe,” the nuggets, and the remains of their library,
 the white men started with jumper and the two natives; without much
 leave-taking between the travellers and the rest of the tribe,
 excepting that they shouted messages to each other until out of
 hearing.
 the little band commenced working their route by the sun and
 coast-line by day, and the stars by night, when they happened to
 travel late.
 they avoided the neighbourhood of all tribes by the way, and journeyed
 but slowly, tim and the chief having scarcely recovered the effects
 of their wounds, so that at first they did not cover much ground, for
 having jumper to guard them, they were enabled to sleep every night
 far later than they would otherwise have done, and the sun was often
 high in the heavens before they resumed their march next morning.
 during the daytime they were also much detained by having to procure
 food, but in spite of all hindrances to a quick progress, the spirits
 of our foresters were buoyed by the glorious hope of once again
 joining their own kind, and hearing something of that outside world
 which had been a blank to them for many weary years.
 every description of country they passed over that it was possible to
 conceive.
 large undulating prairies covered with rich grass and interspersed
 with running streams, across miles of dry and stony ranges, now
 cutting their way through dense and seemingly endless scrubs, where
 the heat was like a furnace, then out again across a complete network
 of great sandy beds of rivers, which in flood-time were roaring
 torrents, as denoted by the drift-wood hanging thirty and forty feet
 high in the trees on both banks.
 at length they came to a river which was so different to any they
 had yet seen that, though it was mid-day when they arrived on its
 banks, they determined to “spell” there a few days and explore the
 neighbourhood.
 this river was running with a blue and sparkling stream, numerous
 islets peeped up amongst its waterfalls and cascades, its banks were
 clothed with dense and lofty palm-tree scrubs.
 wondering how it was that this special strip of country should be
 blessed with a large running river when all the others were dry, or
 nearly so, our travellers started to explore its source.
 they found, after many miles of rough walking, that it was fed by many
 springs which issued from the foot of a good-sized mountain amongst
 some basaltic rocks. judging from experience in other places, the
 chief said that these springs would never fail, probably never had
 done so.
 our party caught plenty of fish in this river, amongst which were many
 large eels, and a specially good eating fish which resembled a great
 silvery perch, with an eye the colour of a ruby.
 the country on the banks of this river consisted of rich black soil,
 covered with wild bananas and other tropical growth, and carpeted with
 a wealth of wild flowers. besides all this there were numerous signs
 of game. traces of small fires both up and down the valley showed that
 it was a favourite hunting-ground of the natives.
 but this paradise of a country had two drawbacks, one of which was
 that the river swarmed with crocodiles, and the scrubs were full of
 stinging trees.
 this gigantic nettle was well known to our party, and therefore they
 never came into contact with it, but its pungent smell and handsome
 blossom seemed to pervade every scrub; and as jumper had a narrow
 escape from the jaws of a crocodile, the
 travellers found themselves
 rather disappointed with the district on the third day of their
 sojourn, and so decided to continue their journey southwards.
 three months had they thus crawled through the bush, when one day,
 trudging along through a sandy scrub, they descried two natives
 digging yams on the plain beyond.
 “you hide here whilst i go and talk to them,” said dromoora, and the
 next moment he and terebare were off to interview the strangers.
 they were away an unusually long time, and returned at length bearing
 an emu, which the chief had stalked and speared.
 throwing down the bird, he informed his companions that the two
 strange natives belonged to a tribe lying far to the west, and that,
 as far as he could understand their language, he understood them to
 say, that white men were camped a day’s journey to the west, men who
 use thunder, and killed ducks with it.
 “then,” exclaimed mat, “let us first have a feast of emu, and then
 be off west also, as soon as possible.”
 however, by the time they had finished their repast, the day had worn
 to its close; and tim feeling twinges of rheumatism again, the little
 party decided to camp where they were.
 when they looked out next day, they saw several more strange natives
 on the plain, so that in going
 west they had to make a considerable détour to avoid them.
 that evening they came on the tracks of unshod horses, as mat joyfully
 pointed out, telling his dark friends at the same time that when the
 white man’s camp was reached, they must stay behind, and that tim had
 better remain with them, as he was still a bit leg-weary.
 dromoora and his wife willingly consented to this plan, as they were
 much frightened at the enormous tracks of the strange beast which mat
 had pointed out.
 whilst it was still light, mat spied the camp of the white men,
 situated near a lagoon. what first met his eye was a tent, a solitary
 figure, and smoke proceeding from a good-sized fire near it.
 the sensation was new to him—the first white men, the first signs of
 civilized life, that he had seen for many a year—and as he gazed he
 shook in every limb as he considered how best to approach the camp.
 having made up his mind, he first proceeded to hide his weapons, then
 walked boldly up to within fifty yards, and gave a loud whistle to
 announce his presence. he had noticed two men sitting by the fire
 now that he was so much nearer.
 the strangers, on hearing the whistle, looked round, then, seeing, as
 they supposed, a strange black fellow, instantly snatched up their
 guns.
mat, expecting this movement, cried, “don’t shoot! white man!”
 “come, i know better than that; you are a black who has learned
 english!” shouted one of the men. “a step nearer, and we shoot. put
 down your gun,”—for mat had retained this weapon—“and then come here!”
 mat complied with this request, and placed his gun against a tree;
 then, seeing that he was unarmed, the strangers allowed him to
 approach.
 in a few words mat told his story, how he had been shipwrecked,
 together with his brother, up north, had lived for many years with the
 blacks, and was now journeying south with his friends and brother.
 “well, this beats creation,” said one of the young men whom mat was
 addressing. “you’re a regular crusoe, only without the clothes. come
 and sit down, and tell us more about it.”
 “will you first let me bring up two of the blacks who have befriended
 us all these years?”
“yes, if they are unarmed, and their tribe does not come with them.”
 mat gave a reassuring answer, and then went back for the chief and his
 wife, whom he shortly returned with, introducing his brother at the
 same time.
 our foresters were soon comfortably seated at the fire, revelling
 in the long-forgotten luxuries of tea, sugar, and tobacco, their
 hearts too full to speak, and,
 as tim observed, “he did not know
 how to think even, it was so like a dream.” our heroes, in fact,
 felt prostrated with joy. they wished, in this supreme first hour of
 real liberty, to hear no news, to ask no questions; which their
 new acquaintances observing, simply put another “billy” of tea on the
 fire, and very thoughtfully left them to meditate undisturbed.
 the evening had closed in, when two black boys belonging to the camp
 came up.
 dromoora could not make out these “boys” at all, dressed, as they
 were, in gaudy-coloured flannel shirts and moleskins. he hailed them
 in every dialect he knew, but all to no purpose; they only stared at
 him, and more still did they stare at the brothers, whom, however,
 they told their masters at once “were white fellow, only all the same
 black fellow.”
 the strangers, seeing that tim suffered from rheumatism, had
 thoughtfully rigged him up a kind of tent, or “lean to,” of canvas,
 in a sheltered spot at the back of the camp, his two native friends
 sleeping in the same part, and carrying on their own and tim’s cooking
 there.
mat stayed with his hosts, and slept by their open fire.
 before going to sleep this first night, one of them said to him,
 “now that you have collected your thoughts a bit, tell me more about
 yourselves, and we’ll let you know what we are doing up here. by
 the way, if you had not dropped across us, you would have wandered a
 lot further before finding anything like a station.”
 however, mat had not much more to tell, for the brothers had agreed,
 on first discovering the strangers, that, though they would of course
 relate their adventures in a general way, yet that many particulars
 and incidents of their past lives they would withhold until they knew
 more of their new comrades.
 so mat soon brought his story to a conclusion, being also anxious to
 hear the strangers’ account of themselves, and of colonial matters
 generally.
 as mat’s narrative was brought to a close, the younger stranger
 knocked the ashes out of his pipe, and said,—
 “now i’ll tell you about ourselves. my name is carew, and my mate’s
 name is terry. we came out about two years ago, as ‘new chums,’ to a
 station on the ‘downs,’ but—well, there wasn’t much going on, and it
 didn’t suit, so we are looking out for a bit of country up here for
 ourselves; and burns, that’s the boss—”
 “burns!” interrupted mat, “why, that’s the man i had a letter to, i do
 believe.”
 “now you mention it,” continued carew, “i remember burns said that he
 had been expecting a new chum out years ago; he often referred to
 it. the ship was called the austral, i think. she was signalled off
 hobart town, and has never been heard of
 from that day to this. i see
 it all; you must be the man whom he was looking out for. i remember
 now, he said that steamers were sent everywhere to look for the ship.
 i’ll tell you what i’ll do. i’ll lend you one of our boys to put you
 on the direct track for burns’ station, and you shall take a second
 letter to him. my eye, won’t he be astonished!
 “by-the-bye, the other chap, who’s always in that tent, and generally
 drunk, looks a bad lot, drunk or sober; i can’t tell you anything
 about him, excepting that his name is boyd, he has an awful scar on
 his face, caused in some drunken row probably; we came across him on
 the road, riding a thoroughbred-looking horse—stolen i expect; he
 forced his company on us, and we shall be glad when he goes, and now i
 vote we turn in.”
 dromoora and his wife felt more at home after they had been for a few
 hours in the company of their dark brethren. they even, at length,
 summoned up courage to stroke the horses, causing much laughter by
 asking what the big kangaroos ate? whether the white men ate them?
 and many remarks of a like nature, all of which were interpreted to
 the strangers.
 after they had spelled for three days, the camp was broken up; carew
 and terry to go north, the brothers and their party south.
 carew had packed a horse with rations for the brothers, giving them
 some “notes” as well, so that they would be able to purchase clothes,
 in time to be
 decently rigged out before they entered the district of the darling downs.
 mat thanked his newly-found friends for their generosity, and promised
 to repay the money as soon as he could make a little; he then gave
 them directions where to find some of the good cattle country, through
 which he had lately been travelling. the parties bid good-bye,
 mutually pleased with each other, and a quarter of an hour later the
 camp was lost to sight.
 on the way south, our party conversed with each other concerning their
 late acquaintances.
 “i only saw the third white man once, the first morning, and then only
 for a second,” remarked mat.
 “but i saw him again,” said dromoora. “one evening i was lying very
 still, and he crawled to the opening of his tent to get a better light
 from the fire, so that he might look at some of those yellow stones,
 like yours. i suppose all white men have them?”
“did he?” asked tim in a startled tone, “let’s count the nuggets.”
 forthwith the dilly bag was opened, and several of the lumps of gold
 were found to be missing!
 yet this loss did not affect our foresters much, for they knew where
 more was to be found; besides, were they not “homeward bound.”
 for weeks more our little party journeyed on, happy
  and contented,
 the brothers realizing that they were really leaving their lonely
 life behind them, and knowing that their guide was taking them
 straight to their destination, for the black told them one day that
 they were getting near a small store, pointing to the tracks of drays
 and bullocks.
 having reached this building, our party had to go through so many
 examinations as to who they were, and from what part of the world
 they hailed, that it was a long time before they could be rigged out
 in clothes. dromoora said he knew all about shirts and trousers, and
 declined to be burdened with anything but a straw hat and a thin
 cotton shirt, the former of which he ended by giving to his wife.
 a looking-glass proved as great an object of interest to the brothers
 as it did to the natives.
 keeping along a well-marked track, after quitting the store, they came
 to a fenced-in country; and, guided by the barking of dogs, found
 themselves at burns’ station.
 walking up to the house, mat, who acted as spokesman, was confronted
 by a tall and dissipated-looking man, who was lounging in a canvas
 chair, smoking and reading.
 this individual’s first words were not encouraging, as putting down
 his paper, he stared at mat, and drawled out,—
 “what do you want? i don’t require any hands now, certainly not a
 half-caste.”
 but mat’s answer in right good english considerably astonished mr.
 burns.
 “my name is stanley, i was bringing out a letter to you some years ago
 from a more civil-tongued fellow than yourself, and that’s your own
 brother, only i and my brother here got wrecked, were the only two
 saved, and we’ve lived with the blacks up north ever since; how long i
 don’t know, as i’ve lost all tally, but a great number of years.”
 before the conclusion of this speech, burns had started from his chair
 and was critically examining the speaker.
 “well, i be hanged!” he cried, as soon as he could grasp the fact
 that he was addressing one of the only two survivors of the ill-fated
 young austral; for he guessed that was the ship. “i didn’t mean to
 speak roughly, only i’ve been so bothered lately; that’s your brother
 there, i’ll go bail by the likeness. but come in, come in, and let’s
 talk all about it; fetch the niggers up too, i beg your pardon, i mean
 the natives. you shall all have a good square meal before anything
 else.”
 burns’ manner completely changed as he ordered in the dinner, and bade
 them all be seated. mat then gave his host carew’s letter, and whilst
 he was reading it, our travellers were only too glad to be left to
 enjoy their meal, having fasted since early morning.
 burns reappeared after the lapse of a few minutes, with a bottle of
 grog, saying,—
“now you’ve about finished, let me hear something of your doings.”
 so mat gave him an outline of the history that he had related to
 carew.
 burns’ station—the horse-breaker—colonial “blow”—satan the first—mat
 “collars” the buckjumper.
burns listened in wonder to mat’s narrative, and when it was
 concluded, said,—
 “you are the first white man who have lived amongst the blacks of
 the northern coast, and come again into civilization. i remember my
 brother writing out by mail about you perfectly well; there were a lot
 of my stores on that ship, but she never turned up. well, wonders will
 never cease; what are you thinking of doing? by-the-bye, stephen said
 that you were the most undefeated rider, for your age, in hampshire.”
 “i could ride a bit then,” replied mat, “but i don’t know what i could
 do now.”
 “oh, you’ll do all right, one does not forget riding any more than
 swimming, and if you like to spell here, why i shall be pleased to
 have you and your mates too, and you can look about you. i’ve had no
 end of new chums; but unless they can ride anything, and everything,
 they are of no use to me, and
 i believe those men you met went off in
 a huff, because i talked in the same way, and swore at them a bit for
 their laziness; but then, you see, one always has to swear at new
 chums.”
 burns’ remarks were not altogether free from strong language; many
 of his expressions were remarkable, and quite new to the brothers;
 moreover they were assisted “up” by sundry nips from a bottle of
 “three star” on the table, so that in a short time he grew maudlin and
 monotonous, finally settling down in his “squatter” chair for a sleep.
 “well, what do you think of him?” queried mat, as soon as burns had
 disappeared.
 “why he drinks like a fish, and is such a swearing chap, that i don’t
 wonder at those men clearing out.”
 “i don’t fancy him very much, myself,” agreed mat, “but i don’t think
 he’s a bad sort when he’s sober. let us stay on a bit here; he’s got a
 chap coming to break in colts, and i want to see him at work.”
 so they stayed on until the breaker arrived—a long limbed, actively
 built victorian native (i.e. a white man born in victoria).
 mat had heard that this station of burns’ carried some notorious
 buckjumpers amongst the mob of horses which pastured on it, so after a
 few general remarks, he asked the man whether he could sit out a real
 bad one.
 “buckjumper!” answered the breaker, “me sit a buckjumper? there ain’t
 a horse in the whole country i can’t ride, and smoke my pipe on ’im,
 and without a ‘kid,’ too.”
“what’s that?” asked mat.
 “why, it’s plain, you’re a new chum, not to know as a ‘kid’s,’ what
 boobies use, a stick strapped in front to keep ’em on. i never uses
 it, as burns will tell you.”
 “all right,” cried burns, who now came up and joined in the
 conversation, “we shall have the mob up to-morrow, and see how you
 shape on satan the first.”
 this sudden challenge somewhat sobered the bragging tone of the
 trainer, to whom it was addressed; for after examining burns for some
 seconds with a bleary eye, he remarked,—
“you’re in such a blooming hurry, i must prepare a bit first.”
 “which means,” said burns aside to mat, “that with a few more nobblers
 he will get some dutch courage into him. i can see that he has heard
 about the horse from the change in his tone.”
 the next morning, however, our rough-rider was as full of “spirits”
 and bounce as ever; yet he looked “full of riding” as he turned out
 in jack-boots, clean white moleskin breeches, blue shirt, a silk
 handkerchief of the same colour round his throat and a serviceable
 old “cabbage-tree” hat on his head; it
 was evident, though, that his
 nerves were not very fit, when the horse was at length saddled.
“too shaky about the hands,” whispered burns.
 and sure enough at the third “buck,” “satan” proved the victor by
 sending his rider into a bunch at one corner of the stockyard.
 “i never knew a horse shape like that of all i’ve crossed,” swore the
 discomfited rider, as soon as he could get his wind.
 “never mind,” laughed burns, “when he’s fresh to-morrow, i’ll mount my
 friend on him, and we’ll all go and see the fun.”
 “what! that bloke with the black beard, what had never heard tell on a
 ‘kid’—he ride! i’ll bet you five notes he don’t sit him as long as i
 did.”
 “done with you,” cried burns, who had long since seen that the man
 ranked amongst the common class of “blowers,” or “braggarts,” peculiar
 to his profession in the colony.
 the next day mat was up early, and meeting burns, told him that as
 there was a bet on his riding, he must take a “stretch” with another
 horse first, or he could not answer for keeping his seat.
 so a hot-looking chestnut was saddled, mat straightway mounted and
 disappeared into the bush.
 when he returned a couple of hours later, he said to tim, as he threw
 himself out of the saddle, “the greatest treat i’ve had for years;
 felt like a man
 again on that horse, but he’s a hot ’un, and no mistake.”
 an hour’s rest, a gentle run, and then mat changed his shirt, and told
 burns he was ready.
“what! going to ride with bare legs and feet?”
“yes, i seem to feel more supple, and my feet are as hard as leather.”
 these remarks were followed by a jeer from the breaker, who hiccoughed
 between his cups, “ring up, the show’s a-going to commence.” “hullo!”
 he added, “what’s the nigger up to?” for dromoora approached at this
 moment, armed with spears and club, and calling mat aside, whispered,—
“take the ‘thunder-stick,’ that thing will kill you.”
 mat laughed, and was proceeding to explain the matter to his
 companion, when they saw that the horse had at last been yarded.
 the last bit of advice came from the breaker. “take a drink, mate;
 it’s the last you’ll ever taste.”
 “no thanks,” laughed mat, as he walked towards the stockyard, which
 by this time was surrounded by every man, woman, and child about the
 station.
 it was a long time before the stock-riders could induce the horse to
 put his head into the “bail,” as he rushed open-mouthed at every one
 who approached, causing a general stampede to the rails.
 when at last his head was between the two beams, and these had been
 locked, he gave a heave with his
 neck to test the timbers, and then remained quiet for a moment.
 “now bridle and saddle,” called out burns. the bridle difficulty
 was soon arranged; but getting on the saddle took more time, as the
 animal’s hind legs were at liberty.
 this being at length accomplished, a “greenhide” crupper was slipped
 under the tail, when from the top rails two men quickly spliced the
 hair partially into it.
 when all was ready, burns sang out, “let go.” the bail was opened, and
 the horse was free, and making for the first man which caught his eye.
 however, all hands were prepared for this rush, and quickly gained
 the top rail of the stockyard fence—all save mat, who at first
 coolly dodged the brute; but at length followed the example of his
 companions, as “satan” was evidently determined to kill him, and he
 could see no present chance of getting on his back.
 finding now that he had the yard to himself, the horse gave a moderate
 buck or two; but realizing that the saddle could not be shifted,
 contented himself with walking round and round, and glaring sullenly
 at the spectators.
 not a sound could now be heard. all eyes were fixed on mat, who,
 watching his opportunity, sprang lightly down, and seizing the bridle
 by both reins close to the bit, was preparing to mount. taken for
 the moment unawares—so quickly and silently had
  mat accomplished
 this—the horse gave an angry snort, and the next moment was careering
 round, swinging mat off his feet; but our forester’s grasp was
 powerful, and could not be shaken off.
 mat collars the buckjumper.
 finding that he could not free himself, the horse was preparing to put
 in practice some of his old tricks, when mat vaulted, or swung himself
 as quick as thought into the saddle; yet before he could get either
 foot into the stirrups, up went “satan” into the air, with head and
 tail down.
 three, four, six, ten, and more bucks, till the rider appeared as if
 permanently balanced on a pivot.
 finding this process of no avail, and that mat did not feel to him
 like coming off just yet, the beast next tried to bite his legs,
 gnashing his teeth in his furious but futile efforts, as mat cast each
 threatened limb backwards, and thus baulked him. then he struck at
 his legs with his hind feet; but here again no result. the man’s leg
 seemed simply to alight on the horse’s neck at each threatened stroke.
 the next “round” was of a very different nature. satan threw himself
 down, and rolled with his rider.
 to those who were witnessing this mighty struggle of man versus
 brute, it appeared as if this last act was a decisive one, and as if
 mat had “gone down,” never to come up again. both had disappeared
 amidst a mountain of dust; but a lusty cheer rang out as the rider
 again showed himself, and still sitting in his saddle, when the horse
 rose, though so covered
 was his face and beard with blood and black
 dust, that his features were barely recognizable.
 the spectators could now no longer control themselves, but crowded
 into that portion of the yard farthest from the contest. the horse
 took no notice of them whatever, finding he had that on his back the
 like of which he had never had before.
 and now, not giving his rider time even to grasp a wet towel which was
 thrown to him, “satan” tried his last and hitherto never-failing trick.
 gathering himself together with a snort of triumph, he made a wild and
 terrific sidelong plunge against the massive timbers of the stockyard
 fence.
 the sensation of “bucking,” as this horse had bucked, had been new to
 mat; he had never been rolled with before, in the peculiar manner with
 which this horse had tried to crush him; but of the last “round” he
 had had many former experiences in his old forest days; whilst riding
 young colts in the beech-woods, and as he afterwards remarked to tim,—
“it seemed quite ‘homely.’”
 so when the horse made his plunge on the off side, our forester slung
 his right leg behind him, and “satan” came with his ribs crashing
 against the heavy fencing, with a shock that knocked the remaining
 wind out of him, and which at the same time nearly dismounted his
 rider.
 one of the old stockmen in the yard now begged mat to get off during
 this lull; but before he could
 answer, a black form rushed through
 the throng, and with spear poised in the air, screamed in waigonda,—
“look out! whilst i spear the man-eater through the throat.”
 mat stretched out to catch the poised weapon—seized it—at the same
 moment the horse made another plunge for the fence. mat again saved
 his leg but was overbalanced trying to do two things at once, and he
 fell off. never, however, quitting his hold of the reins, he gave
 satan a sound slap with his open hand as he regained the saddle,
 prepared for further hostilities.
but the fight was over.
 the horse stood there, never caring even for the jostling of men who
 were round him; two jets of steam spouting from his nostrils, his wet
 flanks heaving with spasmodic jerks, and accompanied by a noise of
 choking sobs.
 mat appeared ready to faint, so, without more ado, tim and his friends
 dragged him from the saddle, bore him away on their shoulders out of
 the yard, and deposited him on a mattress, which had been placed under
 a shady tree by terebare’s forethought.
 burns, during the time that this “man-horse” struggle had lasted, had
 been in a perfect ecstasy of delight, hopping round the crowd with
 a bottle of his favourite “three star” in his hand, out of which he
 constantly “pledged our hero,” or proffered it to the bystanders for
 the same purpose. when he saw mat
 at length carried out of the yard, he hurried up to him with,—
 “by jove! old man, finest thing i’ve ever seen; if it hadn’t been for
 the two feet of dust, though, he’d have killed you outright when he
 rolled. by gad, you’re the best man i’ve seen in over twenty years of
 bush-life. i’d offer you a hundred a year, and more, if you’d stop;
 but anyhow, take a ‘ball’ now, you look as though you wanted it.”
 but mat, though he was glad of the brandy, and took a deep pull at the
 bottle, had no voice left in him.
 so they left him to the care of the faithful terebare, who, taking his
 head on her lap and bathing his face, sung him a soothing native chant
 until he fell asleep from exhaustion.
 an official summons—travelling in state—brisbane—on board
 ship again—triumphal entry into sydney—in a church again—the
 lecture—meeting old friends—soft reflections.
some few weeks after this, the brothers were discussing their future
 plans with burns.
 the fact was that ever since the riding episode, he had been trying
 to induce them to stay altogether at his station, and they had almost
 agreed with his proposal to do so, at all events for six months,
 when their conversation was interrupted by the arrival of a mounted
 messenger, who, with a loud clinking of spurs, came up the verandah
 steps and handed burns an official-looking document, saying shortly,
 as he did so,—
“from the governor.”
 “hullo, you stanleys,” shouted burns, as soon as he had skipped
 through the letter, “here, read this. you are both—all of you—expected
 to accompany the bearer back to brisbane at once, to wait on the
 acting-governor, and then be shipped off to sydney. but here, read it.”
 the brothers read the letter carefully through, and
  found that it was
 indeed a summons to brisbane from headquarters; that “the two natives
 were to go with them, and that burns was to find the horses.”
“but how do they know anything about us?” inquired mat.
 “that’s what beats me,” said burns. “oh, stop; i’ve got it! that
 drunken rider who was here has a brother, sort of head-clerk in
 government house. the breaker has told his brother, and thus the
 whole matter has come to the ears of the governor. that breaker, as
 you know, went back to brisbane; but i daresay you don’t know that
 he never paid me my five pounds; only, i suppose just to show that
 there was no coolness between us, took a bottle of my best brandy with
 him. but now, my friends, this is no time to talk. you must get your
 ‘swags’ as quickly as you can, and i’ll see about the horses: you
 don’t know what luck may be in store for you.”
“but one moment,” said tim. “the natives can’t ride.”
 “oh, bother the blacks! never mind, i’ll send you all in the buggy,
 besides, it will be easier going for rheumatics and stiff joints. it’s
 lucky we have all finished letters for the home mail; you can post
 them.”
 a few hours later, having bid farewell to their good-natured host,
 we again find our little party heading southwards, but this time
 clothed, driving a carriage and pair, with an outrider in uniform to
 show them
 the way; and, in fact, “travelling like gentlemen,” as tim said.
 dromoora and his wife, who had at first been much frightened, and
 ultimately as delighted, at the novelty of being driven on four
 wheels behind two of the terrible horses, were still more dazed and
 astonished at the appearance of the town of brisbane, when they
 arrived there,—at that time a township of wooden huts roofed with zinc
 sheeting.
 our party drove straight to the house occupied by the acting-governor,
 who, after being satisfied that the story reported of them was true,
 told them that he had received a request from sydney to send them
 there at once, as every one was impatient to see the only survivors
 of the emigrant-ship, and to hear their story; and that, as a steamer
 was waiting for them at the wharf, they had better get away before
 the inhabitants found them out. he added that he had procured some
 suitable clothing for them, so that they had only to shift and walk on
 board.
 “our twins” were a handsome couple, as they stepped on to the boat
 which was to convey them south.
 owing, doubtless, to the better class of food on which they had been
 subsisting lately, they had grown stouter and broader, whilst their
 dark red complexions were set off by the suits of white indian drill
 in which they were clothed.
 as their tall manly forms appeared on the poop,
  one might well echo
 the captain’s greeting, as he said,—
 “gentlemen, i’m proud to take you in my ship;” adding aside to his
 chief officer, “twins, i’m told, and a right handsome pair, too.”
 dromoora and his wife were rather subdued during the voyage, for
 after leaving the brisbane river a choppy sea rendered them violently
 sea-sick, and they had barely recovered their spirits when, after
 three days, the vessel was standing up the magnificent harbour of
 sydney.
 as they approached the town, the brothers remarked that the wharf
 was densely crowded with people, whilst flags were fluttering in the
 streets adjacent to the landing-place.
“what does all this mean?” asked mat of the captain.
 “why, it’s in honour of your arrival, of course; don’t you see i have
 ‘dressed’ my ship, too.”
 as they slowly neared the quay, a band on shore struck up, “see, the
 conquering hero comes!” whilst the people cheered again and again on
 catching sight of the tall figures of our foresters.
 “well, this is coming it rather strong,” remarked mat with a smile.
 “lucky that we’ve come a bit gradually into civilization, and know a
 few things, and how to handle a knife and fork properly. i almost wish
 i was back in the bush again.”
 as the steamer sheered alongside, many of the
  more active of the
 spectators sprang on board, whilst more of the crowd poured in as soon
 as the gangway was available.
 the brothers were almost overwhelmed by the army of reporters who
 besieged them, note-book and pencil in hand, whilst volleys of
 questions were poured in from every side. however, much to their
 relief for they found it impossible to reply to the numerous and
 varied questions, and their arms were aching from the continued
 handshaking, an orderly forced his way up, and told them that he had a
 carriage ashore to convey them to government house.
 all four shortly found themselves seated in the vehicle, and,
 accompanied by an enthusiastic portion of the inhabitants running
 alongside, drove off.
 the governor, who stood on the steps of his house to receive them, was
 a spare-built, shrewd-looking man, between fifty and sixty years of
 age.
 after welcoming our travellers to sydney, he ushered them into the
 house, and continued,—
 “you may have been surprised at the reception you have met with, but
 you must remember that the citizens are aware that you are the two
 sole survivors of the ship young austral, in which ill-fated vessel
 they had many relatives; at least, we have quite lately been told
 that you were the only two who came ashore; but that which also adds
 an intense interest to your presence here is the fact that you are
 the only two men ever known in this country who have lived for
  years
 amongst the wild northern blacks and survived; and, judging from
 your appearance, you have evidently been well treated during your
 captivity.
 “when the news of your escape arrived from brisbane, the townspeople,
 the squatters also from up country, inundated me with letters and
 special messengers, begging me to get you down to sydney. the
 government was appealed to, and—here you are. we will make you as
 comfortable as possible whilst you stay in this town; and now i will
 introduce you to my aide-de-camp. and your two blacks,—would they
 like a tent, or where shall we put them?”
 on being appealed to, our dark friends said that they would prefer to
 erect a “gunyah” out of doors, if they might cut down a few branches;
 so a suitable spot was found, and strict orders given that they were
 not to be molested.
 mat and tim were then introduced to the aide-de-camp, captain
 marvin, who led them into the smoking-room, and, having made them
 comfortable in easy chairs, said,—
 “you must not be afraid that i am going to cross-examine you, but i
 may as well tell you at once that a rather delicate affair has been
 deputed to me to propose to you, and that is, to plunge at once into
 matters, you are requested by every one—by the voice of the people—to
 appear, one night, with your two natives, at the school of arts, and
 give a short
 account of your adventures in the unknown northern country.
 “i know that you will be well received. they do not want to stare at
 you as if you were newly-caught savages, but to listen and to learn;
 and my impression is that, if you choose to appear, it will save you a
 world of worrying questions in the future, besides, it will be a kind
 act, as the door-money will go to a very deserving charity, which i
 shall be glad to tell you all about.”
 “we will think it over,” said mat when marvin had finished speaking.
 “meantime, we have some old books, in which we have written a rough
 diary, and when you began speaking it seemed to me that perhaps the
 people would like to have it published, instead of our lecturing to
 them.”
“may i glance at the diary? i promise not to divulge a word.”
“certainly, you are welcome; there are no secrets.”
 so mat fetched the old novels, with their closely pencilled margins,
 gave them to marvin, and then sauntered into the garden with tim to
 discuss the question of the lecture.
 “i shan’t speak,” said tim, as soon as they were by themselves, “but
 you can tell them a few things straight, and they’ll be pleased
 enough. for all marvin says, i’ll bet they do want to have a good
 look at us; it’s natural enough, too, and ’twont hurt us.”
 “i’ll try, then,” said mat; “and if i break down, they can still
 stare—that’s all.”
 in the evening, “our lads,” as we may, perhaps, still be permitted to
 call them, for old associations’ sake, were introduced to mrs. marvin,
 who told them that she had already made the acquaintance of the native
 girl, who had come to the house for something to drink.
 “what a nice, dark-eyed woman she is,” said mrs. marvin; “such a sweet
 voice, and she looks quite pretty when she smiles and shows her white
 teeth; and she knows a little english, too; she said ‘milk,’ and
 ‘bread,’ and several other words. what is her name?”
“terebare,” mat informed her, “which means in her language, ‘rainbow.’”
“and a pretty name, too. i shall go and talk with her, if i may.”
“oh, please do! they are a bit dull; it is such a new life to them.”
 and mrs. marvin departed, laden with good things for our chief and his
 wife.
 before they went to bed that night, our brothers adjourned with
 captain marvin for another consultation.
 as soon as they were comfortably seated behind a couple of the
 captain’s best cigars, he said,—
 “i have looked over your journal, and if you would write it out at
 length, i should like to show it to our
 publishers; i know that they
 would agree with me that it would make an interesting and valuable
 book. you have described unknown native customs, besides dwelling upon
 the different sorts of country (most important this); nor have you
 forgotten to jot down useful notes about geology and plants. it will
 sell. many words have got rubbed out, but doubtless you know what they
 are.
 “we will re-write it carefully then,” said mat, “now we can get pens,
 ink, and paper; and leave it in your charge. but now about this
 lecture. we have talked about it, and i will try it if you will first
 let me try speaking—as though i was talking to a lot of people, i
 mean—in this room, before you, when we’re quite alone.”
 captain marvin was delighted to hear that mat would give the lecture,
 and promised to help him. “we will settle the day as soon as we can,”
 he said. “to-morrow will be sunday, there is rather a famous man going
 to preach in the evening in a church close by, and if you are so
 inclined why there is plenty of room for us all in the governor’s pew.”
 “yes, we’ll go,” said tim; “we haven’t been to church since we were
 lads in t’vorest, excepting on board ship, and that ain’t ’zactly
 church.”
 “that’s settled then; i’ll look out for you two to-morrow evening. you
 will like parson tabor; he is a good man.”
 when the brothers entered the church next evening
  they found it
 crammed to suffocation, and with difficulty they followed captain
 marvin to the governor’s pew.
 the grand and solemn tones of the organ were playing a voluntary as
 they passed up the aisle,—music which sounded sweet and soothing to
 their unaccustomed ears.
 during the prayers which followed, our foresters carefully imitated
 mrs. marvin in kneeling, standing, or sitting, as the case might be.
 she also helped them to find their places in the prayer-book, when at
 a loss.
 prayers over, the sermon commenced. complete silence reigned as
 the clergyman ascended the pulpit; the brothers, looking up, saw a
 broad-shouldered man of florid complexion and square-cut jaw, whose
 profile reminded mat for an instant of a fighting-man, whom he had
 once known in the forest, but the resemblance quickly changed when he
 saw his full face, with its solemn, earnest expression, and heard his
 voice.
 the preacher gave out a text which at once enwrapt the attention
 of our twins, so applicable did it and the eloquent sermon which
 followed, appear to their own case in having escaped so many dangers.
 as they walked homewards their thoughts were with the parson tabor,
 and what he had said to them. yet tim made one remark,—
“mat, if ever i want help or advice i’ll go to that man.”
 in the middle of the succeeding week, and after mat had rehearsed, to
 marvin’s satisfaction, the latter came in with the morning papers.
 “look here,” he cried, “you are in for it now; here’s the announcement
 of the lecture, there, read it—‘under the patronage, &c.’”
 “yes, i am,” laughed mat, as he glanced at the advertisement. “as you
 are pleased to say i shall pass, thanks to you, i shall go at it with
 a light heart.”
 the much-thought-of evening had arrived. though mat and his party,
 supported by the governor and suite, arrived early, they found the
 large building already crammed, every seat having been engaged some
 days beforehand.
 having gained the platform, the governor introduced his friends in a
 few happily chosen phrases, and mat, as soon as the applause was over,
 at once commenced; his brother and the two natives standing by him.
 he told his audience that he had never addressed a meeting of his
 fellow-countrymen in his life, and that he hoped they would forgive
 any shortcomings.
 when he and his brother were told that not only the citizens, who had
 received them so warmly at the steamer, but that also many influential
 squatters had expressed a wish to hear how they had passed their
 time with the northern blacks, they determined to come to that house
 to-night and obey the call. he said,—
 “to begin with, we are gipsies, born and bred in the new forest, in
 england—”
at these words, a stentorian voice in the audience called out,—
“i knew it; the lad i broke in myself.”
 mat looked in vain to see who spoke, but only noticed in the quarter
 from whence the voice proceeded, a burly individual with a purple
 face, and a long white beard, sitting rather prominently amongst the
 audience, so he continued,—
 “i did not come out at the expense of my country, but for all that i
 helped to break the forest laws by being out with a friend when he
 shot a deer.”
 mat then gave a full account of the wreck, of the subsequent escape,
 and of life amongst his black friends.
 he added that he reckoned that as near as he could put it the wreck
 happened in about seventeen degrees south latitude.
 that which interested his audience more especially was his account of
 the habits of the wild blacks; and as the chief and his wife were led
 forward by the brothers, tremendous cheers went up from the people;
 who were already aware in what manner these two natives, together with
 their tribe, had befriended the white men.
 it so happened that dromoora had been told, upon the occasion of
 their being cheered on board the steamer, that when the white man
 “corroboreed” he
 must take his hat off; so remembering his lesson,
 or rather knowing that it had something to do with his hat, and not
 having that article on his head, he seized it from the chair where
 it had been placed, with one hand; whilst with the other he dragged
 his wife’s from off her head, throwing them both into the air; then
 shouting, “white fellow, corroboree,” he was proceeding to force his
 “jin” to beat two chairs together, when he was promptly seized by the
 brothers and conveyed to a seat.
 mat continued his lecture for a good hour after this occurrence, and
 finally concluded by stating that their trade consisted of breaking-in
 horses, and that they looked forward to carrying it on in the country
 which had given them such a kind reception.
 mat brought his lecture to a conclusion amidst enthusiastic cheers,
 and the four guests of the evening were preparing to retire, when a
 crowd of squatters jumped on to the platform, amongst them the jovial
 looking individual with the white beard, who elbowed his way up to
 mat, and said, with outstretched hand,—
“don’t you remember the squire, mat? a bit grey about the muzzle, eh?”
 “why, my good old master,” eagerly replied our forester, as gazing
 earnestly at him, he recognized the well-known features of years gone
 by.
 “here, tim,” he continued, as he wrung bell’s hand; “here’s the squire
 i so often told you of.”
 “and my daughter, annie,” added the squatter
  “i don’t suppose you
 will remember her either.” and mat certainly did not at first
 recognize the young lady who now came forward, holding out her
 hand,—and small blame to him.
 it will be remembered that the last time he saw annie was in the
 gun-room of the squire’s home, in the new forest, and then only for
 a brief two minutes; but during the many years that had elapsed
 since then, he had secretly kept in one corner of his brave heart a
 remembrance of the fair young vision. without having a very distinct
 idea of her features generally, he never had forgotten the soft look
 in her eyes, the gentle voice, and above all the beauty of her hair.
 he had never seen, in either man or woman, hair of that peculiar type
 before; in fact, he had not been able to depict its colour, when
 describing the young girl to tim.
 on this eventful evening mat was confronted with a young lady, with
 masses of the same beautiful dark auburn hair gathered up in neat
 coils at the back of her head. he knew that he had only seen that
 colour once before in his life, and when annie spoke, the whole scene
 of his boyhood came back to him.
 in her sweet, soft voice, yet in cheery tones, she welcomed him to
 sydney, and added slowly with a smile, and raising her eyes to his,—
“i remember you in the forest home, mr. stanley.”
 as she stood there, her blushing face half-hidden
  behind a bouquet of
 “stephanotis,” the perfume—he could not realize at the moment whether
 the scent was of the flowers or annie’s hair—the situation, this
 sudden rencontre, and all the novelty of speaking in public, which
 he had gone through that evening, caused our hero to feel completely
 unnerved, so that he felt himself blushing in his turn, and
 murmuring some words of “pleasure at the meeting,” was turning away,
 when the squire came to his rescue.
 “you and your brother, and those frisky natives, must come at
 once—to-morrow—and stay with us at our new station quite near here. we
 shall all be delighted to see you; and tom, whom you taught to shoot,
 you remember, when i told him i was sure it was mat stanley who had
 escaped, said,—yes, by gad, mat!—he said he’d never speak to me again
 if i didn’t bring you home! what do you think of that for cheek to his
 old governor? he would have been here to-night, but was obliged to
 meet a man about some cattle at an out-station.”
 “thanks,” responded mat, who had now found his tongue. “i must speak
 to them at government house first; they have been so kind to us.”
 “here’s tom’s tutor,” interrupted the squire. “not the one you knew in
 england,—wants to grasp the hands of the foresters.”
 our boys turned, and met the earnest face of the man who had so
 impressed them by his sermon a few days before. they exchanged
 friendly greetings
 with him; and after refusing, for the present,
 many kind and pressing invitations from their late audience, mat
 and tim were glad to make their escape to captain marvin’s snug
 smoking-room, where they intended to have a quiet chat; but hardly had
 they sat down when the governor came in and carried them both off to
 supper.
 some time before they entered the dining-room a young colonial had
 been giving his views concerning the evening’s lecture.
 “my word,” he said, “it was a good yarn, and well told. why that man
 stanley speaks as good english, and almost as good grammar, as if he
 had been to college,—and mostly self-taught they say. i thought that
 gipsies in england were a sort of half-breeds, who made tin kettles
 and ‘jackshays,’ those quart pots, you know, and ‘planted’ people’s
 fowls and things; but this fellow’s a gentleman, and—”
 his remarks were here interrupted by the entrance of the individuals
 in question, and the conversation was abruptly changed by the young
 “native,” for such is a white person termed who is born in the
 colonies, who from that moment, as he intimated to mrs. marvin,
 intended “to take a back seat.”
 during supper-time the conversation turned upon many interesting
 subjects connected with the past adventures of our twins. from these
 it drifted into colonial matters, the latest news from “home”
  as
 england is always so referred to in the colonies; and the party broke
 up.
 mat could get but little sleep that night; the events of the evening
 had been almost too much for his otherwise strong nerves.
 besides the excitement of his lecture, and the remembrance of that,
 thoughts of a softer nature rushed through his mind.
 it must be remembered that his experience of woman-kind had been of
 the roughest description, amounting to an exchange of chaff with
 the lassies at the hampshire fairs, and owing to the nature of his
 occupation and mode of life in and around the gipsy camp, he had but
 rarely come in contact with the better class of new forest “squatters”
 in his old home.
 bearing this in mind, let us follow his thoughts as he lay awake in
 the town of sydney, new south wales.
 “i’ve met to-night for the second time a real lady, and such a
 beautiful and gentle lady. i wonder whether they are all like her.
 oh, but how she has altered! would she laugh at me if she knew i had
 stuck to ‘robinson crusoe.’ i expect she’d only open her eyes big,
 as she did to-night, when she seemed surprised. what a fool she must
 have thought me! i couldn’t even say anything civil. i don’t know what
 came over me. i could talk easily enough to that big crowd of people,
 and to mrs. marvin, and be civil
 to her. perhaps captain marvin’s
 cigars are too strong for me. yes; that must be it.”
 having thus determined the nature of his malady, though not entirely
 to his satisfaction, our forester turned over, and went to sleep.
 tim starts for the darling downs—french as spoken by mrs. bell—parson
 tabor—leichardt’s grave—the french “professor”—mat unmasks the
 “professor.”
next morning the leading newspapers of the town were placed in mat’s
 hands by marvin, who triumphantly remarked,—
“see what an excellent ‘coach’ i proved.”
 the entire lecture was given in extenso,—what mat had said, and, as
 he remarked after a perusal, some things he had not said.
 “the old folks must have these,” agreed the brothers, and the papers
 were accordingly sent home to the forest.
 “and now, brother,” said tim, “there was a darling downs squatter got
 hold of me last night, and said i must come up to his station. i felt
 so well up there, the air is so grand, i think i’ll go. he’s promised
 me work, and pay, and grub.”
 “true; we must get work,” rejoined mat; “we have had enough ‘spreeing’
 about; besides, i must see about getting dromoora and terebare to
 their
 home, only the squire has made me promise to go to his station
 first—a new place, called, i think, ‘bulinda creek.’ i can ‘spell’
 there a few days, and then start overland with the chief, join you on
 the downs, and send our friends on from there with a party perhaps.”
 thus it was settled, and after saying good-bye to their hospitable
 friends at government house, mat went to seek out the squire, whilst
 tim found his way to the keens, who were leaving by steamer for
 brisbane.
 henry keen was one of the early squatters of the darling downs, and
 was now returning to his station accompanied by his wife and daughter.
 the chief object of his visit to sydney had been to fetch the latter
 from school.
 tim wondered, as he stepped on board the steamer, how he would be
 received by the ladies, as he had not yet made their acquaintance, but
 he was not long left in doubt, for miss charlotte keen at once met
 him as he stepped on to the boat, and giving his hand a hearty shake,
 said,—
 “you need not bother about an introduction to me, i knew who you
 were as you came along the wharf; where is your brother who lectured,
 i thought he would have come too?”
 “oh, no!” replied tim, who was rather taken aback by this voluble
 welcome. “he has gone to bulinda creek.”
 “what! squire bell’s? i was at school with his
  daughter annie, a
 stuck-up girl, full of stupid, old-country notions. got ‘a down’ upon
 me, because i suppose she went ‘home’ for a few months, and knew i had
 never been; or because, as some say, she’s full of nonsense, learnt
 from an old parson, a sort of private tutor to her brother, who’s
 sponging on the squire. did you see the daughter? she’s a ‘native,’
 you know.”
 “yes, i did see a shy-looking, pretty girl with splendid hair, for a
 few seconds, whilst she was standing with her father.”
 “shy! pretty!” snapped back miss charlotte; “well, my word, if you
 called rusty-coloured hair, and red cheeks pretty, why she is; but
 it’s not my idea of a handsome girl. i admire the true class of
 beauty—the statuesque; and now i must look after pa and ma in the
 saloon.”
with which announcement she turned abruptly on her heel and departed.
 “here’s a row,” said tim; “i wonder whether there are many more like
 her on the downs;” whilst he gazed after the retreating form of miss
 keen, as she stamped her way rapidly towards the companion. “i suppose
 then, that that girl’s washed-out face and tow-coloured hair is true
 beauty. what did she call it—the statue sort? well, i prefer t’other
 sort of statue.”
 leaving tim to pursue his journey with the keen family, we will return
 to mat.
 two days after his brother’s departure, he and the squire had started
 on horseback to the creek, annie and parson tabor, with the two
 natives, having gone on before in the buggy.
 it was early on a beautiful morning, as the two men wended their way
 out of sydney, the air enlivened with the cries of hundreds of blue
 mountain parrots, busily engaged in chasing each other, in whole
 flocks in the forests, or sucking their breakfasts from the blossoms
 of the gum-trees.
 the gay chirping of the tree-crickets, the crisp morning air, which
 clearly defined the soft outline of the blue mountains in the
 distance,—all combined, with the fact that he was on horseback once
 more, to make mat in the highest spirits, as he and bell cantered over
 the high downs.
 not so the latter, who was evidently in deep thought over some
 perplexing matter, which had caused his usual boisterous spirits to
 desert him. at length he broke silence with a sudden,—
 “drat it, man, i may as well say it at once, only you are such an
 independent chap, i do not know how to begin. fact is, the governor,
 and a heap of my mates in town and country, want you and your brother
 to accept a purse from them to help you to start.”
 mat was certainly startled by this proposition, but answered promptly
 enough,—
 “it’s very good of you all, but we have no wish to accept money until
 we have worked for it.”
 “i knew you would say that, but do take it, mat, in the spirit in
 which it is offered. it will hurt their feelings—my feelings—for i
 have a little hand in it, if you don’t.”
 “in that case, squire, i’ll ask you to keep it for us, and if either
 or both of us come to grief, we will ask you for a little help till
 times are better.”
“you promise that?”
“yes, i do.”
“then i’ll hold it in trust for you.”
 “and now, squire,” said mat, after the two had ridden some distance
 farther, “i’ve got something to tell you, that i have told to no man
 living, excepting tim. this ‘swag’ holds a lot of nuggets, tim has an
 equal quantity, and they should start us without the purse, thanks to
 you all the same; and now i will tell you about our gold discovery.”
 mat then recounted full particulars of their “find” in the golden
 gully, which bell listened to with interest, saying he “would not tell
 it to the ground.”
 by the time mat had finished his narrative, they reined their horses
 up at the station.
 as soon as mat had made himself presentable, the squire reintroduced
 him to mrs. bell, and they shortly afterwards sat down to dinner,
 where they were joined by annie and parson tabor.
 mrs. bell was an easy-going soul, who, whilst mutilating her own
 english tongue, managed to utterly murder the french one, on the
 strength of
 having once paid a few weeks’ visit to france, for the
 sake of her daughter’s education. her husband and children had long
 since quenched these foreign outpourings as far as they themselves
 were concerned, but whenever an unlucky stranger came to the house,
 mrs. bell would open fire as soon as her guest was seated, never
 caring whether he or she knew french or not.
 here then was a chance when mat made his appearance, which she was
 not slow to avail herself of, by asking him whether he could speak or
 understand french, knowing perfectly well that in his case he could do
 neither.
 mat, who wished to be specially civil to the mother of annie,
 answered,—
 “no, ma’am, i have never learnt it, and i would hardly care about
 trying to.”
 “not want to learn french! the language of the present day! and
 pray, mat, don’t call me ‘mum,’ as you did in the forest. if i must
 ’ave a ’andle, let it be light and pretty, and pronounce it as i
 do—madam. and now will you pass me the ‘ménoo.’”
 it so happened that this was the exact word, as pronounced by mrs.
 bell, for one of the snakes of the waigonda country.
 mat was puzzled, but thinking that he must have overlooked the dish,
 he carefully glanced over table, sideboard, and mantlepiece; but not
 perceiving any roast snake, replied,—
“i do not see it, ‘mydam.’”
 mrs. bell was just commencing, with a kindly wave of her hand, “oh,
 numport,” when the squire bade her, “stop that fooling.”
annie meantime slyly conveyed the bill of fare over to her mother.
 but the latter was not going to be shut up so soon before her guest,
 on this, her favourite topic, and in spite of her husband telling her
 either to talk english or “blackfellow,” she continued, to bell first,—
 “yes, my dear, i can see, having lived in parry, not to mention cally,
 that mat does not know the divine language, but it’s never too late to
 learn.” then turning to our forester: “i see you’re not quite ‘comme
 il faut au fait,’ but i want to hear the ’ole of your adventures, so
 we’ll have a little ‘cosy’ after dinner on the verandah. it is late,
 so come along.”
 mat said to himself, “whatever language cosy is, it means a pipe for
 me,” as he followed the others out of the room.
 parson tabor, whose age was nearly sixty, had, in his earlier days,
 had a hard life of it in western australia.
 at one period of his life he had headed a little band of explorers to
 that country, starting from melbourne in a small, badly-found vessel,
 with a small cargo of sheep, which they had intended taking the whole
 way by coast.
 the result was disastrous. their vessel was wrecked when off the
 north-western portion of the continent, their sheep drowned, and
 themselves only escaping ashore to find that they had come to a land
 in which there was scarcely any water, and inhabited by hostile
 blacks. most of the party managed with difficulty to reach, at length,
 the settlements; and tabor found means to return to victoria by a
 coasting-vessel. but the hardships which he had endured for many
 months had told severely upon his constitution, and from the time of
 his arrival in civilized life, he had taken holy orders, and settled
 down as a clergyman. upon arriving at sydney, he had also accepted the
 situation of tutor in the squire’s family. before leaving victoria on
 his ill-fated expedition he had lost his wife, and it was this event,
 so preying upon his mind, which had caused him, by seeking a new
 colony, to endeavour to blot out associations connected with the old.
 when the little party at bulinda creek had stepped out on to the
 verandah, and made themselves comfortable in easy chairs, tabor turned
 to mat, and said,—
 “your history, that you related the other night, is of the
 deepest interest to me, for i have suffered hardships and lived
 for a time amongst the natives, but in my case they were not the
 friendly-disposed fellows that yours proved.
 “one matter that you mentioned has struck many
  of us, especially a
 friend of mine—an old explorer, too—named lund. he was not in sydney
 at the time of your lecture, but he received the newspapers which so
 fully gave the account, and wrote to me by return of post. this is
 what he says: ‘find out from stanley anything more about the white men
 he heard of as passing to the west.’
 “i mention this to you, as lund asked me to; but i may as well say
 that i heard you asked this very question by numbers of people after
 your lecture, and, from what i gathered, you said that you knew no
 more than what you had told them there.”
 “that is so, mr. tabor; i can add but little to it. before we knew the
 language, we guessed, from the signs of the natives, that there were
 other white men far to the west of us; and months afterwards, when we
 could speak to the tribes and understand two or three dialects, they
 again said that they had heard that there was a white man, with some
 black men and some very large and strange animals, working their way
 northwards.”
 “then,” said tabor, with emphasis, “that which every one surmises
 must be the case. the white man, without doubt, was one of our
 greatest explorers, who has disappeared for years without leaving the
 slightest clue as to his ultimate fate.
 “my friend, who loved this man as a brother, found himself too old
 to search for him himself, but he organized an expedition to try and
 follow him up, with
 but faint hopes, however, of finding the lost
 man, as previous similar attempts had utterly failed.
 “i have made myself acquainted with poetry and poems, more or less,
 which have been written by the greatest british and american poets,
 but never, to my mind, have i ever heard anything which, for lovely
 expression of holy feelings and great beauty of wording, came up
 to the lines which my friend wrote on the eve of the departure of
 the explorers in search of the lost one,—on the one who ever
 dwelt lightly on the keen sufferings he endured on his former grand
 expedition, whose simple faith in the goodness of the almighty seems
 silently to have supported him in his trials, and to have been
 thankfully acknowledged.”
 so far, the conversation had been carried on between parson tabor and
 mat, but at this point annie broke in with,—
 “do you remember those lines, mr. tabor, and can you repeat them to
 us?”
“do i remember them, annie? yes; i could never forget them. listen!”
 it had now become almost too dark for our little home party to see
 each other’s faces. a “moon-plant,” in the full glory of its lovely
 large white flowers, partly covered a corner of the verandah, which a
 last streak of evening light had brightened from the surrounding gloom.
 under the soft white blossoms of the gigantic convolvulus parson tabor
 took his stand, and with outstretched hand, and in soft, yet manly
 tones, rehearsed the following lines:—
“ye, who prepare with pilgrim feet
your long and doubtful path to wend,
if whitening on the waste ye meet
the relics of my murdered friend.
his bones with reverence ye shall bear,
to where some mountain streamlet flows,
there by its mossy bank prepare
the pillow of his long repose.
“it shall be by a stream whose tides
are drunk by birds of every wing,
where every loveliest flower abides
the earliest wakening touch of spring.
oh! meet that he who so caressed
all beauteous nature’s varied charms,
that he, her martyred son should rest
within his mother’s fondest arms.
“when ye have made his narrow bed
and laid the good man’s ashes there,
ye shall kneel round about the dead
and wait upon your god in prayer.
what though no reverend man be near,
no solemn anthem with its breath,
no holy walls invest his bier
with all the hallowed pomp of death;
“yet humble minds shall find the grace,
devoutly bowed upon the sod,
which calls a blessing round the place,
and consecrates the soil to god.
when ye, your gracious task have done,
heap not the rock above his dust.
the angel of the lord alone
protects the ashes of the just.
“and oh! bethink in other times,
and be those happier times at hand,
when progress, like the smile of god,
comes brightening o’er this weary land.
then shall her pilgrims hail the power
beneath the drooping myall’s gloom,
to sit at eve and mourn an hour,
and pluck a leaf from leichardt’s tomb.”[]
 as the parson concluded his recital, the suspicion of a gentle little
 sob came from the direction where annie was sitting, whilst bell and
 mat said they thought that they would take a turn and finish their
 smoke in the garden, until it was time to go to bed.
the next day, after breakfast, the squire said,—
 “come along, mat, let’s go towards the stockyard; i want to have a
 chat with you. you will have to hang your hat up here. i will show you
 a room i have for you in the bachelors’ quarters presently.”
 “you are very kind,” answered our forester, who had noticed the little
 preparations made for him, and had been thinking it all over; “but i
 would rather join tom at the out-station.”
 “bless my soul! why, you have had enough of a lonely life, surely, my
 boy. tom is out all day, and there are only blacks there, besides a
 stockman.”
 “well, squire, i’d like to see tom again; besides, i am not used to
 ladies’ society.”
 “my prophetic soul! stuff and nonsense! mrs. bell wants to hear your
 adventures from your own lips, and says you must stay. i’ll call
 her. follow me into the house!”
 when mrs. bell appeared, she begged that mat would remain; as, she
 said, she “’adn’t ’eard ’alf his adventures,” and, besides, there was
 a most “distinguéy” professor of the french language coming to stay
 with them, who had brought most flattering testimonials from friends
 down south, and she wished him to make his acquaintance.
 “thank you, ‘mydam,’” answered mat; “but i do not want to know the
 frenchman.”
 “but he’s such a tall, distinguished-looking ‘parrty,’ and he is
 coming to perfect my daughter in his language. of course, i shall hear
 what his pronunciation is like before regularly engaging him.”
mat was still obdurate. so mrs. bell continued,—
 “if you must go and join tom, as the squire says you wish to, will
 you drop in sometimes—it’s not twenty miles from ’ere, you know—and
 take a short lesson? you will find it the greatest comfort.”
 “yes, i will do that,” answered mat, thankful to have “got out” of the
 frenchman for the present.
 “i am so glad to hear you say so. the professor won’t be here for a
 month, i expect, but i shall see you before then. now, go and get some
 air, for you look quite ‘dégagé.’”
 “is she gone?” asked bell, who, finding that french
  was coming up
 again, had made his escape, and now met mat as he appeared outside the
 house. “well, then, i want to ask you where you would like to stow
 those nuggets you were telling me about. the bachelors’ quarters are
 not safe, as every one goes in there. supposing you put them in my
 room?”
 “thank you; that will be safe enough, i am sure,” and the two men
 separated.
 the following day mat had intended to join tom, but was delayed on
 account of dromoora and his wife.
 he had told them that the squire had promised them an escort to see
 them safely back to their tribe; but the chief, being now away from
 the towns, begged to be allowed to see a little more of station life,
 as he could hunt and fish, and be his own master in the bush, besides,
 he had made friends with some station blacks who were camped at
 the lagoon, and now he thought mat might teach him how to use the
 thunder-stick.
 this change of plans relieved mat, as he knew that bell was rather
 short-handed, and could ill spare the men for this escort just then;
 so he took the opportunity to instruct dromoora in the use of a gun,
 finally leaving that doughty chief a proficient in the art of shooting
 anything sitting or swimming.
 our forester had been for some few weeks at the out-station, when one
 morning two letters were handed to him, one from mrs. bell to say
 that the professor had arrived, and the other from tim—a very short
 one—saying that he did not much fancy
 the keens, that he had got
 rheumatism again, and altogether felt restless, and was determined to
 join his brother, and might turn up any day.
 to mrs. bell’s delight the frenchman had, indeed, arrived at bulinda
 creek, bowing his way into the house and making pretty speeches to the
 ladies.
 mrs. bell had once before, in sydney, had an interview with him, and
 now, after introducing him to her husband, beckoned the latter out of
 the room.
 “isn’t he charming, bell,” she said; “i really quite felt in dear
 parry again when he spoke.”
 but the squire was by no means so favourably impressed. he had eyed
 the professor askance, and now told his wife to lock up her spoons.
 “what! my dear!” she answered, “you’re joking; look at his manners,
 look at his ‘ton.’ what a grand face, what eyes, and such a lovely
 moustache!”
 “yes, it’s just his face i don’t like,” retorted her husband; “and his
 eyes are beastly cunning when he thinks you’re not looking at him; his
 moustache, to my mind, is rather too good.”
 “but,” sharply continued mrs. bell, “you will never see that the
 french, though perhaps a little vain as to their personal appearance,
 are ‘au fond,’ a noble race; which means that they are a fine people
 ‘at bottom.’”
 “ha! ha!” laughed the squire, “you’re getting worse and worse, that’s
 exactly what the great duke said,—but i’ll tell you the story.
 “some time after the battle of waterloo, wellington’s health happened
 to be proposed at a great dinner at which he was present, and at which
 there happened to be also a number of french officers. these stood up,
 but on hearing who the individual was that was about to be pledged,
 immediately faced round and turned their backs towards the duke,
 who simply remarked, as he sat at the table, ‘not the first time,
 gentlemen, that you have turned your backs upon me.’
 “i want no more arguments,” concluded bell, “but the less i see of
 this hair-dresser, the better i shall be pleased.”
 so monsieur rayon, such was the frenchman’s name, was duly installed
 at the creek, making himself agreeable to the ladies, and, whilst
 showing an equal civility to the squire, avoiding him as much as
 possible, explaining to mrs. bell that it was natural her husband
 took no notice of him, as he disliked the french language. matters,
 however, went on smoothly enough, rayon giving lessons to mother and
 daughter, and rendering himself tolerable to the squire, by insisting
 upon every one speaking english when he was present, a language
 which seemed as facile to him as french.
 after rayon had been settled a few days at bulinda creek, mat happened
 to return late one evening to the station, and discovered the squire
 smoking a cigar with the frenchman.
 the latter, as it turned out, had brought some full-flavoured
 “havannahs” with him. now, if bell had one weakness, it was a good
 cigar; so that in spite of his dislike to the foreigner, he felt bound
 in honour, as he explained to the members of his family, to smoke with
 him, when these were produced.
 mat had never seen rayon till now, and on this occasion it was too
 dark to see his features distinctly. on reaching the verandah he was
 introduced to him, when the foreigner made him a profound bow, and
 said how proud he was to make the acquaintance of such a “voyageur,”
 as all australia was ringing with his name; which flowery speech mat
 received with a slight bow, and addressing himself to the squire, the
 two were soon deep in matters connected with the out-station, which
 they discussed until it was time to turn in.
next day, mrs. bell seeing mat at the station, accosted him with,—
“i’m so glad to see you, mat; now you’ll stop and ’av a lesson.”
 “no, i’m sorry i can’t,” he replied. “i only came in for the two
 horses ‘wallaby’ and ‘timeringle,’ and tom must have them to-night;
 but i’ll be back again soon, and stay a few days.”
 “oh, do! monsieur rayon is such a dear man, and tells such amusing
 stories of ‘parisien’ society, and he’ll talk to you in english too.
 poor man, he is dreadfully troubled with indigestion, and walks in
 his
 sleep. one night i was sleeping heavily, as i had taken a little
 chloral for neuralgia, when my husband saw him in our room, and
 called out; yet he took no notice, but walked on, out of the ‘french
 light’ and back to his own quarters, and the next day remembered
 nothing about it. what a wonderful thing somnambulism is!”
 mat reached the out-station and delivered the horses in good time. tom
 thanked him for his ready help, and asked him if he would go again on
 the following monday and bring his father back, as there was to be a
 meeting of importance, at which parson tabor would also be present,
 who with his sound advice would be of great service in discussing
 the question as to how they could put an end to the encroachments of
 the “cockatoo squatters,” or small free selectors who, as a gang of
 useless loafers, infested the run, with suspicious-looking intent.
 mat expressed his readiness to go, and accordingly, when the time
 approached, prepared to start for bulinda, but as he could not find
 the horse he wanted for the journey, he had to put up with an old one
 that had had a hard week of it after cattle, and in consequence he did
 not reach the station until midnight.
 having turned his weary beast into the paddock, he entered the house
 to tell the squire of tom’s wishes.
 bell was asleep, but came out at once on hearing
  mat’s summons, told
 him in answer to his question that he would be ready to start in the
 morning with tabor, bade him get some refreshment, and turn into the
 empty room next the frenchman’s.
 mat went off to the sleeping-quarters to which he had been directed;
 but not finding any light, felt his way to the “bunk,” and turned in,
 though he did not go to sleep, as he had much to divert his thoughts
 with regard to a proposition which tom had made him in connection
 with his taking charge of the out-station. after he had been in bed
 but a short time, his train of thoughts was diverted by the sound of
 whispering; then a match was struck apparently close to him, yet he
 could see no light. softly creeping out of bed, he was aware of a
 glimmer which came through a chink in the log-hut, evidently from a
 room next his own.
 straining his eye to the crack, he saw a human hand on a table—more he
 could not see. so feeling about he found a beam, and cautiously drew
 himself up to where the chink was larger, when just as he was about to
 apply his eye to the crevice, he heard the whispered but unconnected
 words, “that—gipsy—to-morrow.” again straining his eyes, he could
 indistinctly make out two scrubby heads in the dim light beneath him.
 whilst he was thus watching, one of the speakers slightly raised his
 face. our forester was certain that he had seen those features before,
 but to obtain a better view he slightly shifted his
  position, and in
 doing so knocked off a piece of harness which had been left hanging on
 the beam, and which fell with a heavy thud on to the earthen floor.
instantly the light was extinguished, and dead silence reigned.
 mat quickly let himself down, regained his bunk, and sat there till
 morning, pistol in hand, and nothing more happened to disturb him
 through what appeared an endless night. had jumper been there to guard
 him, he might have enjoyed some sleep, but jumper he had always left
 to guard the squire’s bedroom at the latter’s request.
 when the family were assembled for breakfast next morning, the
 frenchman, amongst others, greeted mat most cordially, and asked him
 how he had slept after his fatiguing journey, not being aware that he
 had occupied a different room to that which he was accustomed to use.
 “not very well,” replied our forester. “some one talked all night, and
 struck lights, and i could not sleep.”
 this he said, fixing his piercing eyes on the frenchman as though he
 would look him through. but rayon, whilst avoiding his gaze, answered
 in an apparently unconcerned manner,—
 “ah, my dear friend, i expect it was me you heard. i had such an
 attack of indigestion, and when i suffer from that, i walk in my
 sleep.”
 “oh!” began mat, still fixing the man with his
  gaze; but he was
 interrupted at this point by the entrance of a boy with the mail from
 sydney.
 one letter was for rayon, who, after glancing at its contents, said in
 an apparently agitated voice,—
 “business of great importance obliges me to ‘render’ myself in sydney.
 i bought some valuable land there, and my agent, i now hear, has run
 away with the title-deeds.”
“how dreadful!” said mrs. bell. “when will you be back?”
 “directly i find the deeds, madame; i must be off at once, and try
 to discover the agent.” and bowing profusely in a general way, the
 professor left the table.
 “and i will see him off,” thought mat, as he followed the frenchman
 out.
 going to the hut, mat found “his man” in the act of packing his
 things, and under pretence of helping him to strap his valise,
 brushed his arm across rayon’s head, when, presto! off tumbled a wig,
 disclosing a shock head of hair of a much lighter colour underneath.
 a furious oath of a strictly british character escaped rayon’s lips,
 but the next instant he collected himself together, apologized most
 deeply for swearing, and explained that having had a fever, he was
 obliged to wear a “peruke.”
 “yes, i see,” laughed mat; “but i wish you would give me the address
 of the gentleman who cropped you. i want my own hair cut!”
 by this time rayon had mounted a horse which was tied up close to the
 hut, and which mat saw was a stranger to the station, a better class
 of animal than he had seen on the run yet. feeling himself now safe,
 the “professor” turned to mat with a scowl,—
“you’ll find out before long, you low-bred gipsy.”
 “ha! ha! ha!” yelled our forester, as the man rode away. “you lost
 your head when you lost your wig. why didn’t you keep to french, you
 fool? i mightn’t have understood you then. i do now.”
 rayon seemed half inclined to rein up as he heard this parting shot,
 but thinking better of it, only replied by an insulting gesture, and
 the next minute galloped out of sight.
mat was now in a dilemma.
 he would have given anything to have stayed behind, and let the squire
 and tabor go on to tom’s abode; but when, upon meeting with bell, he
 suggested this, and gave his reasons, the latter would not listen to
 him, but for once lost his temper with our hero, replying in an angry
 tone,—
 “stop behind? we go without you? don’t talk like that, mat, when
 there’s all this bother at the out-station. you don’t know foreigners
 as i do (the squire had met somewhere about a dozen in his life).
 three parts of the french nation wear wigs, just as all the germans
 wear spectacles. tell “dromoora” to look after the station; we shan’t
 be gone long. come.”
 mat was not convinced, but was fain at length to let the old man have
 his way, as he was getting more purple than ever with rage. so calling
 up the chief, he put him on his guard, at the same time telling him to
 warn tim, who might arrive any hour.
 dromoora replied that he would look out a good deal now, as he had to
 be all round the country to procure some plain-turkeys, or bustards,
 which mrs. bell wanted him to shoot.
 so mat, bidding farewell to mrs. bell and annie, rode away with his
 two companions to the out-station.
 the writer learnt these verses in northern queensland
 many years ago from an old bushman (since dead), who had picked them
 up in the same casual manner.
 tim’s unpleasant reception at bulinda—the bushranger’s camp—the
 robbery—annie kidnapped—tim’s good samaritans.
we will now take up the thread of tim’s movements since he quitted the
 “keen” family. he first made his way by sea to sydney, and, hiring a
 horse, rode out to the first station on the road to bulinda creek,
 leaving his “traps” to be sent direct to the squire’s by one of the
 drays which were passing at intervals between the town and the station.
 having arrived at his destination, he found, upon making the
 acquaintance of the family who owned it, that they were so glad to
 welcome him, and so hospitably inclined, that he determined to stay
 there a few days. at the end of that time he felt himself so much
 improved in health, that he made up his mind to walk the rest of the
 way to bulinda creek.
 having informed his newly-made friends of his intention, and bidding
 them farewell, he started one bright moonlight night, having before
 him, as he had been told, a well-defined track as far as the outside
 fence of bell’s property.
 tim had just reached the bulinda home-paddock fence, when a horseman
 rode out from a neighbouring scrub, and, without the slightest warning
 or preface, came close up to him, and exclaimed, “be your name
 stanley?”
 tim, rather taken off his guard at this sudden question, answered,
 “yes! why?”
 “then take that!” replied the man, with an oath, and without another
 word drew a pistol and shot poor tim through the chest.
 this terrible incident happened only a few hours after rayon had
 quitted bulinda.
 to the north of bulinda, but several miles from that station, lay a
 deep creek with a broad sandy bottom.
 in the rainy season this ravine was a roaring torrent; now, not a
 drop of water was to be seen, with the exception of one or two tiny
 pools far down in the rocks, where the sun could not pierce.
 three men were seated one day round a tiny fire in this creek. all
 three bore the same stamp of low brutality on their clean-shaven
 faces; and as all possessed the same scrubby heads of hair, they might
 at first sight have been taken for brothers.
 a couple of horses, which, to judge by their appearance, had just come
 off a hard journey, were tethered close by, and the men were preparing
 camp for the night, though retaining their clothes and boots.
 one of the party, who exhibited a huge scar on his
  face, was
 evidently looked upon as the leader, and treated with a certain amount
 of respect by his companions.
this leader, who was addressed as “jack,” was saying with many oaths,—
 “i tell you it’s all right. you may say he rode off, but i know he was
 on foot when i met him, and i shot him as dead as a door-nail, i’ll
 swear it, as sure as i was ‘lagged’ for sheep-lifting.”
 “ay, but i’ve got eyes in my head, too,” returned the tallest of his
 companions. “you must have had too much grog, and shot the wrong
 man—some chap looking for work, i expect. why, i’ll swear they had
 got all their horses saddled and were riding off to the out-station
 when i left.”
 “yes,” broke in the man who had not as yet spoken, whose name was
 mike, “when i was doing the cooking for young bell, i heard him say he
 expected all three that day.”
 “you lie,” said jack, turning to the first speaker. “i shot a bloke
 who said his name was stanley, and he had a black beard. it’s you
 who were drunk; and if i find you’ve been playing me any of your old
 tricks, i’ll shoot you as dead as a ‘nit.’ i knows what i knows.
 there’s only that cursed nigger about now, and mike here says as he
 knows for sure that he’s always away shootin’ birds with his gun. i
 ’av’nt followed them nuggets down from the north to be baulked now.
 i’ve ’ad one bite of ’em, and i’ll ’ave
  another, and the girl at the
 same time. now the gipsy’s ‘copped’ i’ll do it; i’ll collar the wench
 through blacks and whites. well, i’ve told you two what to do; but
 i’ll tell you again, else you’ll make a ‘hash’ of it. you”—this to
 the tallest man—“get into the house first, and lead the way, as you
 know where the ‘swag’ is; and you”—to mike—“must hold the horses ready
 outside. t’other blokes i’ve told to look after the camp whilst we’re
 away. now you two get back to your ‘humpy,’ and meet me here to-morrow
 night after sundown, and mind you’re both sober.” saying which, jack
 took a pull at a bottle he had with him, kicked out his fire, and
 prepared to sleep in an old blanket which he pulled off one of the
 horses.
 these men consisted of a portion of the murderous gang who, under the
 guise of “free selectors,” had for present purposes settled down in
 the district.
 these outlaws, partly from fear, more from the hope of gain, supplied
 the man they called jack with food, acted as scouts for him, and,
 under the pretence of looking for country, made it their business to
 find out stations and branch banks which were worth “sticking up;”
 whilst jack himself was nothing less than the famous bushranger of the
 day, john magan.
 an escaped convict, he had committed more murders—many of them of the
 most cold-blooded description—and robberies, single-handed, than had
 any of the other gangs by which the country was infested.
  he had
 long since been outlawed, and a price put upon his head. however, by
 constantly changing his camp and assuming different disguises, but
 more particularly by having so many of his “pals” in league with him,
 he was still free.
 more than once had the police tracked him to his lair, fired at, and
 even hit him, as they believed, but hitherto he had borne a charmed
 life, and seemed actually proof against powder and lead, whilst his
 assailants came off second best in the fight, and magan escaped on his
 horse, which he always kept ready saddled close to him.
 according to agreement the conspirators met again the next evening at
 the appointed time, and arming themselves, proceeded at once by the
 nearest route to bulinda creek.
 so far everything seemed to favour their plans, for the night was
 pitchy dark, and not a sound could be heard as they approached the
 house.
 when they arrived within a stone’s throw of the building they
 dismounted, and leaving mike to hold the horses, jack and his
 companion crawled to the steps of the verandah. the tall man ascended
 first, and in his stockinged feet gained the bedside of mrs. bell; he
 then felt for, and commenced to drag silently out the heavy box of
 nuggets.
 the noise caused by this act, however, woke old jumper, whose senses
 had latterly been very dull, and springing out he fastened his teeth
 in the intruder’s
 arm. this was met by a blow from the butt end of
 a pistol, which though partly stunning the dog, never caused him to
 relax his hold. but the tall ruffian had a far worse assailant to deal
 with, and this time from above his head.
 it so happened that mrs. bell had been lately suffering much from
 neuralgia, and lying half asleep had been awakened to her full senses
 by the rush and furious growl of jumper. at the same moment she put
 out her hand to feel for the old dog, when it came into contact with a
 scrubby head of human hair.
 uttering a scream, and losing her balance at the same moment, she came
 right down on the top of the crouching figure, and in doing so she
 dragged a voluminous mosquito-net with her, when a dim night-light
 burning in the room showed her the form of a man struggling with
 jumper.
 in an instant she comprehended the situation; her self-possession did
 not desert her, for seizing her bottle of chloral, she dashed half the
 contents into the man’s eyes and nose, and as he opened his mouth to
 give vent to most fearful curses, she rammed the rest, bottle and all,
 into his throat.
 whilst this scene, which barely occupied a minute, was taking place on
 one side of the room, a struggle of a different character was going
 on, on the other.
 annie had been reclining fully dressed on a couch, so as to be ready
 to fetch some medicine for her sick
 mother in case of need, from a little store-closet outside the house.
 dozing somewhat wearily, she felt herself suddenly seized in the grip
 of a powerful arm, and in spite of her frantic struggles, a towel was
 the next moment forced into her mouth, and she felt herself carried,
 whilst struggling for breath, towards the verandah.
 magan had nearly reached his horse with his almost unconscious burden,
 when a dark figure came rushing out of the surrounding gloom and
 drove a heavy spear on to his back, being the only part of his body
 which could safely be assaulted, by reason of annie’s form guarding
 the rest. the spear reached its mark with a heavy thud, but the only
 effect of the blow was to make the bushranger redouble his efforts to
 gain the horse.
 dromoora, for he it was, now hurled a heavy club at the man as he
 hoisted himself into the saddle, aided by mike. the blow told, and
 knocked magan forward in his saddle; dromoora with a bound was on
 to him with a long-bladed knife, making a blow at him between the
 shoulders; the bushranger’s horse at that moment gave a bound forward,
 the knife glanced off and entered the calf of magan’s leg, causing a
 wound, which, however, in no way had the effect of unseating him, and
 with another bound the horse and his rider had disappeared into the
 surrounding darkness, with annie stretched across the saddle-bow.
 mike would have gone to the help of his chief, or would more likely
 perhaps have attacked dromoora, had not his time been entirely taken
 up during the latter part of the fray in trying to curb the remaining
 two horses which he was holding.
 these animals, affrighted at the combat, plunged and reared to such an
 extent that one of them broke clean away, when mike, seeing dromoora
 rushing upon him with an open knife, flung himself on to the back of
 the other, and galloped off.
 our waigonda chief had been out hunting the whole of the previous
 day, in a vain endeavour to shoot a turkey for mrs. bell. these
 birds had been much disturbed of late, and in consequence had sought
 more distant plains, too far for dromoora to pursue them, as he had
 promised mat to sleep at the station always during his absence. so
 the chief had come in late at night tired with his tramp, and from
 carrying a number of ducks, which he had procured without difficulty
 on the numerous lagoons near the station. he and his wife were camped
 within two hundred yards of the house in their usual place, when
 terebare woke him up, saying, “quick to the station.” she had heard
 several shrieks which mrs. bell had given vent to after she had fallen
 on the burglar. dromoora seeing that the case was urgent, left his
 gun, which he had no time to load, and with spears and a club rushed
 into the darkness, and encountered magan as we have seen.
 when he saw that mike had escaped him also, he turned to terebare, who
 had followed him out of their camp with fresh weapons, and pointing in
 the direction of the out-station, said, “quick, run all the way; there
 are no white men here, bring the white chief and his friends.”
 he then jumped on to the verandah, and hearing a moaning noise
 proceeding from the house, struck a match, and, guided by the sound,
 walked into the squire’s bedroom, when an extraordinary scene
 presented itself to his gaze.
 amidst a quantity of overturned furniture and medicine-bottles, lit
 up by the feeble glimmer of an expiring night-light, lay a man as
 white as death, enveloped in a mosquito-net, struggling for breath,
 which came in convulsive gasps from his foam-bedewed lips, whilst his
 face appeared to be smeared over with a brown liquid: near him, and
 supported by the legs of the bedstead, lay mrs. bell in a kind of
 stupor. remembering how water had brought him to in the great fight
 with the tingura, our chief, casting his eyes around, to his great joy
 espied a large bath full of water; and intending to empty the whole
 of the contents over mrs. bell, commenced the operation by pouring
 a gallon or two on to her head. the effect was surprising; for his
 patient immediately sprang to her feet, asking wildly where she was,
 and what had happened. paying no attention to these questions, as
 he saw that she was not hurt, dromoora
  next approached the partly
 insensible prisoner, and whilst playfully toying with the edge of his
 long knife, asked permission to cut the throat of the white man. but
 mrs. bell, with a horrified look, cried, “oh, no, no.”
 finding that this pleasure was denied him, the chief proceeded to
 tie the legs and arms of the prisoner together with the bed-clothes,
 making all fast to the leg of the bed.
then turning again to mrs. bell, he said,—
“missy gone along a ‘yarraman’ and white fellow.”
 “what horse! what white fellow?” she shrieked. “what! annie carried
 off, do you mean?”
 our chief was beginning to explain matters, and to describe the late
 fight with great zest, when mrs. bell interrupted him with,—
“don’t ‘yabber’ any more; oh! if the others were only home.”
“me send terebare long ago—come by-m-by.”
 “good man,” faltered mrs. bell, “there’s nothing can be done till
 they come.”
 at length, after a weary waiting of some six or seven hours,
 dromoora’s well-practised ear caught the sound of hoofs, and rushing
 out, and then along the track, he encountered the horsemen before they
 reached the “slip-rails” of the home-paddock.
 as they galloped, so dromoora ran alongside mat’s horse, giving our
 forester an account of the fight in a
 few hurried sentences, which mat interpreted to his companions.
 not a word spoke the squire or mat as they flung themselves off their
 horses at the steps of the verandah.
 the squire and tabor went into the house, mat into the bachelors’
 quarters to his room, and returning immediately, called out the
 squire, and told him that he was off at once on the tracks of the
 bushranger, and bade the old man not to fret. bell pressed his hand,
 and in a husky whisper said,—
 “find my daughter, mat, and god prosper you; i will come after you
 soon.”
 just previous to the raid of the bushrangers on bulinda creek, on a
 clear morning, with a touch of frost in the air, two hawkers, named
 langridge, father and son, were travelling with a light cart along one
 of the many tracks which led from the blue mountains to sydney.
 these men had been up country with fancy goods, and having disposed
 of them to their satisfaction, were returning in high spirits to
 their native town. the particular road which they were using was new
 to them, and they had camped in one of bell’s paddocks without being
 aware that the station was close to them.
 whilst engaged discussing the various classes of goods which they
 should lay in for their next trip, their little dog, which had been
 frisking along in front of the horse, suddenly turned off the track
 into the
 long grass, and commenced barking round some object lying there.
 ever alive to the chance of killing a snake, which they were certain
 it was, father and son rushed up, armed with a whip and some sticks,
 but when they gained the spot they were startled and horrified to find
 there the body of a man stretched out to all appearance dead.
 the two men went down on their knees to examine more closely the
 supposed corpse, and to their joy found that the man not only
 breathed, but moved his head and opened his eyes, as though the sound
 of their voices had awakened him.
 father and son then gently lifted him into a sitting position, and in
 doing so remarked blood upon the grass, which had evidently escaped
 from the man’s mouth, whereupon they forbore moving him again until
 they could discern the nature of his wound; whilst looking for this
 the wounded man whispered “water,” upon which the younger man at once
 ran back to the cart, and returned with a large tin mug, which he had
 filled with water, adding a few drops of rum.
 the suffering man gulped this down eagerly, and seemed at once to be
 considerably revived, whilst a faint colour returned to his cheeks,
 which before had been deadly pale.
 the hawkers, seeing that he had more appearance of life in him, whilst
 still supporting him asked him his name.
“stanley,” was the feeble answer.
it was indeed the youngest of our foresters, the unfortunate tim.
 “don’t know that name,” remarked the elder traveller shaking his head;
 “however, that’s no odds. now, stanley,” he continued, “you shake
 your head or make signs according as you want me to do this or that,
 ’cos i can see your lungs are wrong somehow, so don’t speak. where are
 you hurt?”
 tim pointed to his chest, which was enveloped in a thick blue jumper
 or jersey; for when he had started on his moonlight walk the weather
 had been very keen. on looking to where tim pointed the hawkers could
 see a little round hole in the jersey.
 “i know of no doctor about here,” continued the elder man; “shall we
 take you on to sydney, we can carry you in a cart pretty easy?”
 tim made an affirmative sign, and the men left him to prepare their
 cart, having first made him as comfortable as circumstances would
 permit, by propping him up with some bundles of grass. they then
 proceeded to make a high and springy bed in their empty cart, forming
 it of alternate layers of grass and soft ti-tree bark; then bringing
 the little waggon up to where tim was lying, they lifted him carefully
 and tenderly in.
 whilst one man walked by the side, and attended to any wants of the
 sufferer, the other guided the horse carefully over rough places, and
 in this way
 they reached sydney after several hours’ travelling, and
 without any conversation on the road, excepting that when they rested
 once to give tim a little relief from the jolting, they asked him who
 shot him.
tim whispered back, “don’t know; never saw him in my life.”
 the two good samaritans deposited our forester at the hospital, and
 upon inquiring of the doctor whether it was a very bad case, received
 for answer, “don’t know yet; shot through the lung, and chilled all
 night in the dew.”
 mat on the trail of the bushranger—annie’s signal—mat tracks the
 bushranger to his lair—the cave—our hero as the black warrior once
 more—a fearful fight—dromoora’s timely cry—annie’s rescue—blissful
 moments.
before mat made his start after the bushranger, he had buckled on a
 brace of pistols, loaded his gun with a heavy charge of slugs, and put
 some matches in his leather pouch. trusting entirely to his powers of
 tracking, he went on foot, knowing that he could approach his quarry
 in this manner, and no other. food he did not stop for, either to eat
 or to burden himself with, that he could procure whenever he wished
 it. one thing that puzzled him was, what had become of dromoora; the
 chief had disappeared directly the white men had dismounted after
 their ride from the out-station. however, he had no time to search,
 his first object was to find the tracks of the horse which carried the
 greatest weight; he could tell as well as any of the station blacks
 whether a horse was being ridden, or simply driven without a rider.
 daylight had broken, and our forester very soon discovered that one
 horse had galloped away free, one had been ridden by an ordinary
 weight, whilst the
 third, which had gone straight away, had carried a double weight.
 the tracks of this last animal he followed up for the first few miles
 at a steady run, only pulling up at mid-day for a short respite at
 a water-hole. towards evening, as the tracks became fainter, he
 changed to a more moderate pace, so as not to overrun the trail; all
 night he stuck to it like a sleuth-hound, sometimes subsiding into a
 walk, then, as the tracks stood out in the soft ground in the clear
 starlight, quickening his pace again.
 for the first few miles of his pursuit he had noticed the track of
 a naked foot which had followed the horse, and which he presumed
 belonged to some one of the station blacks who frequented that part,
 but after a bit these footmarks disappeared in a direction away from
 the one that the horse was taking.
 by early morning the trail brought him to another water-hole—evidently
 these small lakes were well known to the man he was pursuing—he
 perceived here that the rider had dismounted to get a drink, and he
 also saw that there were a few spots of blood on the grass, as he sat
 down, for the first time that he had done so, to roast and eat some
 “unios,” a sort of shell-fish, which he found in the water.
 though burning for revenge on a wretch who dared to touch the girl who
 was ever uppermost in his thoughts, and whilst horrible doubts arose
 in his mind as to her possible fate, there was a very large
  amount
 of savage or wild feeling in all mat’s plans since he started on this
 race, which gave him an intense pleasure: so perfect had been his
 training in the waigonda country, that in his mind he ridiculed the
 idea of any white man or men being his match as long as he employed
 his native tactics. in fine, from the moment that he took up the
 trail, he dropped the white man, and became once more the waigonda
 warrior.
 after a rather long rest, mat once more resumed the trail, again
 following it all night, and the next morning to his relief found that
 he was gaining on his quarry, for the bushranger’s horse, having to
 bear a double load, had been walking for several miles.
 our forester then had another rest, to roast and eat a carpet snake
 which he had killed, and smoke a pipe.
 off again, he crossed a rocky creek, and from there the tracks entered
 a dry stony country and trended towards the east. on this particular
 part of the country the footprints of the horse were not discernible
 to the ordinary eye. mat smiled, as he quickly stepped over this hard
 ground, and said to himself, “the fool thought, i suppose, that his
 tracks would now be lost.” farther on magan had again dismounted to
 get water, and here a little matter was cleared up which had puzzled
 our forester, namely, how had the horse been fed all this time? by
 bread, for by this water-hole was a small hollow full of
  crumbs,
 distinctly showing to mat’s eye that the animal had there crunched up
 a loaf.
 one invariable habit of a native black is to cast his eyes all round
 into the branches of the trees, so it was with mat—a habit which he
 never lost, and as he passed his eyes across a mimosa-tree which
 over-shadowed the pond, he saw something which made his heart beat
 wildly with delight. for there hung a small shred of muslin. now he
 knew that annie was well enough to leave a little signal, hanging it
 up whilst sitting on the horse’s back.
 with redoubled efforts he started on again, when, upon ascending some
 high ground, there lay the ocean before him,—the pacific ocean,
 which formed a silvery horizon in the distance.
 “going to get away in a boat,” muttered mat, as he spurted along the
 trail.
 but in this surmise he was mistaken. magan knew better than to trust
 to the sea as a means of escape. besides, his villainous schemes
 tended in another direction altogether.
 our forester soon again considered it prudent to “slow down,” as
 certain signs showed him that the man he was pursuing could not be far
 off. on rounding the corner of a hill, he found himself over a broad
 and steep creek, which was covered on its banks with dense stunted
 scrub.
 viewing the nature and “lay” of this ravine, as he halted above it mat
 entirely changed his method of
 procedure, and once more prepared to
 follow the tactics he had pursued for so many years with the waigondas
 when engaged in stalking game.
 divesting himself of his clothing, and twining green leaves into his
 hair and beard, he dropped into the long blady grass which grew along
 the bank of the creek, and, wriggling himself, like a snake, to the
 cover of a hibiscus bush, peered cautiously through, and found that he
 was right over the robbers’ camp!
 a couple of hundred yards to the right of him, and in the dry bed of
 the creek, were two men lying stretched out under a huge specimen of
 the eucalyptus (known as the ti-tree, but pronounced te-tree), with
 their cabbage-tree hats over their eyes, fast asleep, and, as mat
 hoped, in a drunken sleep, for he saw the glitter of empty bottles
 strewed around them. their guns he could also see leaning against the
 ti-tree.
 all this our forester took in at a glance. without shifting his
 position, he peered anxiously about, until at length he descried a
 third man, magan, wide awake and eating something, seated on a spit of
 sand a few yards higher up than the two sleepers. the bushranger had
 chosen his position with great cunning, not a tree or bush to afford
 cover to a foe being near him.
 mat could see, even at the distance that he was, that the whole
 attitude of the man betokened extreme
 fatigue; yet ever and anon he
 turned his head about, as if listening for any sign of pursuit.
 here was evidently a stronghold of the gang, for mat could see a cave
 in the side of the gully, with saddles and swags lying in the mouth
 of it.
 the two men, mat guessed, had awaited the bushranger at this spot.
 at all events, he had seen no other tracks during his pursuit of the
 robber.
and where was annie?
our forester decided—in that cave.
 long and anxiously did he study the situation, for one false step
 would now ruin all.
 he had hoped, during his pursuit, that he would overtake the
 bushranger as he sat down to rest, with no one but his helpless victim
 near him; but it was now evident that the cunning robber had never
 intended to stop for more than an instant until he had gained his lair
 and joined his “pals.”
 once the thought crossed mat’s mind that, as he had three enemies to
 deal with, he would wait until the solitary one followed the example
 of the others, and went to sleep; but this idea he at once dismissed.
 the agony of waiting, as we know, he never could tolerate; and
 now, with annie a prisoner, to be unoccupied would be intolerable to
 him.
 at length, after having viewed the pros and cons of the life-and-death
 struggle which he knew must ensue, our forester made up his mind, drew
 himself back from his place of concealment, made a long
  détour, and,
 crossing the creek far below the big tree which sheltered the two men,
 he approached their camp from the other side.
 drawing himself along the ground, he found that he was out of sight of
 the single robber, and thus could approach the other two, whom he
 found still asleep, and breathing heavily.
 having reached the guns, he cautiously put out two fingers, eased
 the nearest one down from its position against the tree, drew it
 towards him, opened the pan, shook out the powder, and replaced it as
 carefully in its former position, serving the other one in the same
 way. a large powder-flask lying against one of the men had not escaped
 his eye. this he buried deep in the sand. so far, mere child’s play to
 our forester. he then retreated a few yards behind a bush, looked to
 his own weapons, and took stock of the place where he knew magan was
 sitting. cautiously peeping, he saw that he could shoot the man dead
 from where he was lying concealed, but this act did not enter into his
 plan. he wanted to get his gun, and so have him, he hoped, at his
 mercy.
 he found, upon further spying, that he would have to make another
 détour to get round to the back of his man; and herein lay the
 difficulty, owing to want of cover.
 he now, for the first time, saw what he knew the robber must have with
 him—the gun, lying near magan’s right hand, and slightly behind him.
 “if i
 get that,” thought mat, “it will be the stalk of my whole
 life;” and he crawled away. it seemed hours to him before he had come
 round to the edge of the sandy plain to the rear of magan. once
 there, he wormed his way in the required direction with eyes fixed on
 the robber, and grasping his gun ready for any emergency.
 every time that the man was not looking at his food—each time that he
 looked up or about him—mat was as a stone, and, in truth, his body
 being the exact colour of the ruddy sand on which he lay, it would
 have taken something sharper than a white man’s eye to detect him.
 slowly he crept on. he could hear once, in the stillness of the air,
 one of the two men turn over and grumble in his sleep, and again was
 mat motionless.
 at last, his heart thumping so that he was afraid it would be heard,
 silently and gently he drew himself so close behind the bushranger
 that he could hear him breathe; his hand was upon the gun, lifting it
 gently, when the man made a movement as though he would get up.
 mat’s other hand stole to his pistol, but magan had only reached
 forward to get a bottle, and whilst applying it to his lips, our
 forester took the opportunity to slip back behind a slight ridge in
 the sand, magan’s gun in his hand. this he securely hid as soon as he
 could do so with safety.
 continuing his retreat by the way he had come, he
  passed the two
 sleepers, helped himself to a small “damper” which was lying ready
 baked near a tiny fire and which he had previously noticed, but had
 left until his retreat, and recrossing the creek again regained his
 clothes.
 putting these quickly on and eating a mouthful of the bread, he came
 again into the creek, walked up, hidden by the bushes, to within
 thirty yards of magan, stepped out into the open, and cried, “throw up
 your arms, my mates are behind me,” at the same time covering the man
 with his pistol.
 the bushranger looked up and felt for his gun, but not finding it, he
 got up leisurely on his feet, instead of springing up as mat had
 expected.
but once erect he snatched a pistol from his breast and shot at mat.
 our hero, watching his eye, had seen his intention, and springing to
 one side, the bullet flew harmlessly by him.
 mat returned the fire instantaneously and hit magan full in the chest,
 but to his astonishment the latter instead of falling was merely spun
 partly round, and steadying himself once more discharged another
 pistol at mat.
 the ball again flew wide, and mat returned the fire with the same
 result as before, and magan drew yet a third pistol.
 our hero had dodged the two first shots by springing to one side or
 the other, but at this third attempt
  at shooting him he tried
 another ruse by springing high into the air; he did not, however, come
 off scathless, for he was aware of a smarting blow like a red-hot
 iron, passing round his thigh.
 “the death of magan.”
 the thought that flashed through his mind at this period of the fight
 was, “i did not put enough powder into the pistols, but old joe’s got
 a fearful dose in her.”
 magan at this moment turned his head on one side to look for his gun.
 mat threw up his manton to riddle his antagonist’s neck, and was in
 the act of pulling the trigger, when a voice from the bushes almost
 under his feet yelled out in waigonda,—
“hit in lower legs for your life.”
 for an instant magan darted a glance to the spot from whence the voice
 proceeded.
 mat never moved his head, such was our hero’s nerve, but depressing
 his aim, poured the contents of both barrels into his adversary’s
 legs, when the bushranger fell to the ground with a hideous yell, his
 remaining pistol flying into the air with a spasmodic jerk.
 mat walked cautiously towards the man to see that he was not shamming,
 but as he approached him he was received with such a volley of curses
 from his late antagonist, who he saw was terribly wounded, the lower
 portions of both legs being completely smashed, that he came straight
 up to him and stooped over to see if he could render any assistance
 by staunching the flow of blood, which was pouring in a torrent over
 the sand.
 “ah! you gipsy,” groaned magan, as soon as he saw him close. “who
 are you, his ghost? i shot you dead near the station, i’ll swear it!
 ghost or not, i’d have killed you if i could have got my gun in time;
 but that nigger standing there—they’ve always been my curse,—he
 told you something! yes, i’d have killed you and left you to rot as
 you will me now, if it hadn’t been for him!—curse you both. i never
 pulled straight with the pistols ’cos i believed ’twere a ghost! i—”
 but here magan fell back in a swoon.
this is how it was that dromoora appeared on the scene.
 some days before the night of the visit of the bushrangers, when out
 with his gun, he had come upon a deserted camp higher up this creek
 which had evidently quite lately been occupied by white men; so
 thinking that magan would make for this spot, as he had found some
 cooking utensils hidden away there, dromoora, directly mat and his
 party arrived at bulinda, and thus left him free to act, took a short
 cut to this old camp,—it will be remembered that mat had noticed the
 steps of a native,—but finding that no one had been there since, he
 made a cast down the creek, taking a line parallel to it, and then
 ‘cut in’ to the track of pursuer and pursued; following this up he
 was in time to watch mat’s proceedings
  from a spot close to that on
 which the latter had disrobed himself, from which coign of vantage he
 speedily realized his friend’s scheme, but did not discover himself
 until the opportune moment, as he did not wish to interfere with his
 plans in any way.
 dromoora now complimented our hero upon his stalking powers, telling
 him that no black in the whole of the waigonda tribe could have
 procured the guns more neatly.
 “i was so glad,” he said, “that you did not try to kill the man when
 you were creeping upon him, as i should have done had i not known
 something.
 “i saw at the last that you would get the worst of it, and therefore
 cried out telling you where to shoot.
“for that man has iron all over his body, head and neck!!!
 “and when you were going to shoot at his neck he was just turning,
 when all the lead would have struck against the iron skin; it’s all
 hidden, but i will show it you; i found this out when i tried to drag
 him off his horse, but my knife went into his leg, and i knew there
 was no iron there; let us take his clothes off and you shall see.”
 mat, who had listened rather impatiently to the rapidly delivered
 utterances of the now excited chief, replied,—
“yes, yes, but first where is the white girl?”
 “in that cave,” promptly replied dromoora. “tracks go in, none come
 out.”
 together they searched the cave, but found it empty, as far as they
 could see, so mat felt for his matches, but not finding them at the
 moment bade dromoora fetch a fire-stick, when suddenly a stone came
 rolling down from the upper part of the cavern, which lay buried in
 darkness.
 “quick! fire-stick,” shouted mat. the chief seized one from the small
 fire outside, and returning, blew it into a flame, when to mat’s
 intense relief and joy they discovered annie, lying on a ledge far up
 the cave, with feet and hands tied, and a handkerchief bound round
 her mouth. to cut through cords and handkerchief was the work of an
 instant, and the two men then carried her into the open air, and
 laying her gently down on some soft grass under the great ti-tree,
 placed water by her side, and left her to recover herself.
 seeing that he could be of no further use, and feeling that as yet he
 had had no direct hand in exterminating the enemies of his beloved
 white chief, our waigonda, disdaining firearms and contenting himself
 with a steel tomahawk, was off before mat could stop him, shouting
 back, in answer to the latter’s question as to where he was going,—
“to get the other two and their thunder-sticks.”
 as mat afterwards found out, when the duel between him and the
 bushranger commenced, these two
 other ruffians had jumped up and
 taken deliberate aim at him, with the result of two flashes in the
 pan. they had then looked for their powder-flask, and not finding it,
 the truth had dawned upon them; so seizing their guns they had bolted
 for their lives, leaving magan to shift for himself.
 our forester had taken care to place annie in a position from where
 she could not possibly see the dying bushranger.
 “thank god, you are now safe, miss bell,” he said, as he approached
 her. “i will leave you for a few minutes whilst i look for the horse,
 but you’re quite safe. i will hardly be out of your sight.”
 saying which he was turning away, in reality to look after magan, and
 also to see that there were no signs of further miscreants, when annie
 called him back.
 “oh! don’t be long; i want to get out of this horrid place! but, ah!
 forgive me for only thinking of myself instead of my preserver—for
 such you are, mr. stanley.”
 “call me simply ‘mat,’ as the others do,” he replied. “and rest
 yourself; i know you must be terribly stiff with all you’ve gone
 through; plenty of time to tell me all about it afterwards. i must
 see first that we have no enemies left.”
 with that he took a turn round the camp, and then walked up to magan,
 who, he found had regained his senses, but was slowly bleeding to
 death.
 mat saw that the case of the man was hopeless, but at the
 same time felt that he was utterly powerless to help him; however, he
 procured him water, placed his bottle close to him, and asked him if
 he could do anything at all for him.
 “no, curse you,” hissed the man between his teeth, “haven’t you done
 enough? why didn’t i kill you and the others when i was with carew,
 and you came to the camp? i got some of your nuggets, and meant to
 wipe out the lot of you, only there were too many niggers about; if
 ever i stirred even to the mouth of the tent, there was one watching
 me. they’ve been my curse all along.”
 mat had once, when camping with carew, caught a glimpse of the
 mysterious man in the tent, who he was told was such a drunkard that
 he never stirred out; and now, as he gazed carefully at the features
 of the wounded man before him, he recognized the great scar on his
 face.
astonished at this recognition and the man’s words, he said,—
“why, then, you’re boyd!”
 “in course i was, and now i’m jack magan, and shall be both boyd
 and magan under the sod soon. how did that nigger tell you where
 to shoot? if it hadn’t been for him, i’d ’av got a thousand pounds
 ransom for that wench, after killing you! i wish you and him felt as
 i do now. they’ve tried to take me these years, and never would, only
 for you two finding
 out the secret; but perhaps that liar who lived
 with bell, that liar we called ‘frenchey,’ perhaps he peached. but my
 senses are going; what’s the good of talking to a ghost? i saw your
 black beard fly into the air when i shot you one moonlight night at
 the paddock, and i’ll swear you never stirred afterwards.”
 every sentence of the foregoing remarks was larded with horrible
 oaths, and magan soon after died, cursing with his last breath the man
 who had dealt him his death-blow. but mat, seeing that his presence
 only infuriated the bushranger, placed some shady branches lightly
 around him before he was dead, and turned away.
 the horse he found in a miserable condition, so tied that he could
 neither lie down nor get about to seek for food or water, so our
 forester freed him, led him to a small pool in the rocks, and left him
 at liberty amongst some good feed.
 he then rejoined annie, whom he found brighter, and refreshed from her
 rest.
 in answer to his questions, she told him that the men had treated her
 without insult, and that the wretch called “jack” had informed her
 that he had killed the gipsy days ago, which she knew at the time
 must be a story. he also told her that some of his men were guarding
 his camp; it was quite impossible for her to get away, and that his
 intention was to get a large sum of money for her ransom, keeping her
 prisoner until he could communicate safely with her
  father. if his
 hiding-place was discovered, and a force sent against him, he did not
 intend to be taken himself, nor should he burden himself with her if
 he had to fly, but should simply cut her throat before going.
 “oh, it’s so dreadful!” continued annie. “but i will tell you more
 as i think of it. yes, and when we arrived here i was given damper and
 meat and water, and then they tied a handkerchief round my mouth, and
 my legs and arms together, and put me in that dreadful cave. when they
 struck a match in there i glanced round and spied that ledge, so when
 the firing began i remembered the man’s threats, and struggled inch by
 inch, until, in despair, i got not only on to the ledge, but rolled
 beyond it out of sight, and there i lay shaking with fear. at last i
 recognized your voice—though in black-fellow language i knew it—and i
 knew i was saved! and i just managed to kick a stone down, as i could
 not call out. but, oh! mr. stanley—mat, i mean—are my parents safe?
 tell me everything. and how was it you came up alone? how i prayed
 for you all, and my prayers have been answered, have they not? i knew
 you would come, as you can track anything, but where are the others?”
 mat assured her that her people were all safe, and would be with her
 soon, at all events the squire would, and that as he had started
 first, so he had arrived before the others, having gone night and
 day;
 as she had surmised, he had followed the tracks, and at a run,
 whereas the other white men were not accustomed to tracking, and,
 moreover, they would be mounted, which would still more add to their
 difficulties in following a trail; and, “believe me,” concluded mat,
 “i would have followed across australia to save you, miss annie.”
 annie gazed at our hero earnestly for a moment, but did not respond; a
 dreamy look came into her eyes as she looked at him and thought, “what
 a noble, manlike fellow he is!” and the forester’s hitherto rather
 stern-like expression gave way to a softer one, as he met that gaze,
 and took in the appearance of the fair girl beside him; her rich long
 auburn hair had fallen over her shoulders, its dark shades relieved by
 golden gleams, where the sunlight played upon it. annie had loosened
 her dress at the neck, to get all the air she could, thus disclosing
 her pure white skin and the soft outlines of her throat, whilst her
 gentle fawn-like eyes, still moist from the hours of agony she had
 gone through in the cave, looked with a startled anxious expression
 into those of our hero.
 truly, hers was a lovable, confiding nature, and mat felt it,—felt it
 as in a dream,—as in a heavenly trance, and he also felt that he was
 rewarded....
 after they had thus sat for a brief space in silence, mat went on to
 tell annie, without entering into particulars of the fight, that if it
 had not been for the faithful waigonda chief, matters might have had
 a
 very different termination, for that he could not do much against
 bullet-proof armour.
 “yes, that armour!” cried annie, “i knew that there were many things
 i wanted to tell you; i soon found out how impossible it would be
 for any one to harm the bushranger, for once he took off a lot of
 armour when resting and eating, for he had a bag of provisions, and
 then i remembered reading somewhere about a man who defied every
 one, and shot all who tried to take him, and they supposed he wore a
 breastplate of iron, because no one could ever hurt him; and, mat, how
 agonizing were my feelings when i found i had no means of scrawling
 this fact on a bit of paper to let you know, for i knew you would
 come. i tied a bit of handkerchief on to a tree to show i was alive
 and—”
 “and here it is,” said mat, with a smile, as he produced the remnant.
 “and there’s a ‘cooee,’” he cried, jumping up. “terebare’s, i know,
 yes! there she is, on that high bank, and the squire on horseback.”
 annie sprang to her feet, and a few moments afterwards was weeping
 tears of love and thankfulness on her father’s breast.
 magan’s armour—safe at bulinda creek again—the professor’s last lesson
 on the island—mat and tim once more together—tim convalescent.
after the first transports of joy at again meeting each other were
 over, annie led her father under the big ti-tree, and recounted to
 him some of the adventures that had befallen her since she had been
 carried off.
 “and where is the man that saved you, lassie?” said the squire, as
 soon as he had heard her narrative.
“he was here just now, father.”
 mat had retired, not wishing to disturb the meeting between father and
 daughter, but he now came forward, when bell took his hand in both of
 his, saying as he did so,—
 “mat, you have saved my daughter’s life, like a brave and noble fellow
 that you are. accept the gratitude of an old man, who owes her life
 and honour to you. i cannot say all that i think, and wish to, now,
 my nerves have been too much shaken, but i will when we get home;
 i should never
 have got here if it had not been for ‘terebare,’ who
 ran pretty well the whole way in front of my horse. i insisted on the
 others staying behind, so as not to come away and leave the station
 undefended. now let us have some rest and refreshment.”
 whilst annie went off with terebare to cook some provisions, which the
 squire had brought, mat took the latter aside and told him a few of
 the particulars connected with the rescue of annie, adding,—
 “miss bell knows scarcely anything of what i’m telling you, and she
 certainly does not know that the bushranger is lying dead about fifty
 yards up this gully; she must not go near the spot; but come and see,
 and then you’ll judge.”
 so the two men proceeded to the place, and found the man lying dead
 sure enough.
 before they thought of burying him, which they knew must be done in
 that climate without much loss of time, they proceeded to take off and
 examine his armour, which both viewed with astonishment.
 “how could the man bear the weight in this climate and move about?”
 queried bell.
 “i don’t think he did move about much,” replied his companion; “i
 expect he always rode. what i could not understand at the time was the
 slow way in which he got up when i surprised him; why, looking at the
 weight of this lot, he must have carried nearly a couple of hundred
 pounds.”
 “not far off it,” said the squire, who, with the help
  of mat, had
 now got off the thigh pieces, breastplate, back piece, and a sort of
 helmet with a cover for the neck, from the body, all this iron being
 concealed by ordinary clothing.
 “this has stood some shooting,” continued bell, “and here’s your
 ‘brand’ too,” as he pointed to a couple of deep dents in the
 breastplate. “we’ll keep all this gear, and bury the body under that
 tree in the scrub, where the others can’t see us at work; i’m glad
 that annie did not see this frightfully-mutilated corpse.”
 so they scraped a hole, put magan’s body in, marked the tree, and made
 a “cache” of the armour.
 “i saw you limping when helping to carry the body,” said bell; “are
 you wounded?”
 “no, it’s nothing,” answered mat, “else i couldn’t walk, but i may as
 well look at it before we go back.”
 mat found that the ball from magan’s pistol had travelled just under
 the skin of his outer thigh, causing a slight flesh wound, but causing
 him little inconvenience.
 after the little party had refreshed themselves, they prepared to
 start for home.
 terebare brought up the horses; annie was mounted on her father’s, the
 squire insisting on mat’s riding magan’s, taking turn and turn about
 with him.
 in this manner they reached home by easy stages, and without further
 adventure. as they approached the house, mrs. bell, rushed out to meet
 them, having
 recognized them from far off, and once again the family
 party met in safety and happiness on the verandah of bulinda creek.
 when they had partly got over the first feelings of thankfulness at
 the rescue of annie, mrs. bell said to her husband,—
“and who do you think is the wretch we caught?”
 “i don’t know,” answered bell; “i was too much engaged to look at the
 man; some escaped convict, probably.”
 “you are partly right, but you ’av’nt guessed who he is,—’e’s rayon,
 the frenchman! the police have recognized ’im as an escaped convict,
 and ’av carried him off to jail more dead than alive. i remembered
 afterwards, when dromoora was tying him up he said, ‘french feller’;
 but i was ’alf stunned by all that ’appened, and didn’t know what he
 meant. i’ll never speak french again.”
 “i see it all now,” replied her husband; “what a lot of fools we were
 to be gulled so, and what a doubly-distilled ass i was not to listen
 to mat when he wanted to stay behind, saying he thought there was
 danger about.”
mrs. bell listened eagerly to the account of annie’s rescue by mat.
 “what a brave man he is,” she said; “he must live with us altogether;
 we can never repay him. i must ‘embrasser’ him; i—i—mean embrace him,
 and dromoora too.”
 “as you say, we cannot fully repay him,” joined in her husband; “but
 i have some plans that i will talk over with you by-and-by.”
 the news of the death of one bushranger and the capture of another
 soon rang over the whole district, the newspapers especially devoting
 their columns to what they knew of the history and doings of the two
 miscreants.
 there was no doubt that it was the intention of the bushrangers to
 murder all who opposed them.
 one paper stated that the leader of the gang, the notorious magan, had
 long been outlawed, and that he fought with a halter round his neck,
 for that his previous career showed that he had shot more than one man
 in cold blood; it related that—
 “upon one occasion this fiend had ridden up to a station down south,
 and had ordered the inmates to ‘bail up!’ this they at once did, being
 taken by surprise. magan had then shot at and wounded one of the men,
 then despatched another for the doctor, and then had deliberately shot
 him as he was going away upon his errand.”
 concerning rayon, whose real name was never clearly made out, this
 much was known—that he was english-born, had been very well educated
 travelled as courier in france with some of the best families. having
 learnt french perfectly, he had settled in paris, but eventually ran
 away from there, owing to his being found out at card-sharping. he
 next turned
 up in london, and, being an accomplished penman, had
 forged whilst there the name of one of his former patrons for a large
 sum of money; was tried, convicted, and transported for life to botany
 bay, and escaped.
 as we have seen, he was now captured again, and doomed to pass the
 rest of his life, this time on a well-known island, whose sole
 sentries consisted of swarms of gigantic sharks, which had already
 snapped up more than one unlucky prisoner upon his attempting to swim
 to the mainland.
 our forester was surprised on his return to bulinda after the rescue
 of annie, not to hear any news of tim. the squire, too, could not make
 it out, but said,—
 “i expect he did not start from the ‘downs,’ as he said he intended to
 when he wrote; so, as we have not done with this police business yet,
 having to go to headquarters again soon, supposing we make a start
 to-morrow to sydney; we may then hear news of tim.”
 mat gladly agreed to this proposal, and as parson tabor also wished to
 visit the capital, the three men started the next day.
 passing the station where tim had “spelled” before starting on
 his moonlight walk, the travellers were astonished to find that
 tim had been there, and as they had heard no tidings of his being
 about bulinda, they thought that he must have forgotten
  something
 important, and returned to sydney. so, without further delay, they put
 spurs to their horses, and galloped into the town.
 leaving their horses in a stable, they were walking down one of the
 chief streets when a man accosted mat with,—
“beg pardon, how is your brother to-day?”
“brother!” replied mat, “why, where is he?”
 “i know it’s your brother,” replied the man, “i saw you both at the
 school of arts, at your lecture, he’s ill in the hospital, so they
 say.”
 without another word the three friends hurried off to the hospital,
 and there learnt that it was indeed tim who was one of the patients,
 but further they could not learn until the house-surgeon appeared,
 who gave them particulars of the case, and then, in answer to their
 questions, said that tim was now out of danger, and that one of them
 might visit him; so it was settled that mat should go to his brother,
 whilst the others, bell and tabor, would transact some business in the
 town and call for him again.
 our forester found his brother looking very white and wan, lying in
 a small bed in one of the wards. one of the nurses, before ushering
 him in, had warned mat not to let the patient talk above a whisper by
 exciting him in any way, and not to stay long.
 so he went in very softly, took his brother’s thin hand, in his, and
 pressed it, saying,—
 “don’t talk, tim, only a little whisper now and
  again. the doctor
 has told us all about you, and i would have come before, but have
 been away from the station, and only heard you were here by accident.
 squire and the parson are in the town—”
 tim here interrupted him with a questioning look, so mat bent his head
 to hear what he had to say.
tim’s whispered words came faintly to him,—
“i want to get to the station where you and t’parson are.”
mat replied,—
 “i will go and ask the doctor,” and was leaving the room, when tim
 motioned him back with a plaintive look,—
“i want to go to-morrow.”
 mat nodded, went out, and having found the doctor, repeated his
 brother’s wish to him.
 the doctor was a little spare man, short in stature and short in
 manner. he said,—
 “we knew some time ago who your brother was, and where you were
 living, but we were also aware that the patient’s life depended upon
 utter quiet, and up to two days ago it would have been madness for
 any of his friends to have seen him, therefore we sent no message to
 bulinda creek: we meant to have let you know to-day or to-morrow. as
 i told you, a bullet in the lungs is no joke; still if you could get
 a very easy carriage and take him by short stages, only travelling by
 day, it might be safe now.”
 mat told tim the good news, and waited quietly
  by his brother’s
 bedside until the squire and the parson sent up to say that they were
 waiting below.
 the three men then had a consultation, the doctor being present, when
 it was decided to bring a carriage there next day, should the weather
 be favourable. mat was requested not to disturb his brother again so
 sending word to him of their intention, they adjourned to a hotel for
 the night.
 the weather was warm and balmy, and looked as though it would remain
 so for the next few days, as the carriage drew up on the morrow at
 the hospital, and tim was comfortably and slowly driven to the creek,
 which he reached in two days’ time, escorted by his brother, the
 squire and the parson, and not any the worse for his journey.
 the doctor, as he had promised mat, came out to see his patient on the
 day after his arrival, and finding him all that he could wish, called
 mat out on to the verandah, and said,—
 “what he wants now is absolute quiet, no exciting talk, no physic,
 merely cooling drinks; your brother is not likely to live to be an
 old man, but the best chance of lengthening his days is, when he is
 well enough, to get him out of this hot climate—a mild sea voyage, if
 possible, i would suggest, even to going home. but, above all, gentle
 nursing now.”
 annie, who had entered the verandah during the latter part of the
 conversation, walked up to mat, and addressing him and the doctor,
 said,—
“let me look after him; i will do so night and day, i promise it.”
 and annie was as good as her word, never leaving tim without his
 cooling drinks, making him jellies and other delicacies with her own
 hands, sitting by his bedside night after night, and when at length he
 was able to leave his bed, it was upon the same fair nurse’s arm that
 he leaned, to take his first feeble walks on the verandah.
 the squire’s offer—tim decides to go home—our heroine’s advice to
 mat—our forester takes to gardening—the “new chum’s” difficulties and
 troubles.
the squire, one evening after the inmates of bulinda creek had once
 more settled down to their quiet every-day life, beckoned mat on to
 the verandah for a smoke. when they had made themselves comfortable in
 a couple of “squatters,” or easy seats made of canvas, propped on two
 poles, the old man spoke.
 “mat, my lad, i have heard the opinion of the doctor, that tim should
 go home. i hope that you and he will accept the offer that i am going
 to make to you. if he wishes to go, and i believe he does, i propose
 to pay his passage to the old country in the best ship that we can
 find, and i intend to start him in the forest with a thousand pounds,
 so that he can take a little farm, or buy a bit of land, and he shall
 draw upon me for any farther sum he may require.”
 mat was about to thank him for this generous proposal, but the squire
 stopped him.
 “i know that you will never take money without working for it and all
 that, but remember, should you wish to ease your conscience, you can
 repay me when
 you are a rich man, and i intend to put you on a road
 by which you may attain this, the particulars of my scheme i will
 explain to you in good time. another thing, you can also help your
 brother and yourself by accepting the purse that was subscribed for
 you, and which money i long ago placed out at interest in the bank,
 and then there are your nuggets worth at least three pounds sterling
 an ounce, and—”
 “true enough, squire,” interrupted mat, “they are what brought all
 the misery to your house, and to tim too, for ’twas magan, of course,
 that shot him. i wish i had put them in the bank, when i landed in
 sydney.”
 “very well, mat, and now i have a proposition to make which concerns
 yourself. no one in this country could have rescued my daughter
 under the peculiarly difficult circumstances of the case, as you did
 it”—here bell paused to light up another pipe, whilst our forester
 waited with impatience, he scarcely knew why, for his next words. the
 squire quietly puffed at his pipe, and continued, “had the police come
 up with this magan, i feel convinced that, proof as he was against
 their bullets, he would have retreated fighting to the cave, and
 rather than surrender would have killed annie, for the brute would
 as soon have shot a woman as a man; and, bear in mind, i never shall
 forget that that gallant chief of yours saved your life, and thus the
 lives of others, and i will make it one of my first cares to reward
 him and his wife, and the whole of his tribe,
  in any way you think
 they will most appreciate. but to come back to yourself, mat. you of
 all men will appreciate deeds rather than words, and i propose that
 from this date you take up your abode with us, and go equal shares
 with me in all the property i possess.
 “tom wishes this as well. remember that you will be, as the younger
 man, the working partner, and will consequently be of the greatest
 assistance to me, who am getting a bit portly and old. now go and
 sleep over all this. to-morrow i will show you my books, and then you
 can tell me if you agree. tom, who is well provided for, says you
 must, and i say you shall.”
 mat did not “sleep over it,” but lay awake that night thinking
 over the squire’s proposal. to his own way of thinking, he had not
 done anything so wonderful after all in the way that he had rescued
 annie; though true he recollected that dromoora had praised him in the
 matter, which praise, coming from the lips of that old warrior, meant
 a very great deal indeed. he plainly saw what a splendid opening lay
 before him; such a career had never occurred to him in his wildest
 dreams. and then he thought how splendid it would be if tim could join
 him in anything of the sort; or should he go home with tim? no, that
 would be no advantage to either; besides, he thought he would like
 to stay at bulinda. thus, reasoning the matter over in every possible
 way, in trying to come to a conclusion, he went to sleep.
 our forester was sauntering along the verandah the next day, thinking
 of what he should say to the squire, when annie came softly out of
 tim’s room, and mat almost ran against her, so absorbed was he in his
 thoughts.
 “oh, mat,” she said, “i was coming to look for you. tim would like to
 speak to you, and after that i want you to help me get some bananas
 for him.”
 “is that you, mat?” said a faint voice, as our hero entered the
 sick-room. “i want to talk to you about what we were saying the other
 day, when i wasn’t allowed to talk any more. i’m much better this
 morning. the doctor says i can never ride, or do anything worth doing
 again, that’s what pains me; ’taint the wound so much as that. but
 i ought to be very thankful, i know, ’taint no worse, cos t’ parson
 says i oughter. oh! he is just like an angel; steals in and prays;
 yes, prays at night, when he thinks i’m asleep; but i can hear him
 whispering his prayers. and miss annie, she do just about take care
 of me; i never have to ask for anything i want. i feel better in body
 and in mind when those two are here, and they come different times,
 and never bother me with ‘how did you sleep last night?’ because they
 know; they tell each other. and i told t’ parson as how i’d like
 to get back to t’ forest, and
 he said the doctor told him that he
 wished i was back, and if i went on so well as now, i might go in a
 few weeks; and that is why i wanted to see you, to ask you, is there
 enough money as my share, do you think, for me to go?”
 tim broke down at this point from exhaustion, and mat gave him a
 cooling drink from a bottle which his brother pointed out, and begged
 him not to talk any more.
 “you only listen, tim,” he said. “i’ve settled all about the money;
 you’ll have plenty, and will go home. i’ll tell you all about it
 another time. i am going now to get some bananas for you.”
 “will you come again after i’ve had a sleep, mat? for i feel so much
 happier now i’ve seen you, i shall get to sleep and dream of home.”
 mat promised, then stepped out and rejoined annie, and they proceeded
 to the garden, where he cut a large bunch of “lady’s finger” bananas
 which she showed him, and carried it back to the house.
when he had deposited his burden, mat turned to annie.
 “i am afraid i nearly pushed you over just now, miss annie, when you
 were coming out of tim’s room, but i never looked up in time. i was
 stupidly going along with my head down, thinking so much of what your
 father said to me last night.”
“why, what did he say?”
 “i’ll tell you in a few words. he asked me to live with him and be his
 partner.”
 “i guessed that might be it, for we were all talking about it. and
 what was your answer?”
 “why, he told me to give him an answer this morning; and it’s such a
 grand prospect for a poor man like myself. but then, i am not used to
 live amongst your class, miss annie, and i don’t know what to say.”
 “well, then, i will tell you what to say; and you must say it to
 please me. tell my father that you will be glad to avail yourself of
 his terms. and as to what you say about ‘class,’ i daresay you will
 get accustomed to ours, and all the other ‘classes’ round about here,
 in time.”
“then, miss annie, i’ll say as you tell me.”
 there was a noble specimen of the crimson-flowered “poinciania-tree”
 growing near to the entrance of the house, and a seat had been put up
 under its shady branches. this tree was a favourite resort of various
 members of the family, by reason of the cool currents of air which
 played around it. the verandah, though perfectly shady, was rather
 confined as to atmosphere; the perfume of the creepers which shut it
 in was also rather overpowering.
 after his conversation with annie, our forester departed to look for
 the squire, but not finding him thought that he would smoke a pipe
 under the “poinciania-tree,” and there await his return.
 strolling up to the seat, he found it already occupied by annie, who
 had brought her work there.
 “i cannot find your father. miss annie, do you know, i was thinking,
 before i spoke with you just now, that i would go back to england with
 tim.”
“why, mat? do you like england so much better?”
“no, i don’t think i do, since you said i might stay here.”
 “yes, i would rather you would stay,” said annie, as she went on
 rapidly with her knitting. “i should not like to think that the man
 who risked his life to save mine was going away for ever.”
 “miss annie, do you know that during the whole of that wild, savage
 life i was leading, i used often to get out a book that i saved, and
 think of the young lady who gave it me.”
“was she such a very nice girl, then?” inquired annie.
“she was—she was miss annie bell!”
“me! me give you a book! i never did, mat.”
 “i think perhaps you will remember when i show it you.” and mat
 went off to his room, and returning presently, laid an old and
 much-battered copy of “robinson crusoe” in her lap.
“there!” he said triumphantly.
 “i do remember it,” said annie, after looking at the old
 yellow-leaved volume. “i gave it you in the forest, when i was a
 school-girl.”
“yes; i never expected to show it to you again.”
“do you always keep presents like that, mat?”
 “no; but that is the only present i ever had from a lady who was kind
 to me, and i was pleased when it was washed up from the wreck.
 by-the-bye, would you like to see my journal? i have been writing it
 out as carefully as i can, because a publisher in sydney has offered
 me a good price if i’ll let him print it, and it will be so nice if
 tim and i can make a few pounds by it.”
“i should like to hear it, if you will read it to me, mat.”
mat fetched the manuscript, and, taking his seat by annie said,—
 “i won’t give you all this beginning part, because you heard most
 of that at the lecture; but do listen to this page, because, when i
 read that part to the publisher, he threw himself back in his chair,
 shoved his spectacles on the top of his forehead, put his thumbs
 into his waistcoat, and said, ‘um—ah!—yes; just so. i believe there
 are some curious freaks of nature in those northern parts, but this
 is—well—er—er—a little strong.’ what he really meant was—‘you and
 your brother are terrible liars.’
 “this is the account, as i wrote it, only i’ve had the ‘wording’
 improved:—
 “tim and i were returning to the camp on a moonlight night, along a
 chain of small water-holes, which were fringed with ‘blady’ grass,
 when some beast or
 other suddenly floundered into the water, but
 never rose to the surface again. whilst i watched, tim went off to
 the camp close by, and soon returned with half a dozen blacks with
 their clap-nets. these entered the little pool, and, after working
 their nets for some time, one of them jumped out with a fish of about
 six pounds in his net. ‘very good,’ i said to my black friend, ‘but
 that is not the beast we heard in the dry grass.’ ‘yes, that is it,’
 he replied. ‘look! he has two sorts of legs on his stomach, and he
 eats grass at night, like a kangaroo, and we call him “barramundi”
 (ceratodus forsteri); and sometimes we have caught him on the banks
 of water-holes on moonlight nights. he can breathe in the water
 because he has these things, showing me his gills; and he can
 breathe on land because he has these—i will show you;’ upon which
 the black cut open the fish, and showed me his lungs.”
 “i can only say,” said mat, as he stopped reading, “that we both saw
 all this, and, after all, it’s not much more wonderful than some of
 the tree-snakes. i can show you, on the next one i kill, two little
 short points or legs under his stomach, to help him to grip getting
 about trees.”
 before mat could continue his journal they were summoned to dinner, so
 annie took up the book, saying,—
 “we must go on with it this evening. i am sure that i shall like it so
 much.”
 when, however, the evening came, annie remembered that her garden
 must be watered, for she had neglected this of late; so she asked
 mat to come and help her to carry the buckets, saying,—
 “if you will fill the buckets at the water-hole, and then carry them
 across the paddock to those trees—that is where my garden is—i will
 walk on first, for i do not suppose that there are any bushrangers
 about now.”
 mat had often passed this garden, with its hedge of prickly “osage
 orange,” but had never penetrated through the little gate.
 he soon filled his buckets, and was by annie’s side, in her garden,
 waiting for orders.
 she pointed out those shrubs and flowers which were specially thirsty
 subjects, and told him the names of many of the plants.
 “these many-coloured flowers are balsams; that great bush, with its
 deep red flowers, is a bouganvillia; and the creeper joining it,
 over the summer-house, with its bunches of waxy flowers, is called
 stephanotis; it scents the whole garden at night.”
 “i know the smell of that,” said mat, “if i do not know the name,
 for you had a nosegay of it when i saw you in sydney.”
 “yes, i had, and i wear it at all the balls and parties i go to. it
 is my favourite flower.”
 our hero watered everything he was told to, and a good many dead
 sticks and cuttings that he was not
 told to. when they had finished,
 he asked annie whether they should come again the next evening to
 water; also whether he might look after her garden a bit, for that it
 was “terrible” weedy.
 “yes,” she returned, “i should be glad if you would help me this dry
 weather. what funny expressions you do use sometimes!”
 “and,” continued mat, “will you give me a bit of
 the—the—sweet-smelling plant.”
 “certainly i will,” she said, as she plucked a spray and gave it him,
 “and i will write down those difficult names for you. now we will go
 in; they will wonder what has become of us.”
 mat told his brother that evening, before he went to bed, that
 he had heard of three plants quite new to him, called “balsam,”
 “boug-and-villia,” and “ste-phen-oh-tis;” and tim agreed that whatever
 the plants were like, the names were very wonderful.
 the following day our forester found the squire and tom alone in the
 former’s room. parson tabor had been away a great deal of late upon
 affairs connected with the station in sydney, with tom as companion.
 “our parson” was always taken into the confidence of the family in
 matters both temporal and spiritual; he was one of those men who
 seldom ventured an opinion upon any important matter until it was
 asked for; but when he did speak, his remarks and advice were worth
 considering, and to the point.
 mat had hoped when he entered the squire’s room
  that the clergyman
 would have been there too, but in this he was disappointed: the parson
 was too busy writing, they said, to attend; besides, they had not much
 to discuss, for, said bell,—
 “i’ve got a new chum coming, but first, what is your decision mat,
 with reference to the matter we were discussing the other night?”
 mat replied that if the squire and tom still wished him really to have
 a share in the station, and become one of the partners, he would do
 his very best, and certainly would be very proud of such a distinction
 being conferred upon him. he would like, he said, to begin work
 at once, and be off to the out-station in a couple of days’ time.
 (mat did not say so, but the fact was he had taken a great fancy to
 gardening all at once, and wished to have a couple more evenings at
 that delightful occupation.)
 bell and his son were much pleased at having secured such a powerful
 and useful aid as our forester for the working of the station, and mat
 was as delighted at having achieved the very height of his ambition,
 though he could never conceive that such a possibility would be
 afforded him in australia, when he left the new forest, as to rise
 suddenly to the position of partner in one of the finest properties
 in the country; for though the “books” of the station were at present
 a little beyond his understanding, yet by this time he was well
 acquainted with the whole of the “run,” and the thousands of cattle
 and horses
 upon it, and during frequent visits to sydney for purposes
 connected with bell’s affairs, he had heard nothing but praise on all
 sides of the squire’s management, and of the “solidity” attached to
 his name.
 when mat proposed to lose no time in commencing his work at the
 out-station, bell replied that he wished him to wait at bulinda until
 a “new chum” arrived from england, who was expected daily.
 “fact is,” he said. “i thought i had done with ‘new chums,’ but a
 letter i received some time ago reminded me of a promise i once made
 to an old friend at home, that i would take his son on my station.
 he says it’s his only son, who will enter into no profession, loves
 horses, and can ‘rough it’ to any extent. i know what that means by
 experience,” growled bell. “anyhow he comes—‘the honourable lionel
 fulrake;’ the ship was in a week ago. we will do our best to welcome
 him anyhow, and we shall soon see how he ‘shapes.’”
 a few hours after this conversation, mat was in his room tidying up
 his things, arranging his “manavlins,” as tom dubbed his odds and
 ends, when the sound of wheels caught his ear; so he stole round the
 building to see who had arrived.
 a buggy and pair of horses, driven by a coachman in livery, was just
 pulling up at the verandah. the vehicle was laden, or rather piled
 up, with every conceivable description of luggage: portmanteaux,
 hatboxes,
 guns, fishing-rods, a tent, and, perched on the top of all, an enormous canteen.
 presently, a young man could be seen clearing out of these
 impedimenta, and descending the vehicle. “what a swell!” thought mat;
 and the new arrival certainly was, if one judged by his clothes: a
 tall white hat, an irreproachable collar, a scarf with two pins in it,
 dust coat, nankeen trousers, and patent boots.
 “brought over in a bandbox,” whispered tom, who had joined mat in the
 inspection. “i don’t think he will ‘shape’ much!”
 “i don’t know,” rejoined his companion; “i’ve seen swells just like
 him at home, and i’ve seen them fight!”
 mr. fulrake, for he it was, had now ascended to the verandah, and,
 looking about for a bell, but finding none, subsided languidly into a
 “squatter,” and lit a cigarette.
 having finished this without seeing anyone, he got up to examine
 the house, and finally entered a room, which happened to be the one
 occupied by the ladies and the squire.
 “welcome to bulinda!” said bell, coming forward. “i know it must be
 mr. fulrake from the family likeness!”
 “thanks!” replied the new arrival, as he exchanged bows with mrs. bell
 and her daughter. “i’ve been outside for about a quarter of an hour;
 couldn’t find
 any one, you know. will you send the servant to bring in my luggage?”
 “all right,” returned bell; “we’ll get in your traps, but it’s not
 here. i’ll tell the man to drive round to the bachelors’ quarters;
 your room is all ready there. sorry we never heard you come. you
 should have walked in at once!”
“thanks! i’m awfully tired with that jolting cart!”
“well, then, rest here; the ladies will look after you!”
 saying which, the squire went out, called his son and mat, and with
 their help proceeded to attack the pile of luggage.
 our “new chum’s” appearance was distinctly striking, in one especial
 peculiarity—that of his hair. it was the lightest possible hair
 ever seen, almost white in colour, whilst his moustache and the down
 on his cheeks was only a shade darker. the contour of his delicately
 pink-hued face denoted an equal mixture of good temper and languor,
 whilst a pair of thin legs supported an apparently frail body, and a
 pair of remarkably long arms.
 as soon as the squire had disappeared, fulrake threw himself into an
 easy armchair, which annie offered him, and, first gazing in a vacant
 sort of way round the room, prepared to rest himself, and answer
 questions.
“’ad you a good passage,” inquired mrs. bell.
 “pretty fair, only a horribly dirty ship, not a very first-class lot
 of people on board, bad cook, and all that sort of thing, don’t you
 know.”
 “you must find your first impressions out here rather different to
 those of the old country—we live in a very simple way, you know, mr.
 fulrake.”
 “oh, well, it’s rather hot, and all that sort of thing, but i’m rather
 used to roughing it, you know—led quite a wild life in norway, had to
 cook my own food.”
 “you did not find that so very hard, did you,” inquired annie, with
 a smile; “how long had you to do it?”
“why, quite three weeks, last time i was there.”
“dear me, but could you not find any one to cook?”
 “as a matter of fact, there was a man with me, but he was so dirty i
 would not let him cook, and my interpreter pretended he couldn’t.”
 “i really do not think you were so badly off with two men,” remarked
 annie, “unless, of course, you had any real discomforts.”
 “yes, but i had, though. one night i got drenched, and had to have my
 clothes dried at the canteen fire; never travel without a portable
 stove. if you’ll excuse me, i’ll go and get a change and hot bath, i’m
 so dusty, don’t you know.”
 “well,” said annie, as soon as he had gone, “‘mr. matter-of-fact
 don’t you know,’ has a pretty good opinion of himself and his personal
 comforts, i should
 think, with his short answers, too; what do you think, mother.”
 “my dear, i don’t like your talking in that light way about him, he
 is evidently a gentleman of good education and talents, and we know
 that he comes of a good family. we have seen little of him as yet,
 i’ve no doubt but what he speaks fren—, no, i mean i daresay you
 will like him when you know him better, you must take him in hand a
 little.”
 “me!” answered annie, in a tone of scorn, “me take him in hand! no
 thank you; my opinion is, that at his best he’s an amusing fop—what
 a funny-looking little creature he is. but don’t you think, my dear
 mother, that you are rather too fond of being taken with strangers
 directly you see them? remember that wretched sham frenchman.”
 “yes, yes, my dear; there, you know i never can abide an argument, but
 only remember that mr. fulrake is a thorough-bred english gentleman.”
 meantime, fulrake had been shown the way to his room, and entering
 it, sat down perfectly aghast, uttering his thoughts out loud. “why,
 hang it, no better than a norwegian log-hut—worse—earthen floor! no
 armchair! no toilet-table! no bell! no nothing!” “hi, you there,” he
 called out, hearing some one in the next apartment.
 and a man in moleskin trousers, and flannel shirt with sleeves tucked
 up, appeared at his summons.
 “i want a warm bath, and my things put out, and a dressing-table, and
 above all a glass.”
 “all right,” said mat, for he it was, “i’ll speak to the squire, a
 glass of what shall i tell him, he only keeps whisky.”
 “idiot,” was on fulrake’s lips, but on second thoughts, he said, “a
 looking-glass, please.”
 “queer place and queer people,” he muttered, as mat disappeared. “what
 a rummy sort of flunky! and who on earth is the squire, i wonder?”
 however, as bell never appeared, he had to unpack his boxes himself,
 and after much hunting and bad language, got out his dress clothes,
 but without the aid of a looking-glass he could neither arrange his
 moustaches nor put on his tie.
 “the bath i’ll go without for once,” he said, “but a glass i must, and
 will have.”
 after considerable searching, he found the segment of a looking-glass
 containing a minimum degree of quicksilver; and finally he reached the
 house as the family were sitting down to supper.
 upon arriving in the room, he was introduced to parson tabor, tom, and
 mat, with all of whom he exchanged bows.
 “is this the fellow,” he thought, as he eyed our forester, “that i
 took for the ‘bush flunky,’ i suppose though they have their servants
 in to dinner in these parts; at least he’s had the decency to change
 his things, and put on a collar.”
 english society v. colonial—music—the “new chum’s” letter—“two’s
 company and three’s none”—unpleasant reflections—parson tabor’s
 advice—mrs. bell shows that she has a “down” on our hero—the
 “spider”—the “new chum” proves that he is “not such a fool as he
 looks”—tim returns home.
the conversation at supper turned upon station matters, varied by a
 discussion concerning a concert which had just taken place in sydney;
 and here fulrake, who had a good knowledge of music, and who had
 been present at the concert, was both interesting and amusing, at
 all events to the ladies of the party; but he spoilt this favourable
 impression which he had created, a little later on by making sarcastic
 remarks upon the society of sydney, this called forth a mild reproach
 from parson tabor, as he found that no one else took up the cudgels in
 the case of colonial versus english society.
 “i think, mr. fulrake,” he said, “that you have only been a few days
 in the colony, and whilst i fancy you have very fairly criticized the
 music, i hardly think so young a man as yourself would be a proper
 judge of any society in that time.”
 “excuse me, mr. tabor, it’s true that i have not been very long
 amongst you, but i’m considered at home to be a very quick judge of
 characters,—as a matter of fact always keep my eyes and ears open,
 always on the qui-vive, don’t you know.”
 “oh, how nice you speak french,” cried mrs. bell, unable to restrain
 herself. “etes-vous”—but at this point the squire brought his fist
 on the table, making the glasses ring again, as in angry tones he
 said,—
 “for goodness’ sake, mrs. b., don’t let’s have all that over again,
 or i’ll get rayon back and chain him in your sitting-room.”
 this threat was so dreadful, that mrs. bell said not another word, but
 afterwards whispered to fulrake,—
“you must excuse my ’usband, but he can’t ‘abide’ french.”
 after supper was ended, our new chum asked annie if she would favour
 him with a song, as he had heard that all colonial ladies played and
 sang so well.
 “i sing very little, mr. fulrake; another evening i will try, but
 to-night i promised mat—mr. stanley—that i would visit my garden to
 see what he has been doing there. he has been weeding, and says that
 he is afraid that he has pulled up some of my young seedlings.”
 mat, who was standing by, on hearing this, promptly got his hat, and
 the two left the room together.
 mrs. bell then turned to fulrake, and asked him if he would play or
 sing.
 “i play a little,” he answered, and thereupon sat down to the piano,
 and, first running his fingers in a critical manner over the keys,
 went through a difficult piece by weber with such taste and feeling,
 playing it perfectly by ear, that the squire, who had stepped out to
 smoke a pipe with his son, said,—
 “tom, my boy, i’m not much of a judge, but i declare i do believe we
 have got a professor of music instead of french this time. by jove,
 he can play!”
 “so he can, governor; but i think he had better stay here with the
 ladies, instead of going with us to the out-station. he’ll amuse
 them, anyhow.”
 when mr. fulrake got back to his room that night, he unpacked his
 writing-materials, lit a cigar, and wrote a letter to his father,
 which ran thus:—
“bulinda, n.s.w., —,
“christmas-time,  p.m.
 “my dear dad,—at this hour it is a little cooler, so i will
 write you another line. i sent you a letter from sydney about the
 voyage, colonial town society, &c., so i’ll say no more on that
 score, but bring you at once to bulinda creek station.
 “to begin with, the only good things in my sleeping apartment—a
 veritable den—are the cigar i am smoking and the pen i am writing
 with, both of which i brought from home. oh! but i must tell you of
 my light. my lamp, i didn’t bring that out. there’s
 nothing very
 patent about it, excepting that it’s a piece of rope floating in a
 bowl of dirty grease. forgive the apparent joke, but i can only say
 that it ‘couldn’t hold a candle to a farthing dip.’ it is called a
 ‘fat-lamp,’ i find. but these are trifles.
 “judging from what we hear at home concerning bush-life, and taking
 our impressions from the books we read upon the subject, all should
 be very romantic, and free, and beautiful. but the reality, great
 scot!
 “i’ll say nothing of the offensive independence of the so-called
 labouring classes, which i met with from the time i landed to my
 arrival here. you may say that my colonial experience has only
 lasted a few hours. true, oh, worthy dad! but, let me tell you, i
 don’t think it will last very many hours more, at all events in
 these parts; for, unless matters change very much, the probability
 is that the next time i shall write to you it will be from some
 partly-civilized district, or maybe i shall start home straight.
 “i won’t bother you any more about myself; but first i must tell you,
 as a matter of fact, that there is little comfort and no furniture in
 the place, and the food is of the coarsest.
 “now for society. well, you know old bell; but, by gad, sir! you
 don’t know his wife. vulgar aint the word to describe her; ’tisn’t
 in it; so, to use her own expression, ‘let her abide.’
 “next we come to a plump daughter, rich colour
  as to hair, good
 eyes, head well set on, good temper. i may have more to say about
 miss annie, as i intend to ‘cultivate’ her, please the pigs!
 “her brother tom, a regular boor, who eyes one heavily, yet sits
 and says nothing excepting joining in in a ponderous way if the
 conversation turns upon horses,—or ‘scrubbers,’ he seemed to call the
 ones he referred to. by the way, there’s very little scrubbing done
 here, either to man or beast.
 “there is a parson, named tabor. he looks a christian, and
 undoubtedly is a gentleman, and, i should say, is a good sort.
 “and then there’s a man named stanley. every one in sydney was
 talking of a sort of escaped gipsy of that name, who had been living
 with the blacks or wounded by bushrangers—all that sort of thing, you
 know,—and no doubt this is the same individual whom bell has caught
 again. he’s a dark, good-looking man, and fairly-well cultivated i
 should fancy. but the most extraordinary thing is, perhaps, not so
 much that the whole family—daughter and all—call him by his christian
 name and have him in to supper, but that they let him take evening
 rambles alone with annie—that’s the daughter, you perceive.
 “listen! on this, my first evening, i gave the family some music.
 now, i don’t play very badly, and i wanted the daughter to listen.
 but no; colonial manners step in. this is the signal for her to rise;
 and, under the pretence of weeding some garden or
  other, she retires
 out of doors to star-gaze with the hanger-on stanley!
 “i did not like to suggest that, in the absence of a moon, it was
 a case of gardening under difficulties, as, to speak honestly, my
 mother’s one ewe lamb didn’t want to get his sucking-teeth knocked
 out—and this gipsy is a big ’un, very. the balance of the family
 seemed to like my efforts on the piano; at all events, mrs. bell
 asked for another ‘toon,’ but i don’t care about throwing my pearls
 before those who can’t possibly appreciate them, so i shut up—anyhow,
 shut the piano up, a good one, by the way. the whole thing smacks,
 to my mind, of the opening of a three-volume novel; only i say at
 once that i don’t much fancy the hero, and i do rather like the
 heroine, as far as i’ve got, if, indeed, they do represent these two
 characters, ‘which i hopes it isn’t.’ at all events, i shall tell you
 if the plot thickens, as it will be some amusement to watch events.
 “give my love to my mother, and tell her that i must now retire to my
 couch of sticks and rotten bags—for of such does my bed appear to be
 composed, as viewed by that brilliant meteor, the ‘fat-lamp.’
“from your affectionate son,
“lionel b. fulrake.”
 the next occasion on which our new chum saw annie was one afternoon
 shortly after the evening on which he had written the letter to his
 father.
 he lay stretched on the seat under the poinciania-tree, lazily rolling
 a cigarette, when annie passed him with a basket of flowers in her
 hand.
 daintily dressed in a white gossamer material, the graceful and pretty
 girl—and our heroine looked especially winning on this occasion as she
 came tripping by—caused the usually collected fulrake to start with
 surprise, and murmuring to himself, “how sweetly ‘crisp,’” sprang
 off his seat, and taking off his hat said,—
“miss bell, may i see your garden?”
 “certainly, mr. fulrake, i will show it you; but i expect that you
 will not think much of it after the well-kept old-country greenhouses.”
 as they wended their way laughingly towards the little grove, mat
 followed at some distance behind with two buckets of water; but
 finding that they passed through the garden gate without apparently
 taking any notice of him, he deposited the buckets outside and walked
 away to the stockyard.
as soon as they were inside the garden fulrake turned to annie with,—
 “who is that man stanley that seemed to watch you and i into this
 place, and then disappeared? i suppose what you would call in this
 country a sort of educated ‘wood and water joe’?”
 “what!” answered annie, her temper beginning to rise at these remarks,
 “mr. stanley; where is he?
 i don’t see him. i wanted him here with the water, and expected to find him.”
“well, i saw him ‘slam’ his buckets down and disappear over that rise.”
 “then i hope that he will be back soon,” answered annie warmly.
 “mr. stanley is a very old friend of ours; we knew him in the old
 country; and if he is not a gentleman bred and born, he is one by
 nature. and, mr. fulrake, i will thank you not to couple you and i
 together again in the familiar manner you did just now. you may fetch
 the water if you like, or i will get it myself.”
 fulrake fetched the water, and depositing the pails, said to annie, in
 a tone which seemed to her to have a perceptible sneer in it,—
“i’m sure i beg your pardon; i had no idea he was a friend of yours.”
 “i said a friend of ours,” replied annie, who was now rather amused
 by noticing the peculiar way in which the little man carried his two
 heavy buckets.
 “yes, but by the way you fired up i think i must have trod on some
 soft place.”
 “you are treading in one now,” retorted annie, with a laugh,
 “spilling all the water about like that; why, you will quite spoil
 your dandy shoes; they must be wet through.”
 “very well. shall i call mr. stanley, then?” said fulrake, who felt
 that he was getting the worst of it.
 “yes, if you like; he is not so clumsy. and then you can go in and
 change your shoes.”
 this last was a crusher to our new chum, who was not accustomed to
 be snubbed or talked to in this way. however, determined to take
 himself off decently, with his front to the fair foe, he was stepping
 backwards; but forgetting, in his retreat, that one of the buckets of
 water was behind him, he came against it, overturned it, and found
 himself partly sitting in the bucket and wholly in a pool of water.
 “i’m so sorry,” cried annie, scarcely able to prevent herself from
 going into fits of laughter.
 “don’t mention it, miss bell,” called back fulrake, who was now
 walking rapidly away, as he muttered the following lecture to himself:—
 “you did not quite score there, lionel, my boy. always will rush
 your fences with the fair sex; yes, and very often come an awful
 cropper. what a fool you must have looked with your ‘pins’ in the air.
 how glad you must have been that the gipsy wasn’t there. you’ll hardly
 look for him now; no, you will see him somewhere first.”
 and so, having blown himself severely up, fulrake gained his room,
 changed his things, and rolling a cigarette, soon forgot his intention
 of “cultivating” annie in a new novel which he found in his bag.
 meantime, where was mat? poor mat! he had walked up to the stockyard,
 and finding the place
 deserted, he placed his arms on one of the rails and thus addressed the fence around him.—
 “i knew how ’twould be when that swell came with the dancing-shoes. of
 course she’d prefer his genteel manners to my rough ones. he’s ‘the
 honourable;’ well, so am i—at least, i always try to be. i’ll break
 his head,—no, i won’t, that wouldn’t be honourable; besides, they’d
 kick me off the place if i did, and rightly, too, and she would be
 no longer kind. no, i’ll go home—home to the forest; yes, with tim.
 and yet, the other day i said i’d stop. why, i must stop; i’ve
 signed articles for partnership. hardly know what to do; wish some one
 would tell me. wonder whether the parson would. i’ll ask him.”
 mat! mat; heretofore your strongest point amongst men—amongst dangers
 by flood and field—has been self-reliance and presence of mind; now
 you do not even seem to know your own mind. have patience! try to
 live these thoughts, these trifles, down, as you have before overcome
 great and serious troubles.
 annie had watered her plants, and returning homewards, thought that
 she would leave her empty pails outside mat’s door; but when she
 arrived there, late in the evening, she found the door wide open,
 papers and accounts being blown about by the wind, whilst a candle was
 dimly burning in a sheltered corner of the room.
 seeing that the apartment was unoccupied, she
  stepped in to blow out
 the candle, when her eye lit upon the old book, “robinson crusoe,”
 which mat had once before shown her, and, taking it up, she made
 out on the fly-leaf, written in barely legible round-hand, “from
 miss bell to m. s.,” then the word “forest;” but all the rest was
 nearly obliterated. pinned on to the same page was a fresh sprig of
 stephanotis.
 she was still examining the old volume when an approaching step caused
 her to shut it hastily, and blow out the candle, so that she might
 escape unseen; when, turning to leave the room, she found herself
 seized and held by a strong pair of arms.
 “let me go! who are you?” she cried, on finding herself thus suddenly
 captured.
 “oh! miss annie, i beg you ten thousand pardons!” said the deep voice
 of mat. “i thought i had caught some one pilfering in my room.”
 “you, mat! oh, how relieved i am! i thought i was being carried off
 again by bushrangers. yes, i was pilfering, or, rather, looking
 at your old books; but i went in to blow out the light. you have no
 business to leave a candle burning in such a dangerous position.”
 “i’m very sorry, miss annie; but i was star-gazing—and—thinking—and
 forgot.”
 “well, and what were you thinking of so deeply, when the whole place
 might have been in a blaze through your carelessness?”
“i—i cannot tell you.”
 “but you must, and you shall, mat. come! i know. you thought that
 mr. fulrake should have taken his turn carrying the water for me.”
 “oh, no! no! let me always wait upon you! i want no help. and
 oh! won’t you take my arm, instead of his, next time in going up the
 steps, or anywhere. indeed, i’ll take you safely.”
 “why, mat, what has come over you? mr. fulrake merely repeated the
 formality of taking me in to dinner, and that was only once. i’m sure
 i would always rather you did come with me and carry my buckets, for
 mr. fulrake was dreadfully clumsy, upsetting the water everywhere, and
 quite rude when i laughed at him; and—”
 “was he?” broke in mat, with sudden anger; “then i’ll have him out,
 and—”
“stop, mat! where are you going?”
 “going? why, any one that is rude to you—” and mat was making off when
 annie seized him by the arm.
 “listen to me! mr. fulrake was not insultingly rude. i merely meant
 that he answered me rather shortly when i laughed at his wetting his
 grand shoes.”
 mat, who was secretly pleased to find that fulrake had been sent to
 the rightabout by annie, now said,—
 “that is different. i will tell you what i was thinking of. of going
 back to the old country.”
 “what! leaving us, after you said you would stay? leaving all your
 friends?”
“would you be very sorry if i did go, miss annie?”
“yes, i should be very sorry indeed.”
 “then forgive me for appearing so shifty. i expect that i got rather
 stupid trying to understand accounts and figures, and such things, in
 those papers;” and mat pointed to a pile of documents which littered
 one of the tables near him, and which he had attempted to study after
 his visit to the stockyard, but had given up the attempt, and strolled
 into the night air to think of annie.
 “and now,” said annie, with a smile, “i must go in, so you may give me
 an arm up the verandah steps.”
 one conclusion which mat arrived at after the foregoing conversation
 was that he would still consult the parson on the morrow. the
 clergyman had on more than one occasion given him good, hearty advice,
 and he therefore again sought him.
 parson tabor was engaged writing when mat walked into his room, but
 he got up with a smile of welcome and motioned him to a seat, saying,
 “you look rather fagged, mat; not slept well?”
 “no, i have not, mr. tabor, and i have come to you, as i have come
 before, when i am bothered, and want to do the right thing. i will
 tell you straight. yesterday—last night—i made up my mind to go
  home,
 and never come out here again; but, after that i met miss bell, and
 she said she would be sorry if i went home—and—and—”
 “i see it all,” gently interrupted tabor, “and i have seen it all
 for some time. but before any more is said, i’ll tell you what is
 right—to go and talk to the squire—i know that you have not said
 anything to him—and mrs. bell, and then, if you like, you can come
 to me; but i will not be the first to interfere in these affairs.”
 “but i do not know what to say to them. i daren’t say it, mr. tabor;
 that’s why i have come to you.”
 “mat, you are not a nervous man; go!” and with gentle force tabor
 pushed him out of the door.
 our forester knew, at all events, that he had received good advice,
 and he acted upon it there and then. knocking at the door of bell’s
 study-smoking-room, a cheery voice bade him enter, and he found the
 squire at his accounts.
 “just in good time, mat,” he said, looking up for an instant, “to go
 through the ‘muster’ book. here, partner, sit down,” he added, with a
 laugh, “roll up your sleeves, light a pipe, and to work.”
“squire, i’ll smoke afterwards, but i want to talk seriously first.”
“what’s up now, mat. drive on. must be very bad, you look so solemn.”
 “and ’tis very bad, squire; and i feel very bad
  about it. i’m—i’m in
 love with your daughter, and i can’t help it. there, it’s out!”
 “mat, you surprise me,” said bell, turning round in his chair; “but
 say on.”
 now that the ice was broken our hero took courage, and made quite a
 speech, for him; telling bell that he had liked his daughter when
 she was a little girl in the forest, that he had never forgotten her
 during his long years of wild life in the north, and that now that he
 had met her again as a grown-up woman he loved her.
 “men say in books that i have read, squire,” continued our forester,
 “‘i am not worthy of her.’ and i say truly that i am not, neither
 by birth, manners, nor education.”
“has my daughter given you any encouragement?”
“no,” replied mat; “but i do not think that miss annie dislikes me.”
the squire mused.
 “i will talk to mrs. bell about it,” he at length said. “i will give
 no opinion now; but this must not prevent your helping me in the
 station-books, so sit down.”
 but when the squire afterwards sought his wife and made her acquainted
 with mat’s feelings, she expressed herself as being highly indignant
 at the very idea.
 “look,” she said, “at the grand chances all through this season
 that annie will have of making a really
  good match. you know how
 she has been admired at every ball, party, and picnic that she has
 been to. why, quite lately there’s that young lord roulette, who
 ’asn’t been out long in the colonies; he seeks out annie at every
 reception she goes to; and i know he’ll be a millionaire. then there’s
 the governor’s nephew. see how well she might do with any of these
 eligible ‘parrties.’”
 mrs. bell took care to keep inside the english language whilst
 pronouncing this word, but she could not forbear a slight roll with
 her tongue on the r’s.
 “on the other hand, my dear, though stanley is a fine fellow, and
 has saved annie’s life, we must think of her future. fancy being
 introduced to mat’s people; to their tents and caravans. when you
 mixed with those people—”
 but bell stopped his wife; he knew of old that this was only the
 commencement of a long, wordy harangue, which would develop into a
 lecture upon his own many supposed shortcomings and slights, from
 which she had suffered in former times. thus the argument would become
 purely personal; so he said shortly,—
 “enough. it’s no good further discussing the question until annie
 gives us a bit of her mind; so we’ll drop it.”
 bell walked away, and thought, weakly enough, that he had had the last
 word. but his wife called after him,—
“i forbid mat to speak on the subject to annie.”
 the next time the squire saw mat he told him of the interview that he
 had had with mrs. bell, and of her reasons for opposing an engagement
 between mat and his daughter.
 “she says she forbids you to speak on the subject to annie. but one
 thing i’ll tell you, my boy,” said bell, in conclusion, “i have
 generally noticed that these things right themselves; so keep up a
 good heart.”
 mat replied, “i have often thought of what mrs. bell has now
 mentioned, and as i expected that that would be her argument, i have
 been thinking the matter over deeply since i spoke to you. i would
 not for the world stand in the way of miss annie’s future prospects,
 therefore, i propose this: dromoora and terebare have told me several
 times lately that they would like to return to their country. i will
 take them there, and return here. the journey there and back will take
 weeks—months. during that time miss annie will have opportunities of
 seeing a great number of families and people in sydney, and will have
 a lot of gaiety and pleasure, which she deserves. i will not say a
 word on the subject to her now, but when i return, why perhaps i
 may.”
 “mat, my lad,” said the squire, “your sentiments are noble ones, and
 worthy of your nature. we will now let events work themselves out.”
 our forester occupied himself for the next day or
  two in getting
 tim’s traps packed and settling his brother’s affairs and his own
 generally with the squire. the wound in his brother’s side had healed
 outwardly, though he could feel the bullet within him every now and
 then. still, he was able to get about now unassisted, and was anxious
 to be off, in a ship which sailed shortly.
and how had our new chum, the honourable lionel, been “shaping”?
 he certainly showed no aptitude for bush-life or work, and said as
 much. the solitude of the station did not suit him, and, though he
 accompanied the others on horseback once or twice on the run, and
 proved a good rider, yet he never could be induced to take any active
 part in station matters. as tom said,—
 “he shot a kangaroo one day, and that’s all he’s done, and all he
 wants to.”
 so it was with a feeling of relief to fulrake that tom asked him one
 day whether he would like to go to sydney with him. he gladly accepted
 the proposal, adding,—
 “yes, and i have heard of a good kangaroo hound there i would like to
 buy.”
 an event occurred during this visit to the town which greatly raised
 him in tom’s estimation.
 after tom had transacted his business in sydney, and fulrake had
 purchased his hound, the two young men were crossing a ferry in the
 harbour, when the man who was rowing them made a rough remark to
 fulrake, and asked him what he was going to pay for the cur he had
 with him, for that he interfered with the balance of his boat.
 fulrake, who was dressed with his usual care, and was lying back in
 the stern-sheets, smoking, blew a cloud of smoke out of his mouth, and
 languidly raising himself half up, shifted his big hound, and then
 resumed his former position, without troubling himself even to look at
 the abusive rower. the calm disdain with which he was treated seemed
 to put the man into a fury, as with many oaths he recommenced his
 abuse, saying,—
 “just like you blank loafing new-chum swells, don’t want to pay for
 him, i suppose? i’ve half a mind to pitch yer cur overboard.”
 “if you do,” replied fulrake, with a quiet wink at tom, “i should most
 certainly pitch you after him my man!”
 this answer considerably astonished the ferryman as well as tom, as
 they glanced at the small, spare figure of the new chum. and yet
 the man did not seem to have any intention of putting his threat
 into execution. he seemed to forget the dog; but, staring rudely at
 fulrake, and rowing with all his might, he thundered,—
“wait till i get ashore, my young bloke!”
 “exactly what i’m going to do,” replied fulrake, with a calm smile, as
 he blew a huge cloud of tobacco out of his nostrils.
 the ferryman made one mistake; for when the boat reached land he
 jumped out to fasten her to her usual moorings—a tree some way up
 the bank. this gave fulrake the opportunity he had foreseen. all his
 apparent languor disappeared as he sprang ashore with the ability of a
 cat, and before the rower had completed the fastening of the boat, he
 had given tom the hound to hold, and taken off a pair of well-fitting
 kid gloves. he then addressed the ferryman in a tone that sounded
 almost tender, and certainly was quite touching in its plaintiveness,—
 “you told me just now, in a rough and uncivil manner, that the dog
 was interfering with the balance of your boat. i caused the animal to
 shift his position. you then called me a blank new chum, and applied
 the same epithet to the cur. i think i shall presently show you
 which is the real cur; but, firstly, perhaps you think that that
 vulgar word which your low class use on every possible occasion is an
 oath: it is merely the corruption of an old expression.”
 the man he was addressing had never been appealed to in this kind and
 gentle manner before, and stood listening with open mouth, which,
 however, he closed as fulrake continued,—
 “secondly, and what was more important, you called me new chum.
 as a matter of fact, this is true; but at all events, i paid my
 passage out, and, judging by your dirty scrub of a head, i should
 unhesitatingly put you down as a blackguard of a remarkably low
  type;
 what you are pleased to call out here a ‘lag’—an old hand—but which i
 prefer to put into new chum language as a convict, sent out at the
 expense of the country, and i should judge, in your especial case, for
 kicking some defenceless creature to death. i have no doubt, if you
 ever fought, you would fight like the cur that you are.”
 the ruffian before him evidently could not get the meaning of
 fulrake’s calmly delivered sermon into his thick head at first, but
 towards the end of it a full sense of the words dawned on his heavy
 mind, and when he heard the concluding words, coupled with immoderate
 laughter of tom, he broke out into a volley of furious oaths, and
 seizing a huge stone which lay at his feet, hurled it with terrific
 force at fulrake’s head. the latter, quite prepared for this, never
 shifted his ground, but simply throwing his head to one side with a
 professional movement, the well-aimed missile flew harmlessly by.
 “i thought so,” said our new chum, “you’re too big a coward even to
 fight fair. who is the cur now?”
 this last taunt brought on his adversary, livid with rage, and,
 sparring with both arms in the air, he tried to deliver a round-handed
 blow on the new chum’s head. if that blow had got home, the little
 white-haired man would have gone down, probably never to rise again.
 but the boatman did not know that he had to deal
  with the “spider,”
 for such was the name that his insignificant-looking antagonist went
 by in london, and in his own county, where he was well known to both
 friends and foes by his extreme agility, clever defence, and the
 punishing power of his fists, and by the cool and indomitable pluck
 he showed when facing heavy odds.
 the round-hander that was intended to smash our spider, went, like
 its forerunner the rock, harmlessly over his head, fended off and
 upwards by his left arm, whilst with his right he countered his man
 full in the mouth, sending him down with a crash which would have had
 a stunning effect had not the oarsman lit in the ooze which lined the
 bank.
 this gave the spider time to get his wind, which, owing to his want of
 exercise of late, was none of the best, as he remarked to tom,—
 “bit breezy inside, long sea voyage against training; but we’re
 getting on, eh?”
“my word you are,” was tom’s answer; “you did get on; gave him fits.”
 “round two,” cried the spider, as the boatman, after rinsing his mouth
 in the salt water, prepared to renew the combat.
 this time the ferryman, looking more nasty than ever, and covered with
 blood, came at fulrake literally like a bull, as with head down he
 tried to butt the little man off his legs.
 the spider met this charge with a terrific left-hander,
 which he
 intended for his adversary’s face, but which, owing to the man’s
 dropping his head so low, struck on the top of his skull; this he
 followed with a smart delivery from his right, which landed on the
 ferryman’s jaw as he staggered from the first blow, and down he went
 again, this time rolling under the bows of his own boat; and there he
 lay still.
 but tom thought it time to interfere, so stepped up to the man and
 asked him if he had had enough.
 the boatman looked up in a dazed way, hardly able to articulate, his
 mouth being full of ooze and blood.
 “enough!” he said; “i’ve got too much! is he gone? all my front
 teeth are driven in, and i believe my jaw is broken!” then, getting
 slowly up, he approached his lips close to tom, and said, in a
 confidential whisper, “that young’un hits like a kick from a bullock!”
thereupon tom told his friend that the man had had enough of it.
 “as a matter of fact,” replied the spider, “so have i.” at the
 same time showing tom his left hand. “i’m not used to hitting my
 fists against the top of a thick skull like that. it has, i think,
 driven one of the knuckles in.” saying which, the spider lit another
 cigarette, went up to his late antagonist, and putting a sovereign
 into his hand, said, “there, my man, that will pay the boat and help
 to straighten you up; only don’t do it again, don’t you know.”
 “no, i won’t,” said the fellow, “leastways, i won’t fight with you
 again, if that’s what you mean.” then, as he spit on the gold in his
 hand, he added, “you’re a gentleman, though you be a new chum.”
 “well, you have a nerve,” said tom, as they walked away; “and how
 you kept your temper in the boat i can’t understand.”
 “very simple to understand, tom: if there had been a row in the boat,
 she might have capsized, and i can’t swim. i guessed rightly he
 wouldn’t chuck the dog overboard; i’d have had him as he seized it.”
 but to station life fulrake never would take. as tom said to the
 squire a few days after the fight just recorded,—
 “the little chap has tremendous pluck and nerve, but he is such a
 lazy fellow, and so full of fads about his grub and everything.”
 and fulrake, alias the “spider,” soon after quitted the country,
 taking passage in the same ship with tim and jumper, for the old dog
 was getting very feeble, and his master was much delighted when the
 captain of the ship told him that he might take him with him.
 tim arrived in the new forest in due course, and wrote a letter to
 his brother, which reached him many months afterwards, telling him of
 their parents, who though much aged were still hearty; of their sister
 (who had long been married, as they were
  aware); and he ended a long
 letter of forest news by saying that fulrake had tended him during the
 voyage like his own brother, and had looked after the old dog too.
and so the “spider” disappears from the scene of our story.
 our hero visits the old waigonda country once more—the overlanding—the
 golden gully—the last sight of dromoora.
our hero, having seen his twin brother comfortably off, and well
 provided for by the liberality of the squire, decided to start at once
 with dromoora and terebare to the northern wild country, the land of
 the waigonda tribe.
 tom had often expressed a wish to accompany him, whenever he made up
 his mind to go, and mat gladly accepted his offer now that he was
 actually organizing the little expedition. the squire said that he
 would get an extra hand or two to help him during the absence of “his
 boys,” and remarked how glad he was that there were at least two
 white men for such a long “overlanding.”
 so they started—a party of six—for two of the station blacks joined
 the little band; these were partly to aid in looking after two extra
 pack-horses, which were laden with useful and handsome articles
 destined for the waigondas, and chosen by the chief
  and his wife.
 there was no occasion to take a buggy this time, for our natives had
 learnt to ride during their life at bulinda creek: besides this,
 a wheeled vehicle would have been utterly useless in the wilder
 districts.
 on the last evening of their stay at the creek mat had bidden farewell
 to annie in her little garden, whither they had resorted to water the
 plants as usual, he had also requested her to take charge of his old
 book for him, saying that instead of taking that with him on his
 journey, he had a great favour to ask of her, namely, to give him a
 little lock of her hair that he might carry it with him.
 before annie could open her lips to reply to this request, mrs. bell
 came running out of the house which the two were approaching, and,
 calling sharply to her daughter, said,—
 “come, it’s nigh time for you to be a-bed, you’re always about that
 garden now.”
annie laughed and went in, and mat saw her no more that night.
 the next morning when the family were collected on the verandah to see
 the little party of adventurers off, annie stole softly up to mat,
 placing a tiny paper packet in his hand. our hero grasped it, and the
 hand that held it, and whispered,—
“i can go through anything now, annie.”
 and when shortly afterwards he turned from the “apple-tree” ridge,
 to have a last look at the station,
  so he informed tom, he saw
 a little white handkerchief being waved from her corner of the
 verandah, and our forester went on his way rejoicing.
 mat had kept to his promise of not speaking to annie of the one
 absorbing thought that lay deep in his manly bosom; he had reasoned
 this matter so far out that he had concluded that it was best to
 take this overland trip, away from her sweet presence, away from the
 constant round of station-work. during the long days and nights in the
 silent bush he could commune with himself.
 besides, mat was aware that there was always a certain amount of
 danger amongst the districts whither he was bound; and, again, there
 was a double feeling of honour, so to speak, in his conduct, he had
 given his promise to annie’s parents, and he knew that she would have
 the opportunities of attending many gay parties during his absence, so
 that, reasoned mat, “she will see plenty of other men besides me. at
 all events, it shall never be said by others that i stood in her way.”
 mrs. bell had noticed the little farewell tribute which annie had
 given mat, and determined to “have it out” with her daughter, who
 was still earnestly gazing at the distant cloud of dust made by the
 receding horsemen.
 “annie, come here,” called mrs. bell, but annie took no notice of this
 appeal beyond saying,—
“in a moment, when they are out of sight.”
 “yes, but they are out of sight, besides tom will be back in a few
 months.”
 “tom!” replied annie in a tone which implied that he did not enter
 into the subject of her thoughts; “yes, i suppose they will come back;
 but how i wish we could write to them, or they to us; it’s a dangerous
 journey, mother, many have told me so.”
 annie had been correctly informed, for in the enormous stretch of
 country between bulinda creek and the scene of mat’s shipwreck, many
 events had taken place, and though around the waigonda country the
 natives had not been disturbed, yet south of that many collisions had
 taken place between the white and the black man; much country had been
 taken up; the new settlers had had their cattle speared, and even
 one or two of the camps of these white men had been destroyed, and
 themselves murdered. it was a very old story, which had been often
 repeated, as new colonies were taken up, from south to north of the
 entire continent. the black man looked upon any one, whether black or
 white in colour, who encroached upon his territory, as an enemy, and
 dealt with him accordingly, and the white man avenged the murders of
 his countrymen by shooting the natives.
 when mrs. bell saw that her daughter was really grieved, and that her
 last words were spoken in a choking tone, she said,—
 “they can’t write, dear, of course, there’s no post up there, but we
 will try to forget for the time; and
  you will have plenty to amuse
 you, i’m sure. just think of the engagements we have; why, as you
 know, i’ve a tray full of minor invitations. then, look at the
 grander ones; there’s—where shall i begin? let me see; first, the trip
 to the ‘heads’ with the governor in his special steamer; his nephew,
 of course, will be there, that will be a picnic; then there’s
 another grand picnic at ‘rose bay’ with the gilletts—lord roulette
 is a great friend of theirs, you know—‘manly beach’ afterwards, and a
 ball at—”
 “oh; yes, i know,” interrupted annie impatiently, “how you can
 remember it all i can’t think, i’m tired of all those people and
 places, and prefer home life, riding with my father and—my garden.”
 “that garden again! why, i declare you have gone gardening mad, annie,
 at least lately you have; since mat has been interfering in it you
 have thought of nothing but flower-raising.”
 “perhaps now he has made it tidier i take more interest in it,”
 replied her daughter, and feeling that she was reddening slightly
 under the solid stare of her mother, added, “and i’m going there now
 to put in some seeds.” and so escaped further questions for the time.
 matters were dreary enough at the station now. bell without “his
 boys;” annie having no one to confide in, for she saw plainly that in
 one sense, in her sense, mat was not now in her mother’s good graces.
 parson tabor was the only one to cheer up the spirits of the little
 party.
 as an outsider, he had for some time been conversant with the feelings
 of all parties, and though he had so far been made a confidant of
 mat’s secret, that he guessed the state of our hero’s feelings, yet
 he followed his fast rule of making it no business of his, unless
 specially appealed to by the elders. yet somehow he was always taking
 mat’s part when the conversation happened to bring in his name, or
 touch upon the absent ones, and it was wonderful to see how both bell
 and his daughter brightened up on hearing the good man speak in this
 strain.
 annie had always been fond of horses, and was an accomplished
 horsewoman, and to help pass the days, which seemed long to her now,
 she took regular rides with her father.
 she, mounted on her favourite, robin hood, which mat had broken in as
 a colt, and left behind for her special use; and bell bestriding his
 own especial fancy, a confidential weight-carrier, sure and steady.
 upon one of these occasions, it chanced that father and daughter had
 ridden many miles around the run, and, approaching home again, came
 across one of the numerous small lagoons which lay to the north of the
 station.
 the day had been intensely hot, scarcely a breath of wind moved the
 leaves of the stately eucalypti,
  but over this lagoon hung a group of
 the drooping myall, affording such shade that the squire proposed to
 dismount and rest themselves and their horses.
 bell, having found a comfortable resting-place, lit a pipe, stretched
 himself out and prepared for a rest, or, as he called it, a “bange.”
 he had not taken many puffs at his pipe when, turning his head, he
 found annie busy with her sketching-block, a tiny one, which she
 carried in the pouch of her saddle.
 “why, annie, what on earth are you going to sketch here?” said he.
 “not that old scaly moreton bay ash on the opposite bank, surely?”
 “no, father, you know i cannot sketch; but i am going to try and
 draw robin hood as he crops the grass there, and, if it is anything
 like, send it to mat.”
“why, you foolish little thing, there’s no post to where mat has gone!”
“then i will keep it until he returns, and give it him then.”
 “i suspect, my girl, that you are keeping that little heart of yours
 until he returns.”
 the colour mounted into annie’s face as she heard these words from the
 squire’s lips, and, hastily putting down the drawing materials, and
 gazing with wide-open appealing eyes at her parent, she exclaimed,—
 “father, my good daddy, why did you say that? would you be very,
 very angry?”
 “there, lassie, don’t cry!” said bell. “it has been my earnest wish
 for many a day; and when mat spoke—i mean i am getting old, and long
 have i hoped that you would be wedded to one of the most honest,
 upright, and, by jove! manly fellows i have ever met.”
 “you have made me so happy,” whispered annie, who had now thrown
 herself into her father’s arms and was silently weeping on his neck.
 “i knew that you would not be against me, nor against him.”
 “there, my dear,” said the squire, as he gently disengaged himself
 from her embrace. “let us keep this to ourselves until that young
 rover returns home.”
“i must kiss your dear, kind old face again, dad.”
 “that will do, lassie,” laughed bell, as he submitted to half a dozen
 little smacks administered in quick succession over his rugged face.
 “go on with your drawing, and let me smoke in peace.”
 “i cannot finish it now, father; let us go home!” and annie packed up
 her drawing materials and called robin.
 the noble beast threw up his head from the grass that he was cropping,
 fixed his great, calm eye upon his mistress, and then, walking
 solemnly up, commenced “nuzzling” his nose into her hand.
 “why, how you must have petted the rascal!” said the squire, who had
 watched these proceedings with an amused smile.
 “yes, i often stroke his head, and kiss that pink
  spot on his soft,
 velvety nose; but i expect that his affection is all cupboard love,
 for, you see, he is sniffing about for the bread and salt which i am
 in the habit of giving him.”
 as soon as the squire had finished his smoke he mounted annie on to
 her horse, when she said, “now, dad, i must have a good gallop,” and,
 without waiting to see if her father was in the saddle, she spoke to
 robin, who no sooner found that his head was directed towards the
 creek than he flew homewards as hard as he could gallop.
 together girl and horse cleared the home-paddock fence, and pulled
 up breathless at the verandah, followed a few minutes later by the
 squire, who remarked,—
 “i never saw you go like that, annie; i really cannot keep up with you
 another time. i hope that you enjoyed your ride!”
 “father, i shall never forget it!” said our heroine, as she flew up
 the steps to her own room.
 from this period both annie and her father seemed to find the time
 pass more quickly and cheerfully. a “something” had been removed
 between them which caused her to seek her father’s companionship for
 a daily ride with eagerness, whilst most of the evenings she devoted
 to her garden; and the squire, when he could find the time, wended
 his way to sydney on business connected with the station, and matters
 concerning the publication of our forester’s
  journal or narrative,
 which annie had finished reading with great delight.
 we must now follow our hero and his little party on their trip
 northwards.
 before starting, mat had pointed out to tom, on an outline map, his
 proposed route as near as he could guess. placing his finger on a spot
 high up on the north-eastern coast, he said,—
 “i should fancy the wreck took place within fifty miles of this line,
 which, you see, is marked seventeenth degree of south latitude. it
 must be a good bit over eight hundred miles from here the way that we
 shall have to go; but, by hitting off moreton bay, we can surely find
 a vessel which will carry us and our horses some way north, and so
 give us a rest.”
 at first, after leaving the creek, they pursued their way through the
 more settled districts for some weeks, sleeping either at stations or
 camping out, as time or fancy suited, and, reaching brisbane, were
 lucky enough to find a schooner there, which they hired, the captain
 of the boat saying that he knew the northern coast up to a certain
 point, and so far he would take them.
 on the evening of the sixth day the skipper anchored at the mouth of
 a fair-sized river, and declared that he could not risk his vessel
 further, so our party reached the shore, when the tide was suitable,
 by swimming their horses; their food, ammunition, and fancy articles
 being taken in the ship’s boat.
 they found, upon coming ashore, that they had landed amidst dense
 mangrove-swamps, and for many hours had to cut their way through these
 scrubs, until they at last emerged into higher ground, which consisted
 of palm-tree scrubs, with a thick undergrowth of vines and rattan-cane.
 the difficulty of getting their horses through this wilderness of
 trees was enormous, and when at length a suitable spot was found, they
 determined to rest a whole day to recruit themselves and their tired
 animals, and to repair the packs which carried their goods.
 they, however, found time for hunting and fishing as well, and tom
 said that it was the most sporting district that he had ever been into.
 they caught numbers of fish—eels, bream, and a species of perch which
 ran up to twenty pounds’ weight and more, as far as they could guess.
 in the palm-scrubs were quantities of scrub-turkeys, and another
 smaller species of bird somewhat resembling the domestic fowl, and, as
 they had no lack of powder, the camp was well supplied.
 this river reminded mat and the chief of the one they had crossed on
 their way south which was so full of crocodiles, but they saw none of
 these reptiles which fact dromoora explained by saying that they did
 not often frequent mouths of rivers so near to the salt water.
 but delightful as this camp proved, mat was anxious to push on; so,
 after having enjoyed a thoroughly
  good spell, they crossed the river,
 and then kept a north-westerly direction, hugging the coast-line as
 much as the great mangrove scrubs and swamps would allow.
 three of our party being perfect scouts, and all being good bushmen,
 they were enabled to avoid anything like a near approach to strange
 natives, as they agreed that a collision with them would be most
 disastrous to all concerned.
 at length, after many weeks of monotonous travelling, and after
 following a large river almost to its source, they entered on to a
 large salt-bush plain, which was bounded on the horizon by a range of
 hills terminating in a solitary mountain.
 as soon as the big mountain was sighted the chief and his wife broke
 into a corroboree of joy, and mat was as delighted as his two friends
 at seeing the termination of their journey within sight, for this
 mountain was situated in the waigonda country. it was long before this
 range of hills, which had appeared comparatively near, was reached;
 but when they at length found themselves in their own country,
 mat and his two friends went forward, the others forming a camp and
 guarding the horses, for our natives knew that they could never
 approach their tribe on these terrible-looking animals.
 the first members of the tribe who appeared to them were a party of
 jins digging yams, who no sooner saw them than they fled in terror.
 but dromoora said, “do not attempt to stop them! they will go home:”
 which sure enough they did, for, following up their trail, our party
 of three found themselves within sight of a cluster of black fellows,
 all gazing towards the supposed danger.
 dromoora then gave a peculiar call known to his tribe, upon hearing
 which all those who were in the waigonda camp sprang forth to welcome
 their long-absent friends, and with joyous shouts escorted them to
 their fires.
 messengers were then despatched to bring in all the blacks who were
 out hunting, whilst terebare brought up tom, and introduced him and
 the bulinda creek natives.
 when all were assembled, the usual feasting, dancing, and corroboree
 were gone through, and after dromoora and mat had detailed all their
 adventures to numerous knots of natives, mat left the chief to give
 his impressions of the white man and his wonderful ways, whilst he
 superintended the unpacking of the pack-horses, having first assured
 his friends that the big “kangaroos” would not injure them; they were,
 however, hardly satisfied about this until, their chief being free
 from his numerous questioners, they prevailed upon him to mount one of
 the terrible “kangaroos.” when, however, they saw him sitting in the
 saddle, their fears gave way to immoderate laughter, and every man,
 woman, and child was brought up to see their beloved chief in such a
 novel position.
 mat, during this spectacle, was engaged counting over the presents, or
 “spoil” as he called it, to see that nothing was broken, and beyond
 the fact that one or two of the numerous mirrors were cracked, he
 found nothing damaged, calling to dromoora in the midst of his task,
 he said,—
 “i told the waigondas long ago that there should be only one gun, or
 “teegoora” amongst them, but you have brought two besides the one i
 gave you.”
 “yes, oh, white chief,” answered dromoora, “but i got these two
 fighting: i never wished to tell you how, but i will now. i killed
 those two white men, who would have killed you when you were fighting
 the robber.”
 “then,” said mat, “keep them, but never use them to kill white or
 black men with, but only to shoot game.”
 “i promise,” returned dromoora, “i will only use them against men in
 defence of our lives.”
 leaving the chief and his wife to distribute the much-prized presents,
 mat and tom mounted their horses, took a few provisions and tools,
 and started on a visit to the “golden gully.” our forester taking
 a straight line to the place, they soon reached the valley, and
 proceeded to work.
 tom, who had previously had some experience on diggings, after working
 for some hours in the dry watercourse, called his companion, and said,
 “i have found these few small nuggets, and there is gold, i
  expect,
 in this sand, and you have some too, i see,” as mat produced a few
 nuggets also, “but this i’m pretty sure is ‘a poor man’s diggings.’ i
 will tell you what i mean; you would have to take all this sand and
 shingle away to the nearest water, and wash it in a ‘cradle,’ and
 even then the gold would not last long, for here is where the real
 quantity of the ore is, in these rocks of hard white quartz, up the
 creek.”
 then taking mat to the spot, he explained that this gold-bearing
 quartz which was rich in veins of ore, might be almost endless.
 “but then, you see,” he continued, “this part where all the gold
 is, is not ‘a poor man’s diggings;’ to win this gold means erecting
 machinery, costing thousands of pounds, on the spot; and what would it
 cost even if it were possible to land it on the coast, to transport it
 hither? it cannot be done, mat; some future day, when the country is
 opened up, there is no doubt that it will be done; but we can’t do
 it, mate.”
 mat saw the truth of tom’s argument, and at once agreed to take what
 they could find, but not to waste any more time there, adding, “no
 doubt tim and i got most of the loose gold, excepting the small stuff
 which could only be found by using the cradle and water as you say.”
 upon their return to the camp, they found the whole tribe laughing and
 dancing round their “toys,” axes, large and small, beads, and gaudy
 handkerchiefs.
 the whole of the “spoil” was taken out every morning
 to be examined, and fresh wonders were discovered in the treasures
 every moment. dromoora had had to explain the secret powers of the
 thunder-sticks till he was tired.
 mat returned for a few days to his wild, savage life, chiefly to show
 tom the various methods employed in hunting the game, as pursued by
 really wild blacks, and tom took such a fancy to the life, that he
 wished to stay on for some weeks, but mat insisted that they had
 already stayed long enough, that it would not be fair to the squire to
 delay, as station matters required their presence at the creek, and
 that they really must not leave the ladies any longer by themselves.
 to which tom replied that his mother and sister were perfectly well
 able to take care of themselves, and besides that they had the squire
 and parson to look after them.
 dromoora and his tribe, upon hearing mat’s decision to return
 immediately, implored him to remain and be their chief.
 to refuse this request, when he saw their urgent appeals, went to
 mat’s heart, but he was obliged to harden his feelings, and also to
 show some diplomacy in refusing them.
 but mat had a powerful and steadfast friend in dromoora, with whom he
 had been conferring apart, and when the tribe gathered round him to
 hear his decision, he thus addressed them,—
 “i have brought your chief and terebare back safely. i have brought
 the things i promised. now i ask you to let me go back; there are bad
 white men about my friends at home. the chief will tell.”
 mat had told dromoora, of what that chief was well aware, that
 though the gang of the bushranger was broken up, that some of them
 had escaped over the border into victoria, and though it was not
 likely that they would return into new south wales, yet it was always
 possible; but he had not told dromoora many other things, which the
 faithful chief took upon himself to explain to the assembled tribe,
 for, after giving a rapturous account of mat’s doings in general, and
 a specially detailed account of the gallant fight with magan, the
 whole scene of which he acted to the life, and to the death, by making
 another black fellow personate the bushranger, he concluded,—
 “our white chief, who won the white girl in a hard and fair fight,
 claims that he should be rewarded by taking her as his wife to his
 ‘gunyah.’”
 this speech was received with loud bursts of pleasure, mingled with
 cries of “such would be the reward of a black warrior; such shall be
 the reward of the white chief.”
 tom, to whom this language was greek, asked mat to interpret it,
 and the meaning of the shouts, which our hero very conveniently and
 truthfully did,
 by telling him that they were making a great deal too
 much of his fight with magan. “but then, you see, they do love a good
 fight.”
 so the waigondas agreed that mat should start whenever he felt so
