 night ringing people’s bells while they are peacefully asleep.
 after a minute or two, the same voice cried:
 “get under the window and hold out your hat!”
 pinocchio had no hat, but he managed to get under the window just in time
 to feel a shower of ice-cold water pour down on his poor wooden head, his
 shoulders, and over his whole body.
 he returned home as wet as a rag, and tired out from weariness and hunger.
 as he no longer had any strength left with which to stand, he sat down on
 a little stool and put his two feet on the stove to dry them.
 there he fell asleep, and while he slept, his wooden feet began to burn.
 slowly, very slowly, they blackened and turned to ashes.
 pinocchio snored away happily as if his feet were not his own. at dawn he
 opened his eyes just as a loud knocking sounded at the door.
 “who is it?” he called, yawning and rubbing his eyes.
 “it is i,” answered a voice.
 it was the voice of geppetto.
 geppetto returns home and gives his own breakfast to the marionette
 the poor marionette, who was still half asleep, had not yet found out that
 his two feet were burned and gone. as soon as he heard his father’s voice,
 he jumped up from his seat to open the door, but, as he did so, he
 staggered and fell headlong to the floor.
 in falling, he made as much noise as a sack of wood falling from the fifth
 story of a house.
 “open the door for me!” geppetto shouted from the street.
 “father, dear father, i can’t,” answered the marionette in despair, crying
 and rolling on the floor.
 “why can’t you?”
 “because someone has eaten my feet.”
 “and who has eaten them?”
 “the cat,” answered pinocchio, seeing that little animal busily playing
 with some shavings in the corner of the room.
 “open! i say,” repeated geppetto, “or i’ll give you a sound whipping when
 i get in.”
 “father, believe me, i can’t stand up. oh, dear! oh, dear! i shall have to
 walk on my knees all my life.”
 geppetto, thinking that all these tears and cries were only other pranks
 of the marionette, climbed up the side of the house and went in through
 the window.
 at first he was very angry, but on seeing pinocchio stretched out on the
 floor and really without feet, he felt very sad and sorrowful. picking him
 up from the floor, he fondled and caressed him, talking to him while the
 tears ran down his cheeks:
 “my little pinocchio, my dear little pinocchio! how did you burn your
 feet?”
 “i don’t know, father, but believe me, the night has been a terrible one
 and i shall remember it as long as i live. the thunder was so noisy and
 the lightning so bright—and i was hungry. and then the talking
 cricket said to me, ‘you deserve it; you were bad;’ and i said to him,
 ‘careful, cricket;’ and he said to me, ‘you are a marionette and you have
 a wooden head;’ and i threw the hammer at him and killed him. it was his
 own fault, for i didn’t want to kill him. and i put the pan on the coals,
 but the chick flew away and said, ‘i’ll see you again! remember me to the
 family.’ and my hunger grew, and i went out, and the old man with a
 nightcap looked out of the window and threw water on me, and i came home
 and put my feet on the stove to dry them because i was still hungry, and i
 fell asleep and now my feet are gone but my hunger isn’t! oh!—oh!—oh!”
 and poor pinocchio began to scream and cry so loudly that he could be
 heard for miles around.
 geppetto, who had understood nothing of all that jumbled talk, except that
 the marionette was hungry, felt sorry for him, and pulling three pears out
 of his pocket, offered them to him, saying:
 “these three pears were for my breakfast, but i give them to you gladly.
 eat them and stop weeping.”
 “if you want me to eat them, please peel them for me.”
 “peel them?” asked geppetto, very much surprised. “i should never have
 thought, dear boy of mine, that you were so dainty and fussy about your
 food. bad, very bad! in this world, even as children, we must accustom
 ourselves to eat of everything, for we never know what life may hold in
 store for us!”
 “you may be right,” answered pinocchio, “but i will not eat the pears if
 they are not peeled. i don’t like them.”
 and good old geppetto took out a knife, peeled the three pears, and put
 the skins in a row on the table.
 pinocchio ate one pear in a twinkling and started to throw the core away,
 but geppetto held his arm.
 “oh, no, don’t throw it away! everything in this world may be of some
 use!”
 “but the core i will not eat!” cried pinocchio in an angry tone.
 “who knows?” repeated geppetto calmly.
 and later the three cores were placed on the table next to the skins.
 pinocchio had eaten the three pears, or rather devoured them. then he
 yawned deeply, and wailed:
 “i’m still hungry.”
 “but i have no more to give you.”
 “really, nothing—nothing?”
 “i have only these three cores and these skins.”
 “very well, then,” said pinocchio, “if there is nothing else i’ll eat
 them.”
 at first he made a wry face, but, one after another, the skins and the
 cores disappeared.
 “ah! now i feel fine!” he said after eating the last one.
 “you see,” observed geppetto, “that i was right when i told you that one
 must not be too fussy and too dainty about food. my dear, we never know
 what life may have in store for us!”
 geppetto makes pinocchio a new pair of feet, and sells his coat to buy him
 an a-b-c book.
 the marionette, as soon as his hunger was appeased, started to grumble and
 cry that he wanted a new pair of feet.
 but mastro geppetto, in order to punish him for his mischief, let him
 alone the whole morning. after dinner he said to him:
 “why should i make your feet over again? to see you run away from home
 once more?”
 “i promise you,” answered the marionette, sobbing, “that from now on i’ll
 be good—”
 “boys always promise that when they want something,” said geppetto.
 “i promise to go to school every day, to study, and to succeed—”
 “boys always sing that song when they want their own will.”
 “but i am not like other boys! i am better than all of them and i always
 tell the truth. i promise you, father, that i’ll learn a trade, and i’ll
 be the comfort and staff of your old age.”
 geppetto, though trying to look very stern, felt his eyes fill with tears
 and his heart soften when he saw pinocchio so unhappy. he said no more,
 but taking his tools and two pieces of wood, he set to work diligently.
 in less than an hour the feet were finished, two slender, nimble little
 feet, strong and quick, modeled as if by an artist’s hands.
 “close your eyes and sleep!” geppetto then said to the marionette.
 pinocchio closed his eyes and pretended to be asleep, while geppetto stuck
 on the two feet with a bit of glue melted in an eggshell, doing his work
 so well that the joint could hardly be seen.
 as soon as the marionette felt his new feet, he gave one leap from the
 table and started to skip and jump around, as if he had lost his head from
 very joy.
 “to show you how grateful i am to you, father, i’ll go to school now. but
 to go to school i need a suit of clothes.”
 geppetto did not have a penny in his pocket, so he made his son a little
 suit of flowered paper, a pair of shoes from the bark of a tree, and a
 tiny cap from a bit of dough.
 pinocchio ran to look at himself in a bowl of water, and he felt so happy
 that he said proudly:
 “now i look like a gentleman.”
 “truly,” answered geppetto. “but remember that fine clothes do not make
 the man unless they be neat and clean.”
 “very true,” answered pinocchio, “but, in order to go to school, i still
 need something very important.”
 “what is it?”
 “an a-b-c book.”
 “to be sure! but how shall we get it?”
 “that’s easy. we’ll go to a bookstore and buy it.”
 “and the money?”
 “i have none.”
 “neither have i,” said the old man sadly.
 pinocchio, although a happy boy always, became sad and downcast at these
 words. when poverty shows itself, even mischievous boys understand what it
 means.
 “what does it matter, after all?” cried geppetto all at once, as he jumped
 up from his chair. putting on his old coat, full of darns and patches, he
 ran out of the house without another word.
 after a while he returned. in his hands he had the a-b-c book for his son,
 but the old coat was gone. the poor fellow was in his shirt sleeves and
 the day was cold.
 “where’s your coat, father?”
 “i have sold it.”
 “why did you sell your coat?”
 “it was too warm.”
 pinocchio understood the answer in a twinkling, and, unable to restrain
 his tears, he jumped on his father’s neck and kissed him over and over.
 pinocchio sells his a-b-c book to pay his way into the marionette theater.
 see pinocchio hurrying off to school with his new a-b-c book under his
 arm! as he walked along, his brain was busy planning hundreds of wonderful
 things, building hundreds of castles in the air. talking to himself, he
 said:
 “in school today, i’ll learn to read, tomorrow to write, and the day after
 tomorrow i’ll do arithmetic. then, clever as i am, i can earn a lot of
 money. with the very first pennies i make, i’ll buy father a new cloth
 coat. cloth, did i say? no, it shall be of gold and silver with diamond
 buttons. that poor man certainly deserves it; for, after all, isn’t he in
 his shirt sleeves because he was good enough to buy a book for me? on this
 cold day, too! fathers are indeed good to their children!”
 as he talked to himself, he thought he heard sounds of pipes and drums
 coming from a distance: pi-pi-pi, pi-pi-pi. . .zum, zum, zum, zum.
 he stopped to listen. those sounds came from a little street that led to a
 small village along the shore.
 “what can that noise be? what a nuisance that i have to go to school!
 otherwise. . .”
 there he stopped, very much puzzled. he felt he had to make up his mind
 for either one thing or another. should he go to school, or should he
 follow the pipes?
 “today i’ll follow the pipes, and tomorrow i’ll go to school. there’s
 always plenty of time to go to school,” decided the little rascal at last,
 shrugging his shoulders.
 no sooner said than done. he started down the street, going like the wind.
 on he ran, and louder grew the sounds of pipe and drum: pi-pi-pi,
 pi-pi-pi, pi-pi-pi . . .zum, zum, zum, zum.
 suddenly, he found himself in a large square, full of people standing in
 front of a little wooden building painted in brilliant colors.
 “what is that house?” pinocchio asked a little boy near him.
 “read the sign and you’ll know.”
 “i’d like to read, but somehow i can’t today.”
 “oh, really? then i’ll read it to you. know, then, that written in letters
 of fire i see the words: great marionette theater.
 “when did the show start?”
 “it is starting now.”
 “and how much does one pay to get in?”
 “four pennies.”
 pinocchio, who was wild with curiosity to know what was going on inside,
 lost all his pride and said to the boy shamelessly:
 “will you give me four pennies until tomorrow?”
 “i’d give them to you gladly,” answered the other, poking fun at him, “but
 just now i can’t give them to you.”
 “for the price of four pennies, i’ll sell you my coat.”
 “if it rains, what shall i do with a coat of flowered paper? i could not
 take it off again.”
 “do you want to buy my shoes?”
 “they are only good enough to light a fire with.”
 “what about my hat?”
 “fine bargain, indeed! a cap of dough! the mice might come and eat it from
 my head!”
 pinocchio was almost in tears. he was just about to make one last offer,
 but he lacked the courage to do so. he hesitated, he wondered, he could
 not make up his mind. at last he said:
 “will you give me four pennies for the book?”
 “i am a boy and i buy nothing from boys,” said the little fellow with far
 more common sense than the marionette.
 “i’ll give you four pennies for your a-b-c book,” said a ragpicker who
 stood by.
 then and there, the book changed hands. and to think that poor old
 geppetto sat at home in his shirt sleeves, shivering with cold, having
 sold his coat to buy that little book for his son!
 the marionettes recognize their brother pinocchio, and greet him with loud
 cheers; but the director, fire eater, happens along and poor pinocchio
 almost loses his life.
 quick as a flash, pinocchio disappeared into the marionette theater. and
 then something happened which almost caused a riot.
 the curtain was up and the performance had started.
 harlequin and pulcinella were reciting on the stage and, as usual, they
 were threatening each other with sticks and blows.
 the theater was full of people, enjoying the spectacle and laughing till
 they cried at the antics of the two marionettes.
 the play continued for a few minutes, and then suddenly, without any
 warning, harlequin stopped talking. turning toward the audience, he
 pointed to the rear of the orchestra, yelling wildly at the same time:
 “look, look! am i asleep or awake? or do i really see pinocchio there?”
 “yes, yes! it is pinocchio!” screamed pulcinella.
 “it is! it is!” shrieked signora rosaura, peeking in from the side of the
 stage.
 “it is pinocchio! it is pinocchio!” yelled all the marionettes, pouring
 out of the wings. “it is pinocchio. it is our brother pinocchio! hurrah
 for pinocchio!”
 “pinocchio, come up to me!” shouted harlequin. “come to the arms of your
 wooden brothers!”
 at such a loving invitation, pinocchio, with one leap from the back of the
 orchestra, found himself in the front rows. with another leap, he was on
 the orchestra leader’s head. with a third, he landed on the stage.
 it is impossible to describe the shrieks of joy, the warm embraces, the
 knocks, and the friendly greetings with which that strange company of
 dramatic actors and actresses received pinocchio.
 it was a heart-rending spectacle, but the audience, seeing that the play
 had stopped, became angry and began to yell:
 “the play, the play, we want the play!”
 the yelling was of no use, for the marionettes, instead of going on with
 their act, made twice as much racket as before, and, lifting up pinocchio
 on their shoulders, carried him around the stage in triumph.
 at that very moment, the director came out of his room. he had such a
 fearful appearance that one look at him would fill you with horror. his
 beard was as black as pitch, and so long that it reached from his chin
 down to his feet. his mouth was as wide as an oven, his teeth like yellow
 fangs, and his eyes, two glowing red coals. in his huge, hairy hands, a
 long whip, made of green snakes and black cats’ tails twisted together,
 swished through the air in a dangerous way.
 at the unexpected apparition, no one dared even to breathe. one could
 almost hear a fly go by. those poor marionettes, one and all, trembled
 like leaves in a storm.
 “why have you brought such excitement into my theater;” the huge fellow
 asked pinocchio with the voice of an ogre suffering with a cold.
 “believe me, your honor, the fault was not mine.”
 “enough! be quiet! i’ll take care of you later.”
 as soon as the play was over, the director went to the kitchen, where a
 fine big lamb was slowly turning on the spit. more wood was needed to
 finish cooking it. he called harlequin and pulcinella and said to them:
 “bring that marionette to me! he looks as if he were made of well-seasoned
 wood. he’ll make a fine fire for this spit.”
 harlequin and pulcinella hesitated a bit. then, frightened by a look from
 their master, they left the kitchen to obey him. a few minutes later they
 returned, carrying poor pinocchio, who was wriggling and squirming like an
 eel and crying pitifully:
 “father, save me! i don’t want to die! i don’t want to die!”
 fire eater sneezes and forgives pinocchio, who saves his friend,
 harlequin, from death.
 in the theater, great excitement reigned.
 fire eater (this was really his name) was very ugly, but he was far from
 being as bad as he looked. proof of this is that, when he saw the poor
 marionette being brought in to him, struggling with fear and crying, “i
 don’t want to die! i don’t want to die!” he felt sorry for him and began
 first to waver and then to weaken. finally, he could control himself no
 longer and gave a loud sneeze.
 at that sneeze, harlequin, who until then had been as sad as a weeping
 willow, smiled happily and leaning toward the marionette, whispered to
 him:
 “good news, brother mine! fire eater has sneezed and this is a sign that
 he feels sorry for you. you are saved!”
 for be it known, that, while other people, when sad and sorrowful, weep
 and wipe their eyes, fire eater, on the other hand, had the strange habit
 of sneezing each time he felt unhappy. the way was just as good as any
 other to show the kindness of his heart.
 after sneezing, fire eater, ugly as ever, cried to pinocchio:
 “stop crying! your wails give me a funny feeling down here in my stomach
 and—e—tchee!—e—tchee!” two loud sneezes finished
 his speech.
 “god bless you!” said pinocchio.
 “thanks! are your father and mother still living?” demanded fire eater.
 “my father, yes. my mother i have never known.”
 “your poor father would suffer terribly if i were to use you as firewood.
 poor old man! i feel sorry for him! e—tchee! e—tchee! e—tchee!”
 three more sneezes sounded, louder than ever.
 “god bless you!” said pinocchio.
 “thanks! however, i ought to be sorry for myself, too, just now. my good
 dinner is spoiled. i have no more wood for the fire, and the lamb is only
 half cooked. never mind! in your place i’ll burn some other marionette.
 hey there! officers!”
 at the call, two wooden officers appeared, long and thin as a yard of
 rope, with queer hats on their heads and swords in their hands.
 fire eater yelled at them in a hoarse voice:
 “take harlequin, tie him, and throw him on the fire. i want my lamb well
 done!”
 think how poor harlequin felt! he was so scared that his legs doubled up
 under him and he fell to the floor.
 pinocchio, at that heartbreaking sight, threw himself at the feet of fire
 eater and, weeping bitterly, asked in a pitiful voice which could scarcely
 be heard:
 “have pity, i beg of you, signore!”
 “there are no signori here!”
 “have pity, kind sir!”
 “there are no sirs here!”
 “have pity, your excellency!”
 on hearing himself addressed as your excellency, the director of the
 marionette theater sat up very straight in his chair, stroked his long
 beard, and becoming suddenly kind and compassionate, smiled proudly as he
 said to pinocchio:
 “well, what do you want from me now, marionette?”
 “i beg for mercy for my poor friend, harlequin, who has never done the
 least harm in his life.”
 “there is no mercy here, pinocchio. i have spared you. harlequin must burn
 in your place. i am hungry and my dinner must be cooked.”
 “in that case,” said pinocchio proudly, as he stood up and flung away his
 cap of dough, “in that case, my duty is clear. come, officers! tie me up
 and throw me on those flames. no, it is not fair for poor harlequin, the
 best friend that i have in the world, to die in my place!”
 these brave words, said in a piercing voice, made all the other
 marionettes cry. even the officers, who were made of wood also, cried like
 two babies.
 fire eater at first remained hard and cold as a piece of ice; but then,
 little by little, he softened and began to sneeze. and after four or five
 sneezes, he opened wide his arms and said to pinocchio:
 “you are a brave boy! come to my arms and kiss me!”
 pinocchio ran to him and scurrying like a squirrel up the long black
 beard, he gave fire eater a loving kiss on the tip of his nose.
 “has pardon been granted to me?” asked poor harlequin with a voice that
 was hardly a breath.
 “pardon is yours!” answered fire eater; and sighing and wagging his head,
 he added: “well, tonight i shall have to eat my lamb only half cooked, but
 beware the next time, marionettes.”
 at the news that pardon had been given, the marionettes ran to the stage
 and, turning on all the lights, they danced and sang till dawn.
 fire eater gives pinocchio five gold pieces for his father, geppetto; but
 the marionette meets a fox and a cat and follows them.
 the next day fire eater called pinocchio aside and asked him:
 “what is your father’s name?”
 “geppetto.”
 “and what is his trade?”
 “he’s a wood carver.”
 “does he earn much?”
 “he earns so much that he never has a penny in his pockets. just think
 that, in order to buy me an a-b-c book for school, he had to sell the only
 coat he owned, a coat so full of darns and patches that it was a pity.”
 “poor fellow! i feel sorry for him. here, take these five gold pieces. go,
 give them to him with my kindest regards.”
 pinocchio, as may easily be imagined, thanked him a thousand times. he
 kissed each marionette in turn, even the officers, and, beside himself
 with joy, set out on his homeward journey.
 he had gone barely half a mile when he met a lame fox and a blind cat,
 walking together like two good friends. the lame fox leaned on the cat,
 and the blind cat let the fox lead him along.
 “good morning, pinocchio,” said the fox, greeting him courteously.
 “how do you know my name?” asked the marionette.
 “i know your father well.”
 “where have you seen him?”
 “i saw him yesterday standing at the door of his house.”
 “and what was he doing?”
 “he was in his shirt sleeves trembling with cold.”
 “poor father! but, after today, god willing, he will suffer no longer.”
 “why?”
 “because i have become a rich man.”
 “you, a rich man?” said the fox, and he began to laugh out loud. the cat
 was laughing also, but tried to hide it by stroking his long whiskers.
 “there is nothing to laugh at,” cried pinocchio angrily. “i am very sorry
 to make your mouth water, but these, as you know, are five new gold
 pieces.”
 and he pulled out the gold pieces which fire eater had given him.
 at the cheerful tinkle of the gold, the fox unconsciously held out his paw
 that was supposed to be lame, and the cat opened wide his two eyes till
 they looked like live coals, but he closed them again so quickly that
 pinocchio did not notice.
 “and may i ask,” inquired the fox, “what you are going to do with all that
 money?”
 “first of all,” answered the marionette, “i want to buy a fine new coat
 for my father, a coat of gold and silver with diamond buttons; after that,
 i’ll buy an a-b-c book for myself.”
 “for yourself?”
 “for myself. i want to go to school and study hard.”
 “look at me,” said the fox. “for the silly reason of wanting to study, i
 have lost a paw.”
 “look at me,” said the cat. “for the same foolish reason, i have lost the
 sight of both eyes.”
 at that moment, a blackbird, perched on the fence along the road, called
 out sharp and clear:
 “pinocchio, do not listen to bad advice. if you do, you’ll be sorry!”
 poor little blackbird! if he had only kept his words to himself! in the
 twinkling of an eyelid, the cat leaped on him, and ate him, feathers and
 all.
 after eating the bird, he cleaned his whiskers, closed his eyes, and
 became blind once more.
 “poor blackbird!” said pinocchio to the cat. “why did you kill him?”
 “i killed him to teach him a lesson. he talks too much. next time he will
 keep his words to himself.”
 by this time the three companions had walked a long distance. suddenly,
 the fox stopped in his tracks and, turning to the marionette, said to him:
 “do you want to double your gold pieces?”
 “what do you mean?”
 “do you want one hundred, a thousand, two thousand gold pieces for your
 miserable five?”
 “yes, but how?”
 “the way is very easy. instead of returning home, come with us.”
 “and where will you take me?”
 “to the city of simple simons.”
 pinocchio thought a while and then said firmly:
 “no, i don’t want to go. home is near, and i’m going where father is
 waiting for me. how unhappy he must be that i have not yet returned! i
 have been a bad son, and the talking cricket was right when he said that a
 disobedient boy cannot be happy in this world. i have learned this at my
 own expense. even last night in the theater, when fire eater. . .
 brrrr!!!!! . . . the shivers run up and down my back at the mere thought
 of it.”
 “well, then,” said the fox, “if you really want to go home, go ahead, but
 you’ll be sorry.”
 “you’ll be sorry,” repeated the cat.
 “think well, pinocchio, you are turning your back on dame fortune.”
 “on dame fortune,” repeated the cat.
 “tomorrow your five gold pieces will be two thousand!”
 “two thousand!” repeated the cat.
 “but how can they possibly become so many?” asked pinocchio wonderingly.
 “i’ll explain,” said the fox. “you must know that, just outside the city
 of simple simons, there is a blessed field called the field of wonders. in
 this field you dig a hole and in the hole you bury a gold piece. after
 covering up the hole with earth you water it well, sprinkle a bit of salt
 on it, and go to bed. during the night, the gold piece sprouts, grows,
 blossoms, and next morning you find a beautiful tree, that is loaded with
 gold pieces.”
 “so that if i were to bury my five gold pieces,” cried pinocchio with
 growing wonder, “next morning i should find—how many?”
 “it is very simple to figure out,” answered the fox. “why, you can figure
 it on your fingers! granted that each piece gives you five hundred,
 multiply five hundred by five. next morning you will find twenty-five
 hundred new, sparkling gold pieces.”
 “fine! fine!” cried pinocchio, dancing about with joy. “and as soon as i
 have them, i shall keep two thousand for myself and the other five hundred
 i’ll give to you two.”
 “a gift for us?” cried the fox, pretending to be insulted. “why, of course
 not!”
 “of course not!” repeated the cat.
 “we do not work for gain,” answered the fox. “we work only to enrich
 others.”
 “to enrich others!” repeated the cat.
 “what good people,” thought pinocchio to himself. and forgetting his
 father, the new coat, the a-b-c book, and all his good resolutions, he
 said to the fox and to the cat:
 “let us go. i am with you.”
 the inn of the red lobster
 cat and fox and marionette walked and walked and walked. at last, toward
 evening, dead tired, they came to the inn of the red lobster.
 “let us stop here a while,” said the fox, “to eat a bite and rest for a
 few hours. at midnight we’ll start out again, for at dawn tomorrow we must
 be at the field of wonders.”
 they went into the inn and all three sat down at the same table. however,
 not one of them was very hungry.
 the poor cat felt very weak, and he was able to eat only thirty-five
 mullets with tomato sauce and four portions of tripe with cheese.
 moreover, as he was so in need of strength, he had to have four more
 helpings of butter and cheese.
 the fox, after a great deal of coaxing, tried his best to eat a little.
 the doctor had put him on a diet, and he had to be satisfied with a small
 hare dressed with a dozen young and tender spring chickens. after the
 hare, he ordered some partridges, a few pheasants, a couple of rabbits,
 and a dozen frogs and lizards. that was all. he felt ill, he said, and
 could not eat another bite.
 pinocchio ate least of all. he asked for a bite of bread and a few nuts
 and then hardly touched them. the poor fellow, with his mind on the field
 of wonders, was suffering from a gold-piece indigestion.
 supper over, the fox said to the innkeeper:
 “give us two good rooms, one for mr. pinocchio and the other for me and my
 friend. before starting out, we’ll take a little nap. remember to call us
 at midnight sharp, for we must continue on our journey.”
 “yes, sir,” answered the innkeeper, winking in a knowing way at the fox
 and the cat, as if to say, “i understand.”
 as soon as pinocchio was in bed, he fell fast asleep and began to dream.
 he dreamed he was in the middle of a field. the field was full of vines
 heavy with grapes. the grapes were no other than gold coins which tinkled
 merrily as they swayed in the wind. they seemed to say, “let him who wants
 us take us!”
 just as pinocchio stretched out his hand to take a handful of them, he was
 awakened by three loud knocks at the door. it was the innkeeper who had
 come to tell him that midnight had struck.
 “are my friends ready?” the marionette asked him.
 “indeed, yes! they went two hours ago.”
 “why in such a hurry?”
 “unfortunately the cat received a telegram which said that his first-born
 was suffering from chilblains and was on the point of death. he could not
 even wait to say good-by to you.”
 “did they pay for the supper?”
 “how could they do such a thing? being people of great refinement, they
 did not want to offend you so deeply as not to allow you the honor of
 paying the bill.”
 “too bad! that offense would have been more than pleasing to me,” said
 pinocchio, scratching his head.
 “where did my good friends say they would wait for me?” he added.
 “at the field of wonders, at sunrise tomorrow morning.”
 pinocchio paid a gold piece for the three suppers and started on his way
 toward the field that was to make him a rich man.
 he walked on, not knowing where he was going, for it was dark, so dark
 that not a thing was visible. round about him, not a leaf stirred. a few
 bats skimmed his nose now and again and scared him half to death. once or
 twice he shouted, “who goes there?” and the far-away hills echoed back to
 him, “who goes there? who goes there? who goes. . . ?”
 as he walked, pinocchio noticed a tiny insect glimmering on the trunk of a
 tree, a small being that glowed with a pale, soft light.
 “who are you?” he asked.
 “i am the ghost of the talking cricket,” answered the little being in a
 faint voice that sounded as if it came from a far-away world.
 “what do you want?” asked the marionette.
 “i want to give you a few words of good advice. return home and give the
 four gold pieces you have left to your poor old father who is weeping
 because he has not seen you for many a day.”
 “tomorrow my father will be a rich man, for these four gold pieces will
 become two thousand.”
 “don’t listen to those who promise you wealth overnight, my boy. as a rule
 they are either fools or swindlers! listen to me and go home.”
 “but i want to go on!”
 “the hour is late!”
 “i want to go on.”
 “the night is very dark.”
 “i want to go on.”
 “the road is dangerous.”
 “i want to go on.”
 “remember that boys who insist on having their own way, sooner or later
 come to grief.”
 “the same nonsense. good-by, cricket.”
 “good night, pinocchio, and may heaven preserve you from the assassins.”
 there was silence for a minute and the light of the talking cricket
 disappeared suddenly, just as if someone had snuffed it out. once again
 the road was plunged in darkness.
 pinocchio, not having listened to the good advice of the talking cricket,
 falls into the hands of the assassins.
 “dear, oh, dear! when i come to think of it,” said the marionette to
 himself, as he once more set out on his journey, “we boys are really very
 unlucky. everybody scolds us, everybody gives us advice, everybody warns
 us. if we were to allow it, everyone would try to be father and mother to
 us; everyone, even the talking cricket. take me, for example. just because
 i would not listen to that bothersome cricket, who knows how many
 misfortunes may be awaiting me! assassins indeed! at least i have never
 believed in them, nor ever will. to speak sensibly, i think assassins have
 been invented by fathers and mothers to frighten children who want to run
 away at night. and then, even if i were to meet them on the road, what
 matter? i’ll just run up to them, and say, ‘well, signori, what do you
 want? remember that you can’t fool with me! run along and mind your
 business.’ at such a speech, i can almost see those poor fellows running
 like the wind. but in case they don’t run away, i can always run myself. .
 pinocchio was not given time to argue any longer, for he thought he heard
 a slight rustle among the leaves behind him.
 he turned to look and behold, there in the darkness stood two big black
 shadows, wrapped from head to foot in black sacks. the two figures leaped
 toward him as softly as if they were ghosts.
 “here they come!” pinocchio said to himself, and, not knowing where to
 hide the gold pieces, he stuck all four of them under his tongue.
 he tried to run away, but hardly had he taken a step, when he felt his
 arms grasped and heard two horrible, deep voices say to him: “your money
 or your life!”
 on account of the gold pieces in his mouth, pinocchio could not say a
 word, so he tried with head and hands and body to show, as best he could,
 that he was only a poor marionette without a penny in his pocket.
 “come, come, less nonsense, and out with your money!” cried the two
 thieves in threatening voices.
 once more, pinocchio’s head and hands said, “i haven’t a penny.”
 “out with that money or you’re a dead man,” said the taller of the two
 assassins.
 “dead man,” repeated the other.
 “and after having killed you, we will kill your father also.”
 “your father also!”
 “no, no, no, not my father!” cried pinocchio, wild with terror; but as he
 screamed, the gold pieces tinkled together in his mouth.
 “ah, you rascal! so that’s the game! you have the money hidden under your
 tongue. out with it!”
 but pinocchio was as stubborn as ever.
 “are you deaf? wait, young man, we’ll get it from you in a twinkling!”
 one of them grabbed the marionette by the nose and the other by the chin,
 and they pulled him unmercifully from side to side in order to make him
 open his mouth.
 all was of no use. the marionette’s lips might have been nailed together.
 they would not open.
 in desperation the smaller of the two assassins pulled out a long knife
 from his pocket, and tried to pry pinocchio’s mouth open with it.
 quick as a flash, the marionette sank his teeth deep into the assassin’s
 hand, bit it off and spat it out. fancy his surprise when he saw that it
 was not a hand, but a cat’s paw.
 encouraged by this first victory, he freed himself from the claws of his
 assailers and, leaping over the bushes along the road, ran swiftly across
 the fields. his pursuers were after him at once, like two dogs chasing a
 hare.
 after running seven miles or so, pinocchio was well-nigh exhausted. seeing
 himself lost, he climbed up a giant pine tree and sat there to see what he
 could see. the assassins tried to climb also, but they slipped and fell.
 far from giving up the chase, this only spurred them on. they gathered a
 bundle of wood, piled it up at the foot of the pine, and set fire to it.
 in a twinkling the tree began to sputter and burn like a candle blown by
 the wind. pinocchio saw the flames climb higher and higher. not wishing to
 end his days as a roasted marionette, he jumped quickly to the ground and
 off he went, the assassins close to him, as before.
 dawn was breaking when, without any warning whatsoever, pinocchio found
 his path barred by a deep pool full of water the color of muddy coffee.
 what was there to do? with a “one, two, three!” he jumped clear across it.
 the assassins jumped also, but not having measured their distance well—splash!!!—they
 fell right into the middle of the pool. pinocchio who heard the splash and
 felt it, too, cried out, laughing, but never stopping in his race:
 “a pleasant bath to you, signori!”
 he thought they must surely be drowned and turned his head to see. but
 there were the two somber figures still following him, though their black
 sacks were drenched and dripping with water.
 the assassins chase pinocchio, catch him, and hang him to the branch of a
 giant oak tree.
 as he ran, the marionette felt more and more certain that he would have to
 give himself up into the hands of his pursuers. suddenly he saw a little
 cottage gleaming white as the snow among the trees of the forest.
 “if i have enough breath left with which to reach that little house, i may
 be saved,” he said to himself.
 not waiting another moment, he darted swiftly through the woods, the
 assassins still after him.
 after a hard race of almost an hour, tired and out of breath, pinocchio
 finally reached the door of the cottage and knocked. no one answered.
 he knocked again, harder than before, for behind him he heard the steps
 and the labored breathing of his persecutors. the same silence followed.
 as knocking was of no use, pinocchio, in despair, began to kick and bang
 against the door, as if he wanted to break it. at the noise, a window
 opened and a lovely maiden looked out. she had azure hair and a face white
 as wax. her eyes were closed and her hands crossed on her breast. with a
 voice so weak that it hardly could be heard, she whispered:
 “no one lives in this house. everyone is dead.”
 “won’t you, at least, open the door for me?” cried pinocchio in a
 beseeching voice.
 “i also am dead.”
 “dead? what are you doing at the window, then?”
 “i am waiting for the coffin to take me away.”
 after these words, the little girl disappeared and the window closed
 without a sound.
 “oh, lovely maiden with azure hair,” cried pinocchio, “open, i beg of you.
 take pity on a poor boy who is being chased by two assass—”
 he did not finish, for two powerful hands grasped him by the neck and the
 same two horrible voices growled threateningly: “now we have you!”
 the marionette, seeing death dancing before him, trembled so hard that the
 joints of his legs rattled and the coins tinkled under his tongue.
 “well,” the assassins asked, “will you open your mouth now or not? ah! you
 do not answer? very well, this time you shall open it.”
 taking out two long, sharp knives, they struck two heavy blows on the
 marionette’s back.
 happily for him, pinocchio was made of very hard wood and the knives broke
 into a thousand pieces. the assassins looked at each other in dismay,
 holding the handles of the knives in their hands.
 “i understand,” said one of them to the other, “there is nothing left to
 do now but to hang him.”
 “to hang him,” repeated the other.
 they tied pinocchio’s hands behind his shoulders and slipped the noose
 around his neck. throwing the rope over the high limb of a giant oak tree,
 they pulled till the poor marionette hung far up in space.
 satisfied with their work, they sat on the grass waiting for pinocchio to
 give his last gasp. but after three hours the marionette’s eyes were still
 open, his mouth still shut and his legs kicked harder than ever.
 tired of waiting, the assassins called to him mockingly: “good-by till
 tomorrow. when we return in the morning, we hope you’ll be polite enough
 to let us find you dead and gone and with your mouth wide open.” with
 these words they went.
 a few minutes went by and then a wild wind started to blow. as it shrieked
 and moaned, the poor little sufferer was blown to and fro like the hammer
 of a bell. the rocking made him seasick and the noose, becoming tighter
 and tighter, choked him. little by little a film covered his eyes.
 death was creeping nearer and nearer, and the marionette still hoped for
 some good soul to come to his rescue, but no one appeared. as he was about
 to die, he thought of his poor old father, and hardly conscious of what he
 was saying, murmured to himself:
 “oh, father, dear father! if you were only here!”
 these were his last words. he closed his eyes, opened his mouth, stretched
 out his legs, and hung there, as if he were dead.
 the lovely maiden with azure hair sends for the poor marionette, puts him
 to bed, and calls three doctors to tell her if pinocchio is dead or alive.
 if the poor marionette had dangled there much longer, all hope would have
 been lost. luckily for him, the lovely maiden with azure hair once again
 looked out of her window. filled with pity at the sight of the poor little
 fellow being knocked helplessly about by the wind, she clapped her hands
 sharply together three times.
 at the signal, a loud whirr of wings in quick flight was heard and a large
 falcon came and settled itself on the window ledge.
 “what do you command, my charming fairy?” asked the falcon, bending his
 beak in deep reverence (for it must be known that, after all, the lovely
 maiden with azure hair was none other than a very kind fairy who had
 lived, for more than a thousand years, in the vicinity of the forest).
 “do you see that marionette hanging from the limb of that giant oak tree?”
 “i see him.”
 “very well. fly immediately to him. with your strong beak, break the knot
 which holds him tied, take him down, and lay him softly on the grass at
 the foot of the oak.”
 the falcon flew away and after two minutes returned, saying, “i have done
 what you have commanded.”
 “how did you find him? alive or dead?”
 “at first glance, i thought he was dead. but i found i was wrong, for as
 soon as i loosened the knot around his neck, he gave a long sigh and
 mumbled with a faint voice, ‘now i feel better!’”
 the fairy clapped her hands twice. a magnificent poodle appeared, walking
 on his hind legs just like a man. he was dressed in court livery. a
 tricorn trimmed with gold lace was set at a rakish angle over a wig of
 white curls that dropped down to his waist. he wore a jaunty coat of
 chocolate-colored velvet, with diamond buttons, and with two huge pockets
 which were always filled with bones, dropped there at dinner by his loving
 mistress. breeches of crimson velvet, silk stockings, and low,
 silver-buckled slippers completed his costume. his tail was encased in a
 blue silk covering, which was to protect it from the rain.
 “come, medoro,” said the fairy to him. “get my best coach ready and set
 out toward the forest. on reaching the oak tree, you will find a poor,
 half-dead marionette stretched out on the grass. lift him up tenderly,
 place him on the silken cushions of the coach, and bring him here to me.”
 the poodle, to show that he understood, wagged his silk-covered tail two
 or three times and set off at a quick pace.
 in a few minutes, a lovely little coach, made of glass, with lining as
 soft as whipped cream and chocolate pudding, and stuffed with canary
 feathers, pulled out of the stable. it was drawn by one hundred pairs of
 white mice, and the poodle sat on the coachman’s seat and snapped his whip
 gayly in the air, as if he were a real coachman in a hurry to get to his
 destination.
 in a quarter of an hour the coach was back. the fairy, who was waiting at
 the door of the house, lifted the poor little marionette in her arms, took
 him to a dainty room with mother-of-pearl walls, put him to bed, and sent
 immediately for the most famous doctors of the neighborhood to come to
 her.
 one after another the doctors came, a crow, and owl, and a talking
 cricket.
 “i should like to know, signori,” said the fairy, turning to the three
 doctors gathered about pinocchio’s bed, “i should like to know if this
 poor marionette is dead or alive.”
 at this invitation, the crow stepped out and felt pinocchio’s pulse, his
 nose, his little toe. then he solemnly pronounced the following words:
 “to my mind this marionette is dead and gone; but if, by any evil chance,
 he were not, then that would be a sure sign that he is still alive!”
 “i am sorry,” said the owl, “to have to contradict the crow, my famous
 friend and colleague. to my mind this marionette is alive; but if, by any
 evil chance, he were not, then that would be a sure sign that he is wholly
 dead!”
 “and do you hold any opinion?” the fairy asked the talking cricket.
 “i say that a wise doctor, when he does not know what he is talking about,
 should know enough to keep his mouth shut. however, that marionette is not
 a stranger to me. i have known him a long time!”
 pinocchio, who until then had been very quiet, shuddered so hard that the
 bed shook.
 “that marionette,” continued the talking cricket, “is a rascal of the
 worst kind.”
 pinocchio opened his eyes and closed them again.
 “he is rude, lazy, a runaway.”
 pinocchio hid his face under the sheets.
 “that marionette is a disobedient son who is breaking his father’s heart!”
 long shuddering sobs were heard, cries, and deep sighs. think how
 surprised everyone was when, on raising the sheets, they discovered
 pinocchio half melted in tears!
 “when the dead weep, they are beginning to recover,” said the crow
 solemnly.
 “i am sorry to contradict my famous friend and colleague,” said the owl,
 “but as far as i’m concerned, i think that when the dead weep, it means
 they do not want to die.”
 pinocchio eats sugar, but refuses to take medicine. when the undertakers
 come for him, he drinks the medicine and feels better. afterwards he tells
 a lie and, in punishment, his nose grows longer and longer.
 as soon as the three doctors had left the room, the fairy went to
 pinocchio’s bed and, touching him on the forehead, noticed that he was
 burning with fever.
 she took a glass of water, put a white powder into it, and, handing it to
 the marionette, said lovingly to him:
 “drink this, and in a few days you’ll be up and well.”
 pinocchio looked at the glass, made a wry face, and asked in a whining
 voice: “is it sweet or bitter?”
 “it is bitter, but it is good for you.”
 “if it is bitter, i don’t want it.”
 “drink it!”
 “i don’t like anything bitter.”
 “drink it and i’ll give you a lump of sugar to take the bitter taste from
 your mouth.”
 “where’s the sugar?”
 “here it is,” said the fairy, taking a lump from a golden sugar bowl.
 “i want the sugar first, then i’ll drink the bitter water.”
 “do you promise?”
 “yes.”
 the fairy gave him the sugar and pinocchio, after chewing and swallowing
 it in a twinkling, said, smacking his lips:
 “if only sugar were medicine! i should take it every day.”
 “now keep your promise and drink these few drops of water. they’ll be good
 for you.”
 pinocchio took the glass in both hands and stuck his nose into it. he
 lifted it to his mouth and once more stuck his nose into it.
 “it is too bitter, much too bitter! i can’t drink it.”
 “how do you know, when you haven’t even tasted it?”
 “i can imagine it. i smell it. i want another lump of sugar, then i’ll
 drink it.”
 the fairy, with all the patience of a good mother, gave him more sugar and
 again handed him the glass.
 “i can’t drink it like that,” the marionette said, making more wry faces.
 “why?”
 “because that feather pillow on my feet bothers me.”
 the fairy took away the pillow.
 “it’s no use. i can’t drink it even now.”
 “what’s the matter now?”
 “i don’t like the way that door looks. it’s half open.”
 the fairy closed the door.
 “i won’t drink it,” cried pinocchio, bursting out crying. “i won’t drink
 this awful water. i won’t. i won’t! no, no, no, no!”
 “my boy, you’ll be sorry.”
 “i don’t care.”
 “you are very sick.”
 “i don’t care.”
 “in a few hours the fever will take you far away to another world.”
 “i don’t care.”
 “aren’t you afraid of death?”
 “not a bit. i’d rather die than drink that awful medicine.”
 at that moment, the door of the room flew open and in came four rabbits as
 black as ink, carrying a small black coffin on their shoulders.
 “what do you want from me?” asked pinocchio.
 “we have come for you,” said the largest rabbit.
 “for me? but i’m not dead yet!”
 “no, not dead yet; but you will be in a few moments since you have refused
 to take the medicine which would have made you well.”
 “oh, fairy, my fairy,” the marionette cried out, “give me that glass!
 quick, please! i don’t want to die! no, no, not yet—not yet!”
 and holding the glass with his two hands, he swallowed the medicine at one
 gulp.
 “well,” said the four rabbits, “this time we have made the trip for
 nothing.”
 and turning on their heels, they marched solemnly out of the room,
 carrying their little black coffin and muttering and grumbling between
 their teeth.
 in a twinkling, pinocchio felt fine. with one leap he was out of bed and
 into his clothes.
 the fairy, seeing him run and jump around the room gay as a bird on wing,
 said to him:
 “my medicine was good for you, after all, wasn’t it?”
 “good indeed! it has given me new life.”
 “why, then, did i have to beg you so hard to make you drink it?”
 “i’m a boy, you see, and all boys hate medicine more than they do
 sickness.”
 “what a shame! boys ought to know, after all, that medicine, taken in
 time, can save them from much pain and even from death.”
 “next time i won’t have to be begged so hard. i’ll remember those black
 rabbits with the black coffin on their shoulders and i’ll take the glass
 and pouf!—down it will go!”
 “come here now and tell me how it came about that you found yourself in
 the hands of the assassins.”
 “it happened that fire eater gave me five gold pieces to give to my
 father, but on the way, i met a fox and a cat, who asked me, ‘do you want
 the five pieces to become two thousand?’ and i said, ‘yes.’ and they said,
 ‘come with us to the field of wonders.’ and i said, ‘let’s go.’ then they
 said, ‘let us stop at the inn of the red lobster for dinner and after
 midnight we’ll set out again.’ we ate and went to sleep. when i awoke they
 were gone and i started out in the darkness all alone. on the road i met
 two assassins dressed in black coal sacks, who said to me, ‘your money or
 your life!’ and i said, ‘i haven’t any money’; for, you see, i had put the
 money under my tongue. one of them tried to put his hand in my mouth and i
 bit it off and spat it out; but it wasn’t a hand, it was a cat’s paw. and
 they ran after me and i ran and ran, till at last they caught me and tied
 my neck with a rope and hanged me to a tree, saying, ‘tomorrow we’ll come
 back for you and you’ll be dead and your mouth will be open, and then
 we’ll take the gold pieces that you have hidden under your tongue.’”
 “where are the gold pieces now?” the fairy asked.
 “i lost them,” answered pinocchio, but he told a lie, for he had them in
 his pocket.
 as he spoke, his nose, long though it was, became at least two inches
 longer.
 “and where did you lose them?”
 “in the wood near by.”
 at this second lie, his nose grew a few more inches.
 “if you lost them in the near-by wood,” said the fairy, “we’ll look for
 them and find them, for everything that is lost there is always found.”
 “ah, now i remember,” replied the marionette, becoming more and more
 confused. “i did not lose the gold pieces, but i swallowed them when i
 drank the medicine.”
 at this third lie, his nose became longer than ever, so long that he could
 not even turn around. if he turned to the right, he knocked it against the
 bed or into the windowpanes; if he turned to the left, he struck the walls
 or the door; if he raised it a bit, he almost put the fairy’s eyes out.
 the fairy sat looking at him and laughing.
 “why do you laugh?” the marionette asked her, worried now at the sight of
 his growing nose.
 “i am laughing at your lies.”
 “how do you know i am lying?”
 “lies, my boy, are known in a moment. there are two kinds of lies, lies
 with short legs and lies with long noses. yours, just now, happen to have
 long noses.”
 pinocchio, not knowing where to hide his shame, tried to escape from the
 room, but his nose had become so long that he could not get it out of the
 door.
 pinocchio finds the fox and the cat again, and goes with them to sow the
 gold pieces in the field of wonders.
 crying as if his heart would break, the marionette mourned for hours over
 the length of his nose. no matter how he tried, it would not go through
 the door. the fairy showed no pity toward him, as she was trying to teach
 him a good lesson, so that he would stop telling lies, the worst habit any
 boy may acquire. but when she saw him, pale with fright and with his eyes
 half out of his head from terror, she began to feel sorry for him and
 clapped her hands together. a thousand woodpeckers flew in through the
 window and settled themselves on pinocchio’s nose. they pecked and pecked
 so hard at that enormous nose that in a few moments, it was the same size
 as before.
 “how good you are, my fairy,” said pinocchio, drying his eyes, “and how
 much i love you!”
 “i love you, too,” answered the fairy, “and if you wish to stay with me,
 you may be my little brother and i’ll be your good little sister.”
 “i should like to stay—but what about my poor father?”
 “i have thought of everything. your father has been sent for and before
 night he will be here.”
 “really?” cried pinocchio joyfully. “then, my good fairy, if you are
 willing, i should like to go to meet him. i cannot wait to kiss that dear
 old man, who has suffered so much for my sake.”
 “surely; go ahead, but be careful not to lose your way. take the wood path
 and you’ll surely meet him.”
 pinocchio set out, and as soon as he found himself in the wood, he ran
 like a hare. when he reached the giant oak tree he stopped, for he thought
 he heard a rustle in the brush. he was right. there stood the fox and the
 cat, the two traveling companions with whom he had eaten at the inn of the
 red lobster.
 “here comes our dear pinocchio!” cried the fox, hugging and kissing him.
 “how did you happen here?”
 “how did you happen here?” repeated the cat.
 “it is a long story,” said the marionette. “let me tell it to you. the
 other night, when you left me alone at the inn, i met the assassins on the
 road—”
 “the assassins? oh, my poor friend! and what did they want?”
 “they wanted my gold pieces.”
 “rascals!” said the fox.
 “the worst sort of rascals!” added the cat.
 “but i began to run,” continued the marionette, “and they after me, until
 they overtook me and hanged me to the limb of that oak.”
 pinocchio pointed to the giant oak near by.
 “could anything be worse?” said the fox.
 “what an awful world to live in! where shall we find a safe place for
 gentlemen like ourselves?”
 as the fox talked thus, pinocchio noticed that the cat carried his right
 paw in a sling.
 “what happened to your paw?” he asked.
 the cat tried to answer, but he became so terribly twisted in his speech
 that the fox had to help him out.
 “my friend is too modest to answer. i’ll answer for him. about an hour
 ago, we met an old wolf on the road. he was half starved and begged for
 help. having nothing to give him, what do you think my friend did out of
 the kindness of his heart? with his teeth, he bit off the paw of his front
 foot and threw it at that poor beast, so that he might have something to
 eat.”
 as he spoke, the fox wiped off a tear.
 pinocchio, almost in tears himself, whispered in the cat’s ear:
 “if all the cats were like you, how lucky the mice would be!”
 “and what are you doing here?” the fox asked the marionette.
 “i am waiting for my father, who will be here at any moment now.”
 “and your gold pieces?”
 “i still have them in my pocket, except one which i spent at the inn of
 the red lobster.”
 “to think that those four gold pieces might become two thousand tomorrow.
 why don’t you listen to me? why don’t you sow them in the field of
 wonders?”
 “today it is impossible. i’ll go with you some other time.”
 “another day will be too late,” said the fox.
 “why?”
 “because that field has been bought by a very rich man, and today is the
 last day that it will be open to the public.”
 “how far is this field of wonders?”
 “only two miles away. will you come with us? we’ll be there in half an
 hour. you can sow the money, and, after a few minutes, you will gather
 your two thousand coins and return home rich. are you coming?”
 pinocchio hesitated a moment before answering, for he remembered the good
 fairy, old geppetto, and the advice of the talking cricket. then he ended
 by doing what all boys do, when they have no heart and little brain. he
 shrugged his shoulders and said to the fox and the cat:
 “let us go! i am with you.”
 and they went.
 they walked and walked for a half a day at least and at last they came to
 the town called the city of simple simons. as soon as they entered the
 town, pinocchio noticed that all the streets were filled with hairless
 dogs, yawning from hunger; with sheared sheep, trembling with cold; with
 combless chickens, begging for a grain of wheat; with large butterflies,
 unable to use their wings because they had sold all their lovely colors;
 with tailless peacocks, ashamed to show themselves; and with bedraggled
 pheasants, scuttling away hurriedly, grieving for their bright feathers of
 gold and silver, lost to them forever.
 through this crowd of paupers and beggars, a beautiful coach passed now
 and again. within it sat either a fox, a hawk, or a vulture.
 “where is the field of wonders?” asked pinocchio, growing tired of
 waiting.
 “be patient. it is only a few more steps away.”
 they passed through the city and, just outside the walls, they stepped
 into a lonely field, which looked more or less like any other field.
 “here we are,” said the fox to the marionette. “dig a hole here and put
 the gold pieces into it.”
 the marionette obeyed. he dug the hole, put the four gold pieces into it,
 and covered them up very carefully. “now,” said the fox, “go to that
 near-by brook, bring back a pail full of water, and sprinkle it over the
 spot.”
 pinocchio followed the directions closely, but, as he had no pail, he
 pulled off his shoe, filled it with water, and sprinkled the earth which
 covered the gold. then he asked:
 “anything else?”
 “nothing else,” answered the fox. “now we can go. return here within
 twenty minutes and you will find the vine grown and the branches filled
 with gold pieces.”
 pinocchio, beside himself with joy, thanked the fox and the cat many times
 and promised them each a beautiful gift.
 “we don’t want any of your gifts,” answered the two rogues. “it is enough
 for us that we have helped you to become rich with little or no trouble.
 for this we are as happy as kings.”
 they said good-by to pinocchio and, wishing him good luck, went on their
 way.
 pinocchio is robbed of his gold pieces and, in punishment, is sentenced to
 four months in prison.
 if the marionette had been told to wait a day instead of twenty minutes,
 the time could not have seemed longer to him. he walked impatiently to and
 fro and finally turned his nose toward the field of wonders.
 and as he walked with hurried steps, his heart beat with an excited tic,
 tac, tic, tac, just as if it were a wall clock, and his busy brain kept
 thinking:
 “what if, instead of a thousand, i should find two thousand? or if,
 instead of two thousand, i should find five thousand—or one hundred
 thousand? i’ll build myself a beautiful palace, with a thousand stables
 filled with a thousand wooden horses to play with, a cellar overflowing
 with lemonade and ice cream soda, and a library of candies and fruits,
 cakes and cookies.”
 thus amusing himself with fancies, he came to the field. there he stopped
 to see if, by any chance, a vine filled with gold coins was in sight. but
 he saw nothing! he took a few steps forward, and still nothing! he stepped
 into the field. he went up to the place where he had dug the hole and
 buried the gold pieces. again nothing! pinocchio became very thoughtful
 and, forgetting his good manners altogether, he pulled a hand out of his
 pocket and gave his head a thorough scratching.
 as he did so, he heard a hearty burst of laughter close to his head. he
 turned sharply, and there, just above him on the branch of a tree, sat a
 large parrot, busily preening his feathers.
 “what are you laughing at?” pinocchio asked peevishly.
 “i am laughing because, in preening my feathers, i tickled myself under
 the wings.”
 the marionette did not answer. he walked to the brook, filled his shoe
 with water, and once more sprinkled the ground which covered the gold
 pieces.
 another burst of laughter, even more impertinent than the first, was heard
 in the quiet field.
 “well,” cried the marionette, angrily this time, “may i know, mr. parrot,
 what amuses you so?”
 “i am laughing at those simpletons who believe everything they hear and
 who allow themselves to be caught so easily in the traps set for them.”
 “do you, perhaps, mean me?”
 “i certainly do mean you, poor pinocchio—you who are such a little
 silly as to believe that gold can be sown in a field just like beans or
 squash. i, too, believed that once and today i am very sorry for it. today
 (but too late!) i have reached the conclusion that, in order to come by
 money honestly, one must work and know how to earn it with hand or brain.”
 “i don’t know what you are talking about,” said the marionette, who was
 beginning to tremble with fear.
 “too bad! i’ll explain myself better,” said the parrot. “while you were
 away in the city the fox and the cat returned here in a great hurry. they
 took the four gold pieces which you have buried and ran away as fast as
 the wind. if you can catch them, you’re a brave one!”
 pinocchio’s mouth opened wide. he would not believe the parrot’s words and
 began to dig away furiously at the earth. he dug and he dug till the hole
 was as big as himself, but no money was there. every penny was gone.
 in desperation, he ran to the city and went straight to the courthouse to
 report the robbery to the magistrate. the judge was a monkey, a large
 gorilla venerable with age. a flowing white beard covered his chest and he
 wore gold-rimmed spectacles from which the glasses had dropped out. the
 reason for wearing these, he said, was that his eyes had been weakened by
 the work of many years.
 pinocchio, standing before him, told his pitiful tale, word by word. he
 gave the names and the descriptions of the robbers and begged for justice.
 the judge listened to him with great patience. a kind look shone in his
 eyes. he became very much interested in the story; he felt moved; he
 almost wept. when the marionette had no more to say, the judge put out his
 hand and rang a bell.
 at the sound, two large mastiffs appeared, dressed in carabineers’ 
 uniforms.
 then the magistrate, pointing to pinocchio, said in a very solemn voice:
 “this poor simpleton has been robbed of four gold pieces. take him,
 therefore, and throw him into prison.” the marionette, on hearing this
 sentence passed upon him, was thoroughly stunned. he tried to protest, but
 the two officers clapped their paws on his mouth and hustled him away to
 jail.
 there he had to remain for four long, weary months. and if it had not been
 for a very lucky chance, he probably would have had to stay there longer.
 for, my dear children, you must know that it happened just then that the
 young emperor who ruled over the city of simple simons had gained a great
 victory over his enemy, and in celebration thereof, he had ordered
 illuminations, fireworks, shows of all kinds, and, best of all, the
 opening of all prison doors.
 “if the others go, i go, too,” said pinocchio to the jailer.
 “not you,” answered the jailer. “you are one of those—”
 “i beg your pardon,” interrupted pinocchio, “i, too, am a thief.”
 “in that case you also are free,” said the jailer. taking off his cap, he
 bowed low and opened the door of the prison, and pinocchio ran out and
 away, with never a look backward.
 freed from prison, pinocchio sets out to return to the fairy; but on the
 way he meets a serpent and later is caught in a trap.
 fancy the happiness of pinocchio on finding himself free! without saying
 yes or no, he fled from the city and set out on the road that was to take
 him back to the house of the lovely fairy.
 it had rained for many days, and the road was so muddy that, at times,
 pinocchio sank down almost to his knees.
 but he kept on bravely.
 tormented by the wish to see his father and his fairy sister with azure
 hair, he raced like a greyhound. as he ran, he was splashed with mud even
 up to his cap.
 “how unhappy i have been,” he said to himself. “and yet i deserve
 everything, for i am certainly very stubborn and stupid! i will always
 have my own way. i won’t listen to those who love me and who have more
 brains than i. but from now on, i’ll be different and i’ll try to become a
 most obedient boy. i have found out, beyond any doubt whatever, that
 disobedient boys are certainly far from happy, and that, in the long run,
 they always lose out. i wonder if father is waiting for me. will i find
 him at the fairy’s house? it is so long, poor man, since i have seen him,
 and i do so want his love and his kisses. and will the fairy ever forgive
 me for all i have done? she who has been so good to me and to whom i owe
 my life! can there be a worse or more heartless boy than i am anywhere?”
 as he spoke, he stopped suddenly, frozen with terror.
 what was the matter? an immense serpent lay stretched across the road—a
 serpent with a bright green skin, fiery eyes which glowed and burned, and
 a pointed tail that smoked like a chimney.
 how frightened was poor pinocchio! he ran back wildly for half a mile, and
 at last settled himself atop a heap of stones to wait for the serpent to
 go on his way and leave the road clear for him.
 he waited an hour; two hours; three hours; but the serpent was always
 there, and even from afar one could see the flash of his red eyes and the
 column of smoke which rose from his long, pointed tail.
 pinocchio, trying to feel very brave, walked straight up to him and said
 in a sweet, soothing voice:
 “i beg your pardon, mr. serpent, would you be so kind as to step aside to
 let me pass?”
 he might as well have talked to a wall. the serpent never moved.
 once more, in the same sweet voice, he spoke:
 “you must know, mr. serpent, that i am going home where my father is
 waiting for me. it is so long since i have seen him! would you mind very
 much if i passed?”
 he waited for some sign of an answer to his questions, but the answer did
 not come. on the contrary, the green serpent, who had seemed, until then,
 wide awake and full of life, became suddenly very quiet and still. his
 eyes closed and his tail stopped smoking.
 “is he dead, i wonder?” said pinocchio, rubbing his hands together
 happily. without a moment’s hesitation, he started to step over him, but
 he had just raised one leg when the serpent shot up like a spring and the
 marionette fell head over heels backward. he fell so awkwardly that his
 head stuck in the mud, and there he stood with his legs straight up in the
 air.
 at the sight of the marionette kicking and squirming like a young
 whirlwind, the serpent laughed so heartily and so long that at last he
 burst an artery and died on the spot.
 pinocchio freed himself from his awkward position and once more began to
 run in order to reach the fairy’s house before dark. as he went, the pangs
 of hunger grew so strong that, unable to withstand them, he jumped into a
 field to pick a few grapes that tempted him. woe to him!
 no sooner had he reached the grapevine than—crack! went his legs.
 the poor marionette was caught in a trap set there by a farmer for some
 weasels which came every night to steal his chickens.
 pinocchio is caught by a farmer, who uses him as a watchdog for his
 chicken coop.
 pinocchio, as you may well imagine, began to scream and weep and beg; but
 all was of no use, for no houses were to be seen and not a soul passed by
 on the road.
 night came on.
 a little because of the sharp pain in his legs, a little because of fright
 at finding himself alone in the darkness of the field, the marionette was
 about to faint, when he saw a tiny glowworm flickering by. he called to
 her and said:
 “dear little glowworm, will you set me free?”
 “poor little fellow!” replied the glowworm, stopping to look at him with
 pity. “how came you to be caught in this trap?”
 “i stepped into this lonely field to take a few grapes and—”
 “are the grapes yours?”
 “no.”
 “who has taught you to take things that do not belong to you?”
 “i was hungry.”
 “hunger, my boy, is no reason for taking something which belongs to
 another.”
 “it’s true, it’s true!” cried pinocchio in tears. “i won’t do it again.”
 just then, the conversation was interrupted by approaching footsteps. it
 was the owner of the field, who was coming on tiptoes to see if, by
 chance, he had caught the weasels which had been eating his chickens.
 great was his surprise when, on holding up his lantern, he saw that,
 instead of a weasel, he had caught a boy!
 “ah, you little thief!” said the farmer in an angry voice. “so you are the
 one who steals my chickens!”
 “not i! no, no!” cried pinocchio, sobbing bitterly. “i came here only to
 take a very few grapes.”
 “he who steals grapes may very easily steal chickens also. take my word
 for it, i’ll give you a lesson that you’ll remember for a long while.”
 he opened the trap, grabbed the marionette by the collar, and carried him
 to the house as if he were a puppy. when he reached the yard in front of
 the house, he flung him to the ground, put a foot on his neck, and said to
 him roughly: “it is late now and it’s time for bed. tomorrow we’ll settle
 matters. in the meantime, since my watchdog died today, you may take his
 place and guard my henhouse.”
 no sooner said than done. he slipped a dog collar around pinocchio’s neck
 and tightened it so that it would not come off. a long iron chain was tied
 to the collar. the other end of the chain was nailed to the wall.
 “if tonight it should happen to rain,” said the farmer, “you can sleep in
 that little doghouse near-by, where you will find plenty of straw for a
 soft bed. it has been melampo’s bed for three years, and it will be good
 enough for you. and if, by any chance, any thieves should come, be sure to
 bark!”
 after this last warning, the farmer went into the house and closed the
 door and barred it.
 poor pinocchio huddled close to the doghouse more dead than alive from
 cold, hunger, and fright. now and again he pulled and tugged at the collar
 which nearly choked him and cried out in a weak voice:
 “i deserve it! yes, i deserve it! i have been nothing but a truant and a
 vagabond. i have never obeyed anyone and i have always done as i pleased.
 if i were only like so many others and had studied and worked and stayed
 with my poor old father, i should not find myself here now, in this field
 and in the darkness, taking the place of a farmer’s watchdog. oh, if i
 could start all over again! but what is done can’t be undone, and i must
 be patient!”
 after this little sermon to himself, which came from the very depths of
 his heart, pinocchio went into the doghouse and fell asleep.
 pinocchio discovers the thieves and, as a reward for faithfulness, he
 regains his liberty.
 even though a boy may be very unhappy, he very seldom loses sleep over his
 worries. the marionette, being no exception to this rule, slept on
 peacefully for a few hours till well along toward midnight, when he was
 awakened by strange whisperings and stealthy sounds coming from the yard.
 he stuck his nose out of the doghouse and saw four slender, hairy animals.
 they were weasels, small animals very fond of both eggs and chickens. one
 of them left her companions and, going to the door of the doghouse, said
 in a sweet voice:
 “good evening, melampo.”
 “my name is not melampo,” answered pinocchio.
 “who are you, then?”
 “i am pinocchio.”
 “what are you doing here?”
 “i’m the watchdog.”
 “but where is melampo? where is the old dog who used to live in this
 house?”
 “he died this morning.”
 “died? poor beast! he was so good! still, judging by your face, i think
 you, too, are a good-natured dog.”
 “i beg your pardon, i am not a dog!”
 “what are you, then?”
 “i am a marionette.”
 “are you taking the place of the watchdog?”
 “i’m sorry to say that i am. i’m being punished.”
 “well, i shall make the same terms with you that we had with the dead
 melampo. i am sure you will be glad to hear them.”
 “and what are the terms?”
 “this is our plan: we’ll come once in a while, as in the past, to pay a
 visit to this henhouse, and we’ll take away eight chickens. of these,
 seven are for us, and one for you, provided, of course, that you will make
 believe you are sleeping and will not bark for the farmer.”
 “did melampo really do that?” asked pinocchio.
 “indeed he did, and because of that we were the best of friends. sleep
 away peacefully, and remember that before we go we shall leave you a nice
 fat chicken all ready for your breakfast in the morning. is that
 understood?”
 “even too well,” answered pinocchio. and shaking his head in a threatening
 manner, he seemed to say, “we’ll talk this over in a few minutes, my
 friends.”
 as soon as the four weasels had talked things over, they went straight to
 the chicken coop which stood close to the doghouse. digging busily with
 teeth and claws, they opened the little door and slipped in. but they were
 no sooner in than they heard the door close with a sharp bang.
 the one who had done the trick was pinocchio, who, not satisfied with
 that, dragged a heavy stone in front of it. that done, he started to bark.
 and he barked as if he were a real watchdog: “bow, wow, wow! bow, wow!”
 the farmer heard the loud barks and jumped out of bed. taking his gun, he
 leaped to the window and shouted: “what’s the matter?”
 “the thieves are here,” answered pinocchio.
 “where are they?”
 “in the chicken coop.”
 “i’ll come down in a second.”
 and, in fact, he was down in the yard in a twinkling and running toward
 the chicken coop.
 he opened the door, pulled out the weasels one by one, and, after tying
 them in a bag, said to them in a happy voice: “you’re in my hands at last!
 i could punish you now, but i’ll wait! in the morning you may come with me
 to the inn and there you’ll make a fine dinner for some hungry mortal. it
 is really too great an honor for you, one you do not deserve; but, as you
 see, i am really a very kind and generous man and i am going to do this
 for you!”
 then he went up to pinocchio and began to pet and caress him.
 “how did you ever find them out so quickly? and to think that melampo, my
 faithful melampo, never saw them in all these years!”
 the marionette could have told, then and there, all he knew about the
 shameful contract between the dog and the weasels, but thinking of the
 dead dog, he said to himself: “melampo is dead. what is the use of
 accusing him? the dead are gone and they cannot defend themselves. the
 best thing to do is to leave them in peace!”
 “were you awake or asleep when they came?” continued the farmer.
 “i was asleep,” answered pinocchio, “but they awakened me with their
 whisperings. one of them even came to the door of the doghouse and said to
 me, ‘if you promise not to bark, we will make you a present of one of the
 chickens for your breakfast.’ did you hear that? they had the audacity to
 make such a proposition as that to me! for you must know that, though i am
 a very wicked marionette full of faults, still i never have been, nor ever
 shall be, bribed.”
 “fine boy!” cried the farmer, slapping him on the shoulder in a friendly
 way. “you ought to be proud of yourself. and to show you what i think of
 you, you are free from this instant!”
 and he slipped the dog collar from his neck.
 pinocchio weeps upon learning that the lovely maiden with azure hair is
 dead. he meets a pigeon, who carries him to the seashore. he throws
 himself into the sea to go to the aid of his father.
 as soon as pinocchio no longer felt the shameful weight of the dog collar
 around his neck, he started to run across the fields and meadows, and
 never stopped till he came to the main road that was to take him to the
 fairy’s house.
 when he reached it, he looked into the valley far below him and there he
 saw the wood where unluckily he had met the fox and the cat, and the tall
 oak tree where he had been hanged; but though he searched far and near, he
 could not see the house where the fairy with the azure hair lived.
 he became terribly frightened and, running as fast as he could, he finally
 came to the spot where it had once stood. the little house was no longer
 there. in its place lay a small marble slab, which bore this sad
 inscription:
 the poor marionette was heartbroken at reading these words. he fell to the
 ground and, covering the cold marble with kisses, burst into bitter tears.
 he cried all night, and dawn found him still there, though his tears had
 dried and only hard, dry sobs shook his wooden frame. but these were so
 loud that they could be heard by the faraway hills.
 as he sobbed he said to himself:
 “oh, my fairy, my dear, dear fairy, why did you die? why did i not die,
 who am so bad, instead of you, who are so good? and my father—where
 can he be? please dear fairy, tell me where he is and i shall never, never
 leave him again! you are not really dead, are you? if you love me, you
 will come back, alive as before. don’t you feel sorry for me? i’m so
 lonely. if the two assassins come, they’ll hang me again from the giant
 oak tree and i will really die, this time. what shall i do alone in the
 world? now that you are dead and my father is lost, where shall i eat?
 where shall i sleep? who will make my new clothes? oh, i want to die! yes,
 i want to die! oh, oh, oh!”
 poor pinocchio! he even tried to tear his hair, but as it was only painted
 on his wooden head, he could not even pull it.
 just then a large pigeon flew far above him. seeing the marionette, he
 cried to him:
 “tell me, little boy, what are you doing there?”
 “can’t you see? i’m crying,” cried pinocchio, lifting his head toward the
 voice and rubbing his eyes with his sleeve.
 “tell me,” asked the pigeon, “do you by chance know of a marionette,
 pinocchio by name?”
 “pinocchio! did you say pinocchio?” replied the marionette, jumping to his
 feet. “why, i am pinocchio!”
 at this answer, the pigeon flew swiftly down to the earth. he was much
 larger than a turkey.
 “then you know geppetto also?”
 “do i know him? he’s my father, my poor, dear father! has he, perhaps,
 spoken to you of me? will you take me to him? is he still alive? answer
 me, please! is he still alive?”
 “i left him three days ago on the shore of a large sea.”
 “what was he doing?”
 “he was building a little boat with which to cross the ocean. for the last
 four months, that poor man has been wandering around europe, looking for
 you. not having found you yet, he has made up his mind to look for you in
 the new world, far across the ocean.”
 “how far is it from here to the shore?” asked pinocchio anxiously.
 “more than fifty miles.”
 “fifty miles? oh, dear pigeon, how i wish i had your wings!”
 “if you want to come, i’ll take you with me.”
 “how?”
 “astride my back. are you very heavy?”
 “heavy? not at all. i’m only a feather.”
 “very well.”
 saying nothing more, pinocchio jumped on the pigeon’s back and, as he
 settled himself, he cried out gayly:
 “gallop on, gallop on, my pretty steed! i’m in a great hurry.”
 the pigeon flew away, and in a few minutes he had reached the clouds. the
 marionette looked to see what was below them. his head swam and he was so
 frightened that he clutched wildly at the pigeon’s neck to keep himself
 from falling.
 they flew all day. toward evening the pigeon said:
 “i’m very thirsty!”
 “and i’m very hungry!” said pinocchio.
 “let us stop a few minutes at that pigeon coop down there. then we can go
 on and be at the seashore in the morning.”
 they went into the empty coop and there they found nothing but a bowl of
 water and a small basket filled with chick-peas.
 the marionette had always hated chick-peas. according to him, they had
 always made him sick; but that night he ate them with a relish. as he
 finished them, he turned to the pigeon and said:
 “i never should have thought that chick-peas could be so good!”
 “you must remember, my boy,” answered the pigeon, “that hunger is the best
 sauce!”
 after resting a few minutes longer, they set out again. the next morning
 they were at the seashore.
 pinocchio jumped off the pigeon’s back, and the pigeon, not wanting any
 thanks for a kind deed, flew away swiftly and disappeared.
 the shore was full of people, shrieking and tearing their hair as they
 looked toward the sea.
 “what has happened?” asked pinocchio of a little old woman.
 “a poor old father lost his only son some time ago and today he built a
 tiny boat for himself in order to go in search of him across the ocean.
 the water is very rough and we’re afraid he will be drowned.”
 “where is the little boat?”
 “there. straight down there,” answered the little old woman, pointing to a
 tiny shadow, no bigger than a nutshell, floating on the sea.
 pinocchio looked closely for a few minutes and then gave a sharp cry:
 “it’s my father! it’s my father!”
 meanwhile, the little boat, tossed about by the angry waters, appeared and
 disappeared in the waves. and pinocchio, standing on a high rock, tired
 out with searching, waved to him with hand and cap and even with his nose.
 it looked as if geppetto, though far away from the shore, recognized his
 son, for he took off his cap and waved also. he seemed to be trying to
 make everyone understand that he would come back if he were able, but the
 sea was so heavy that he could do nothing with his oars. suddenly a huge
 wave came and the boat disappeared.
 they waited and waited for it, but it was gone.
 “poor man!” said the fisher folk on the shore, whispering a prayer as they
 turned to go home.
 just then a desperate cry was heard. turning around, the fisher folk saw
 pinocchio dive into the sea and heard him cry out:
 “i’ll save him! i’ll save my father!”
 the marionette, being made of wood, floated easily along and swam like a
 fish in the rough water. now and again he disappeared only to reappear
 once more. in a twinkling, he was far away from land. at last he was
 completely lost to view.
 “poor boy!” cried the fisher folk on the shore, and again they mumbled a
 few prayers, as they returned home.
 pinocchio reaches the island of the busy bees and finds the fairy once
 more.
 pinocchio, spurred on by the hope of finding his father and of being in
 time to save him, swam all night long.
 and what a horrible night it was! it poured rain, it hailed, it thundered,
 and the lightning was so bright that it turned the night into day.
 at dawn, he saw, not far away from him, a long stretch of sand. it was an
 island in the middle of the sea.
 pinocchio tried his best to get there, but he couldn’t. the waves played
 with him and tossed him about as if he were a twig or a bit of straw. at
 last, and luckily for him, a tremendous wave tossed him to the very spot
 where he wanted to be. the blow from the wave was so strong that, as he
 fell to the ground, his joints cracked and almost broke. but, nothing
 daunted, he jumped to his feet and cried:
 “once more i have escaped with my life!”
 little by little the sky cleared. the sun came out in full splendor and
 the sea became as calm as a lake.
 then the marionette took off his clothes and laid them on the sand to dry.
 he looked over the waters to see whether he might catch sight of a boat
 with a little man in it. he searched and he searched, but he saw nothing
 except sea and sky and far away a few sails, so small that they might have
 been birds.
 “if only i knew the name of this island!” he said to himself. “if i even
 knew what kind of people i would find here! but whom shall i ask? there is
 no one here.”
 the idea of finding himself in so lonesome a spot made him so sad that he
 was about to cry, but just then he saw a big fish swimming near-by, with
 his head far out of the water.
 not knowing what to call him, the marionette said to him:
 “hey there, mr. fish, may i have a word with you?”
 “even two, if you want,” answered the fish, who happened to be a very
 polite dolphin.
 “will you please tell me if, on this island, there are places where one
 may eat without necessarily being eaten?”
 “surely, there are,” answered the dolphin. “in fact you’ll find one not
 far from this spot.”
 “and how shall i get there?”
 “take that path on your left and follow your nose. you can’t go wrong.”
 “tell me another thing. you who travel day and night through the sea, did
 you not perhaps meet a little boat with my father in it?”
 “and who is you father?”
 “he is the best father in the world, even as i am the worst son that can
 be found.”
 “in the storm of last night,” answered the dolphin, “the little boat must
 have been swamped.”
 “and my father?”
 “by this time, he must have been swallowed by the terrible shark, which,
 for the last few days, has been bringing terror to these waters.”
 “is this shark very big?” asked pinocchio, who was beginning to tremble
 with fright.
 “is he big?” replied the dolphin. “just to give you an idea of his size,
 let me tell you that he is larger than a five story building and that he
 has a mouth so big and so deep, that a whole train and engine could easily
 get into it.”
 “mother mine!” cried the marionette, scared to death; and dressing himself
 as fast as he could, he turned to the dolphin and said:
 “farewell, mr. fish. pardon the bother, and many thanks for your
 kindness.”
 this said, he took the path at so swift a gait that he seemed to fly, and
 at every small sound he heard, he turned in fear to see whether the
 terrible shark, five stories high and with a train in his mouth, was
 following him.
 after walking a half hour, he came to a small country called the land of
 the busy bees. the streets were filled with people running to and fro
 about their tasks. everyone worked, everyone had something to do. even if
 one were to search with a lantern, not one idle man or one tramp could
 have been found.
 “i understand,” said pinocchio at once wearily, “this is no place for me!
 i was not born for work.”
 but in the meantime, he began to feel hungry, for it was twenty-four hours
 since he had eaten.
 what was to be done?
 there were only two means left to him in order to get a bite to eat. he
 had either to work or to beg.
 he was ashamed to beg, because his father had always preached to him that
 begging should be done only by the sick or the old. he had said that the
 real poor in this world, deserving of our pity and help, were only those
 who, either through age or sickness, had lost the means of earning their
 bread with their own hands. all others should work, and if they didn’t,
 and went hungry, so much the worse for them.
 just then a man passed by, worn out and wet with perspiration, pulling,
 with difficulty, two heavy carts filled with coal.
 pinocchio looked at him and, judging him by his looks to be a kind man,
 said to him with eyes downcast in shame:
 “will you be so good as to give me a penny, for i am faint with hunger?”
 “not only one penny,” answered the coal man. “i’ll give you four if you
 will help me pull these two wagons.”
 “i am surprised!” answered the marionette, very much offended. “i wish you
 to know that i never have been a donkey, nor have i ever pulled a wagon.”
 “so much the better for you!” answered the coal man. “then, my boy, if you
 are really faint with hunger, eat two slices of your pride; and i hope
 they don’t give you indigestion.”
 a few minutes after, a bricklayer passed by, carrying a pail full of
 plaster on his shoulder.
 “good man, will you be kind enough to give a penny to a poor boy who is
 yawning from hunger?”
 “gladly,” answered the bricklayer. “come with me and carry some plaster,
 and instead of one penny, i’ll give you five.”
 “but the plaster is heavy,” answered pinocchio, “and the work too hard for
 me.”
 “if the work is too hard for you, my boy, enjoy your yawns and may they
 bring you luck!”
 in less than a half hour, at least twenty people passed and pinocchio
 begged of each one, but they all answered:
 “aren’t you ashamed? instead of being a beggar in the streets, why don’t
 you look for work and earn your own bread?”
 finally a little woman went by carrying two water jugs.
 “good woman, will you allow me to have a drink from one of your jugs?”
 asked pinocchio, who was burning up with thirst.
 “with pleasure, my boy!” she answered, setting the two jugs on the ground
 before him.
 when pinocchio had had his fill, he grumbled, as he wiped his mouth:
 “my thirst is gone. if i could only as easily get rid of my hunger!”
 on hearing these words, the good little woman immediately said:
 “if you help me to carry these jugs home, i’ll give you a slice of bread.”
 pinocchio looked at the jug and said neither yes nor no.
 “and with the bread, i’ll give you a nice dish of cauliflower with white
 sauce on it.”
 pinocchio gave the jug another look and said neither yes nor no.
 “and after the cauliflower, some cake and jam.”
 at this last bribery, pinocchio could no longer resist and said firmly:
 “very well. i’ll take the jug home for you.”
 the jug was very heavy, and the marionette, not being strong enough to
 carry it with his hands, had to put it on his head.
 when they arrived home, the little woman made pinocchio sit down at a
 small table and placed before him the bread, the cauliflower, and the
 cake. pinocchio did not eat; he devoured. his stomach seemed a bottomless
 pit.
 his hunger finally appeased, he raised his head to thank his kind
 benefactress. but he had not looked at her long when he gave a cry of
 surprise and sat there with his eyes wide open, his fork in the air, and
 his mouth filled with bread and cauliflower.
 “why all this surprise?” asked the good woman, laughing.
 “because—” answered pinocchio, stammering and stuttering, “because—you
 look like—you remind me of—yes, yes, the same voice, the same
 eyes, the same hair—yes, yes, yes, you also have the same azure hair
 she had—oh, my little fairy, my little fairy! tell me that it is
 you! don’t make me cry any longer! if you only knew! i have cried so much,
 i have suffered so!”
 and pinocchio threw himself on the floor and clasped the knees of the
 mysterious little woman.
 pinocchio promises the fairy to be good and to study, as he is growing
 tired of being a marionette, and wishes to become a real boy.
 if pinocchio cried much longer, the little woman thought he would melt
 away, so she finally admitted that she was the little fairy with azure
 hair.
 “you rascal of a marionette! how did you know it was i?” she asked,
 laughing.
 “my love for you told me who you were.”
 “do you remember? you left me when i was a little girl and now you find me
 a grown woman. i am so old, i could almost be your mother!”
 “i am very glad of that, for then i can call you mother instead of sister.
 for a long time i have wanted a mother, just like other boys. but how did
 you grow so quickly?”
 “that’s a secret!”
 “tell it to me. i also want to grow a little. look at me! i have never
 grown higher than a penny’s worth of cheese.”
 “but you can’t grow,” answered the fairy.
 “why not?”
 “because marionettes never grow. they are born marionettes, they live
 marionettes, and they die marionettes.”
 “oh, i’m tired of always being a marionette!” cried pinocchio disgustedly.
 “it’s about time for me to grow into a man as everyone else does.”
 “and you will if you deserve it—”
 “really? what can i do to deserve it?”
 “it’s a very simple matter. try to act like a well-behaved child.”
 “don’t you think i do?”
 “far from it! good boys are obedient, and you, on the contrary—”
 “and i never obey.”
 “good boys love study and work, but you—”
 “and i, on the contrary, am a lazy fellow and a tramp all year round.”
 “good boys always tell the truth.”
 “and i always tell lies.”
 “good boys go gladly to school.”
 “and i get sick if i go to school. from now on i’ll be different.”
 “do you promise?”
 “i promise. i want to become a good boy and be a comfort to my father.
 where is my poor father now?”
 “i do not know.”
 “will i ever be lucky enough to find him and embrace him once more?”
 “i think so. indeed, i am sure of it.”
 at this answer, pinocchio’s happiness was very great. he grasped the
 fairy’s hands and kissed them so hard that it looked as if he had lost his
 head. then lifting his face, he looked at her lovingly and asked: “tell
 me, little mother, it isn’t true that you are dead, is it?”
 “it doesn’t seem so,” answered the fairy, smiling.
 “if you only knew how i suffered and how i wept when i read ‘here lies—‘”
 “i know it, and for that i have forgiven you. the depth of your sorrow
 made me see that you have a kind heart. there is always hope for boys with
 hearts such as yours, though they may often be very mischievous. this is
 the reason why i have come so far to look for you. from now on, i’ll be
 your own little mother.”
 “oh! how lovely!” cried pinocchio, jumping with joy.
 “you will obey me always and do as i wish?”
 “gladly, very gladly, more than gladly!”
 “beginning tomorrow,” said the fairy, “you’ll go to school every day.”
 pinocchio’s face fell a little.
 “then you will choose the trade you like best.”
 pinocchio became more serious.
 “what are you mumbling to yourself?” asked the fairy.
 “i was just saying,” whined the marionette in a whisper, “that it seems
 too late for me to go to school now.”
 “no, indeed. remember it is never too late to learn.”
 “but i don’t want either trade or profession.”
 “why?”
 “because work wearies me!”
 “my dear boy,” said the fairy, “people who speak as you do usually end
 their days either in a prison or in a hospital. a man, remember, whether
 rich or poor, should do something in this world. no one can find happiness
 without work. woe betide the lazy fellow! laziness is a serious illness
 and one must cure it immediately; yes, even from early childhood. if not,
 it will kill you in the end.”
 these words touched pinocchio’s heart. he lifted his eyes to his fairy and
 said seriously: “i’ll work; i’ll study; i’ll do all you tell me. after
 all, the life of a marionette has grown very tiresome to me and i want to
 become a boy, no matter how hard it is. you promise that, do you not?”
 “yes, i promise, and now it is up to you.”
 pinocchio goes to the seashore with his friends to see the terrible shark.
 in the morning, bright and early, pinocchio started for school.
 imagine what the boys said when they saw a marionette enter the classroom!
 they laughed until they cried. everyone played tricks on him. one pulled
 his hat off, another tugged at his coat, a third tried to paint a mustache
 under his nose. one even attempted to tie strings to his feet and his
 hands to make him dance.
 for a while pinocchio was very calm and quiet. finally, however, he lost
 all patience and turning to his tormentors, he said to them threateningly:
 “careful, boys, i haven’t come here to be made fun of. i’ll respect you
 and i want you to respect me.”
 “hurrah for dr. know-all! you have spoken like a printed book!” howled the
 boys, bursting with laughter. one of them, more impudent than the rest,
 put out his hand to pull the marionette’s nose.
 but he was not quick enough, for pinocchio stretched his leg under the
 table and kicked him hard on the shin.
 “oh, what hard feet!” cried the boy, rubbing the spot where the marionette
 had kicked him.
 “and what elbows! they are even harder than the feet!” shouted another
 one, who, because of some other trick, had received a blow in the stomach.
 with that kick and that blow pinocchio gained everybody’s favor. everyone
 admired him, danced attendance upon him, petted and caressed him.
 as the days passed into weeks, even the teacher praised him, for he saw
 him attentive, hard working, and wide awake, always the first to come in
 the morning, and the last to leave when school was over.
 pinocchio’s only fault was that he had too many friends. among these were
 many well-known rascals, who cared not a jot for study or for success.
 the teacher warned him each day, and even the good fairy repeated to him
 many times:
 “take care, pinocchio! those bad companions will sooner or later make you
 lose your love for study. some day they will lead you astray.”
 “there’s no such danger,” answered the marionette, shrugging his shoulders
 and pointing to his forehead as if to say, “i’m too wise.”
 so it happened that one day, as he was walking to school, he met some boys
 who ran up to him and said:
 “have you heard the news?”
 “no!”
 “a shark as big as a mountain has been seen near the shore.”
 “really? i wonder if it could be the same one i heard of when my father
 was drowned?”
 “we are going to see it. are you coming?”
 “no, not i. i must go to school.”
 “what do you care about school? you can go there tomorrow. with a lesson
 more or less, we are always the same donkeys.”
 “and what will the teacher say?”
 “let him talk. he is paid to grumble all day long.”
 “and my mother?”
 “mothers don’t know anything,” answered those scamps.
 “do you know what i’ll do?” said pinocchio. “for certain reasons of mine,
 i, too, want to see that shark; but i’ll go after school. i can see him
 then as well as now.”
 “poor simpleton!” cried one of the boys. “do you think that a fish of that
 size will stand there waiting for you? he turns and off he goes, and no
 one will ever be the wiser.”
 “how long does it take from here to the shore?” asked the marionette. “one
 hour there and back.”
 “very well, then. let’s see who gets there first!” cried pinocchio.
 at the signal, the little troop, with books under their arms, dashed
 across the fields. pinocchio led the way, running as if on wings, the
 others following as fast as they could.
 now and again, he looked back and, seeing his followers hot and tired, and
 with tongues hanging out, he laughed out heartily. unhappy boy! if he had
 only known then the dreadful things that were to happen to him on account
 of his disobedience!
 the great battle between pinocchio and his playmates. one is wounded.
 pinocchio is arrested.
 going like the wind, pinocchio took but a very short time to reach the
 shore. he glanced all about him, but there was no sign of a shark. the sea
 was as smooth as glass.
 “hey there, boys! where’s that shark?” he asked, turning to his playmates.
 “he may have gone for his breakfast,” said one of them, laughing.
 “or, perhaps, he went to bed for a little nap,” said another, laughing
 also.
 from the answers and the laughter which followed them, pinocchio
 understood that the boys had played a trick on him.
 “what now?” he said angrily to them. “what’s the joke?”
 “oh, the joke’s on you!” cried his tormentors, laughing more heartily than
 ever, and dancing gayly around the marionette.
 “and that is—?”
 “that we have made you stay out of school to come with us. aren’t you
 ashamed of being such a goody-goody, and of studying so hard? you never
 have a bit of enjoyment.”
 “and what is it to you, if i do study?”
 “what does the teacher think of us, you mean?”
 “why?”
 “don’t you see? if you study and we don’t, we pay for it. after all, it’s
 only fair to look out for ourselves.”
 “what do you want me to do?”
 “hate school and books and teachers, as we all do. they are your worst
 enemies, you know, and they like to make you as unhappy as they can.”
 “and if i go on studying, what will you do to me?”
 “you’ll pay for it!”
 “really, you amuse me,” answered the marionette, nodding his head.
 “hey, pinocchio,” cried the tallest of them all, “that will do. we are
 tired of hearing you bragging about yourself, you little turkey cock! you
 may not be afraid of us, but remember we are not afraid of you, either!
 you are alone, you know, and we are seven.”
 “like the seven sins,” said pinocchio, still laughing.
 “did you hear that? he has insulted us all. he has called us sins.”
 “pinocchio, apologize for that, or look out!”
 “cuck—oo!” said the marionette, mocking them with his thumb to his
 nose.
 “you’ll be sorry!”
 “cuck—oo!”
 “we’ll whip you soundly!”
 “cuck—oo!”
 “you’ll go home with a broken nose!”
 “cuck—oo!”
 “very well, then! take that, and keep it for your supper,” called out the
 boldest of his tormentors.
 and with the words, he gave pinocchio a terrible blow on the head.
 pinocchio answered with another blow, and that was the signal for the
 beginning of the fray. in a few moments, the fight raged hot and heavy on
 both sides.
 pinocchio, although alone, defended himself bravely. with those two wooden
 feet of his, he worked so fast that his opponents kept at a respectful
 distance. wherever they landed, they left their painful mark and the boys
 could only run away and howl.
 enraged at not being able to fight the marionette at close quarters, they
 started to throw all kinds of books at him. readers, geographies,
 histories, grammars flew in all directions. but pinocchio was keen of eye
 and swift of movement, and the books only passed over his head, landed in
 the sea, and disappeared.
 the fish, thinking they might be good to eat, came to the top of the water
 in great numbers. some took a nibble, some took a bite, but no sooner had
 they tasted a page or two, than they spat them out with a wry face, as if
 to say:
 “what a horrid taste! our own food is so much better!”
 meanwhile, the battle waxed more and more furious. at the noise, a large
 crab crawled slowly out of the water and, with a voice that sounded like a
 trombone suffering from a cold, he cried out:
 “stop fighting, you rascals! these battles between boys rarely end well.
 trouble is sure to come to you!”
 poor crab! he might as well have spoken to the wind. instead of listening
 to his good advice, pinocchio turned to him and said as roughly as he knew
 how:
 “keep quiet, ugly gab! it would be better for you to chew a few cough
 drops to get rid of that cold you have. go to bed and sleep! you will feel
 better in the morning.”
 in the meantime, the boys, having used all their books, looked around for
 new ammunition. seeing pinocchio’s bundle lying idle near-by, they somehow
 managed to get hold of it.
 one of the books was a very large volume, an arithmetic text, heavily
 bound in leather. it was pinocchio’s pride. among all his books, he liked
 that one the best.
 thinking it would make a fine missile, one of the boys took hold of it and
 threw it with all his strength at pinocchio’s head. but instead of hitting
 the marionette, the book struck one of the other boys, who, as pale as a
 ghost, cried out faintly: “oh, mother, help! i’m dying!” and fell
 senseless to the ground.
 at the sight of that pale little corpse, the boys were so frightened that
 they turned tail and ran. in a few moments, all had disappeared.
 all except pinocchio. although scared to death by the horror of what had
 been done, he ran to the sea and soaked his handkerchief in the cool water
 and with it bathed the head of his poor little schoolmate. sobbing
 bitterly, he called to him, saying:
 “eugene! my poor eugene! open your eyes and look at me! why don’t you
 answer? i was not the one who hit you, you know. believe me, i didn’t do
 it. open your eyes, eugene? if you keep them shut, i’ll die, too. oh, dear
 me, how shall i ever go home now? how shall i ever look at my little
 mother again? what will happen to me? where shall i go? where shall i
 hide? oh, how much better it would have been, a thousand times better, if
 only i had gone to school! why did i listen to those boys? they always
 were a bad influence! and to think that the teacher had told me—and
 my mother, too!—‘beware of bad company!’ that’s what she said. but
 i’m stubborn and proud. i listen, but always i do as i wish. and then i
 pay. i’ve never had a moment’s peace since i’ve been born! oh, dear! what
 will become of me? what will become of me?”
 pinocchio went on crying and moaning and beating his head. again and again
 he called to his little friend, when suddenly he heard heavy steps
 approaching.
 he looked up and saw two tall carabineers near him.
 “what are you doing stretched out on the ground?” they asked pinocchio.
 “i’m helping this schoolfellow of mine.”
 “has he fainted?”
 “i should say so,” said one of the carabineers, bending to look at eugene.
 “this boy has been wounded on the temple. who has hurt him?”
 “not i,” stammered the marionette, who had hardly a breath left in his
 whole body.
 “if it wasn’t you, who was it, then?”
 “not i,” repeated pinocchio.
 “and with what was he wounded?”
 “with this book,” and the marionette picked up the arithmetic text to show
 it to the officer.
 “and whose book is this?”
 “mine.”
 “enough.”
 “not another word! get up as quickly as you can and come along with us.”
 “but i—”
 “come with us!”
 “but i am innocent.”
 “come with us!”
 before starting out, the officers called out to several fishermen passing
 by in a boat and said to them:
 “take care of this little fellow who has been hurt. take him home and bind
 his wounds. tomorrow we’ll come after him.”
 they then took hold of pinocchio and, putting him between them, said to
 him in a rough voice: “march! and go quickly, or it will be the worse for
 you!”
 they did not have to repeat their words. the marionette walked swiftly
 along the road to the village. but the poor fellow hardly knew what he was
 about. he thought he had a nightmare. he felt ill. his eyes saw everything
 double, his legs trembled, his tongue was dry, and, try as he might, he
 could not utter a single word. yet, in spite of this numbness of feeling,
 he suffered keenly at the thought of passing under the windows of his good
 little fairy’s house. what would she say on seeing him between two
 carabineers?
 they had just reached the village, when a sudden gust of wind blew off
 pinocchio’s cap and made it go sailing far down the street.
 “would you allow me,” the marionette asked the carabineers, “to run after
 my cap?”
 “very well, go; but hurry.”
 the marionette went, picked up his cap—but instead of putting it on
 his head, he stuck it between his teeth and then raced toward the sea.
 he went like a bullet out of a gun.
 the carabineers, judging that it would be very difficult to catch him,
 sent a large mastiff after him, one that had won first prize in all the
 dog races. pinocchio ran fast and the dog ran faster. at so much noise,
 the people hung out of the windows or gathered in the street, anxious to
 see the end of the contest. but they were disappointed, for the dog and
 pinocchio raised so much dust on the road that, after a few moments, it
 was impossible to see them.
 pinocchio runs the danger of being fried in a pan like a fish
 during that wild chase, pinocchio lived through a terrible moment when he
 almost gave himself up as lost. this was when alidoro (that was the
 mastiff’s name), in a frenzy of running, came so near that he was on the
 very point of reaching him.
 the marionette heard, close behind him, the labored breathing of the beast
 who was fast on his trail, and now and again even felt his hot breath blow
 over him.
 luckily, by this time, he was very near the shore, and the sea was in
 sight; in fact, only a few short steps away.
 as soon as he set foot on the beach, pinocchio gave a leap and fell into
 the water. alidoro tried to stop, but as he was running very fast, he
 couldn’t, and he, too, landed far out in the sea. strange though it may
 seem, the dog could not swim. he beat the water with his paws to hold
 himself up, but the harder he tried, the deeper he sank. as he stuck his
 head out once more, the poor fellow’s eyes were bulging and he barked out
 wildly, “i drown! i drown!”
 “drown!” answered pinocchio from afar, happy at his escape.
 “help, pinocchio, dear little pinocchio! save me from death!”
 at those cries of suffering, the marionette, who after all had a very kind
 heart, was moved to compassion. he turned toward the poor animal and said
 to him:
 “but if i help you, will you promise not to bother me again by running
 after me?”
 “i promise! i promise! only hurry, for if you wait another second, i’ll be
 dead and gone!”
 pinocchio hesitated still another minute. then, remembering how his father
 had often told him that a kind deed is never lost, he swam to alidoro and,
 catching hold of his tail, dragged him to the shore.
 the poor dog was so weak he could not stand. he had swallowed so much salt
 water that he was swollen like a balloon. however, pinocchio, not wishing
 to trust him too much, threw himself once again into the sea. as he swam
 away, he called out:
 “good-by, alidoro, good luck and remember me to the family!”
 “good-by, little pinocchio,” answered the dog. “a thousand thanks for
 having saved me from death. you did me a good turn, and, in this world,
 what is given is always returned. if the chance comes, i shall be there.”
 pinocchio went on swimming close to shore. at last he thought he had
 reached a safe place. glancing up and down the beach, he saw the opening
 of a cave out of which rose a spiral of smoke.
 “in that cave,” he said to himself, “there must be a fire. so much the
 better. i’ll dry my clothes and warm myself, and then—well—”
 his mind made up, pinocchio swam to the rocks, but as he started to climb,
 he felt something under him lifting him up higher and higher. he tried to
 escape, but he was too late. to his great surprise, he found himself in a
 huge net, amid a crowd of fish of all kinds and sizes, who were fighting
 and struggling desperately to free themselves.
 at the same time, he saw a fisherman come out of the cave, a fisherman so
 ugly that pinocchio thought he was a sea monster. in place of hair, his
 head was covered by a thick bush of green grass. green was the skin of his
 body, green were his eyes, green was the long, long beard that reached
 down to his feet. he looked like a giant lizard with legs and arms.
 when the fisherman pulled the net out of the sea, he cried out joyfully:
 “blessed providence! once more i’ll have a fine meal of fish!”
 “thank heaven, i’m not a fish!” said pinocchio to himself, trying with
 these words to find a little courage.
 the fisherman took the net and the fish to the cave, a dark, gloomy, smoky
 place. in the middle of it, a pan full of oil sizzled over a smoky fire,
 sending out a repelling odor of tallow that took away one’s breath.
 “now, let’s see what kind of fish we have caught today,” said the green
 fisherman. he put a hand as big as a spade into the net and pulled out a
 handful of mullets.
 “fine mullets, these!” he said, after looking at them and smelling them
 with pleasure. after that, he threw them into a large, empty tub.
 many times he repeated this performance. as he pulled each fish out of the
 net, his mouth watered with the thought of the good dinner coming, and he
 said:
 “fine fish, these bass!”
 “very tasty, these whitefish!”
 “delicious flounders, these!”
 “what splendid crabs!”
 “and these dear little anchovies, with their heads still on!”
 as you can well imagine, the bass, the flounders, the whitefish, and even
 the little anchovies all went together into the tub to keep the mullets
 company. the last to come out of the net was pinocchio.
 as soon as the fisherman pulled him out, his green eyes opened wide with
 surprise, and he cried out in fear:
 “what kind of fish is this? i don’t remember ever eating anything like
 it.”
 he looked at him closely and after turning him over and over, he said at
 last:
 “i understand. he must be a crab!”
 pinocchio, mortified at being taken for a crab, said resentfully:
 “what nonsense! a crab indeed! i am no such thing. beware how you deal
 with me! i am a marionette, i want you to know.”
 “a marionette?” asked the fisherman. “i must admit that a marionette fish
 is, for me, an entirely new kind of fish. so much the better. i’ll eat you
 with greater relish.”
 “eat me? but can’t you understand that i’m not a fish? can’t you hear that
 i speak and think as you do?”
 “it’s true,” answered the fisherman; “but since i see that you are a fish,
 well able to talk and think as i do, i’ll treat you with all due respect.”
 “and that is—”
 “that, as a sign of my particular esteem, i’ll leave to you the choice of
 the manner in which you are to be cooked. do you wish to be fried in a
 pan, or do you prefer to be cooked with tomato sauce?”
 “to tell you the truth,” answered pinocchio, “if i must choose, i should
 much rather go free so i may return home!”
 “are you fooling? do you think that i want to lose the opportunity to
 taste such a rare fish? a marionette fish does not come very often to
 these seas. leave it to me. i’ll fry you in the pan with the others. i
 know you’ll like it. it’s always a comfort to find oneself in good
 company.”
 the unlucky marionette, hearing this, began to cry and wail and beg. with
 tears streaming down his cheeks, he said:
 “how much better it would have been for me to go to school! i did listen
 to my playmates and now i am paying for it! oh! oh! oh!”
 and as he struggled and squirmed like an eel to escape from him, the green
 fisherman took a stout cord and tied him hand and foot, and threw him into
 the bottom of the tub with the others.
 then he pulled a wooden bowl full of flour out of a cupboard and started
 to roll the fish into it, one by one. when they were white with it, he
 threw them into the pan. the first to dance in the hot oil were the
 mullets, the bass followed, then the whitefish, the flounders, and the
 anchovies. pinocchio’s turn came last. seeing himself so near to death
 (and such a horrible death!) he began to tremble so with fright that he
 had no voice left with which to beg for his life.
 the poor boy beseeched only with his eyes. but the green fisherman, not
 even noticing that it was he, turned him over and over in the flour until
 he looked like a marionette made of chalk.
 then he took him by the head and . . .
 pinocchio returns to the fairy’s house and she promises him that, on the
 morrow, he will cease to be a marionette and become a boy. a wonderful
 party of coffee-and-milk to celebrate the great event.
 mindful of what the fisherman had said, pinocchio knew that all hope of
 being saved had gone. he closed his eyes and waited for the final moment.
 suddenly, a large dog, attracted by the odor of the boiling oil, came
 running into the cave.
 “get out!” cried the fisherman threateningly and still holding onto the
 marionette, who was all covered with flour.
 but the poor dog was very hungry, and whining and wagging his tail, he
 tried to say:
 “give me a bite of the fish and i’ll go in peace.”
 “get out, i say!” repeated the fisherman.
 and he drew back his foot to give the dog a kick.
 then the dog, who, being really hungry, would take no refusal, turned in a
 rage toward the fisherman and bared his terrible fangs. and at that
 moment, a pitiful little voice was heard saying: “save me, alidoro; if you
 don’t, i fry!”
 the dog immediately recognized pinocchio’s voice. great was his surprise
 to find that the voice came from the little flour-covered bundle that the
 fisherman held in his hand.
 then what did he do? with one great leap, he grasped that bundle in his
 mouth and, holding it lightly between his teeth, ran through the door and
 disappeared like a flash!
 the fisherman, angry at seeing his meal snatched from under his nose, ran
 after the dog, but a bad fit of coughing made him stop and turn back.
 meanwhile, alidoro, as soon as he had found the road which led to the
 village, stopped and dropped pinocchio softly to the ground.
 “how much i do thank you!” said the marionette.
 “it is not necessary,” answered the dog. “you saved me once, and what is
 given is always returned. we are in this world to help one another.”
 “but how did you get in that cave?”
 “i was lying here on the sand more dead than alive, when an appetizing
 odor of fried fish came to me. that odor tickled my hunger and i followed
 it. oh, if i had come a moment later!”
 “don’t speak about it,” wailed pinocchio, still trembling with fright.
 “don’t say a word. if you had come a moment later, i would be fried,
 eaten, and digested by this time. brrrrrr! i shiver at the mere thought of
 it.”
 alidoro laughingly held out his paw to the marionette, who shook it
 heartily, feeling that now he and the dog were good friends. then they bid
 each other good-by and the dog went home.
 pinocchio, left alone, walked toward a little hut near by, where an old
 man sat at the door sunning himself, and asked:
 “tell me, good man, have you heard anything of a poor boy with a wounded
 head, whose name was eugene?”
 “the boy was brought to this hut and now—”
 “now he is dead?” pinocchio interrupted sorrowfully.
 “no, he is now alive and he has already returned home.”
 “really? really?” cried the marionette, jumping around with joy. “then the
 wound was not serious?”
 “but it might have been—and even mortal,” answered the old man, “for
 a heavy book was thrown at his head.”
 “and who threw it?”
 “a schoolmate of his, a certain pinocchio.”
 “and who is this pinocchio?” asked the marionette, feigning ignorance.
 “they say he is a mischief-maker, a tramp, a street urchin—”
 “calumnies! all calumnies!”
 “do you know this pinocchio?”
 “by sight!” answered the marionette.
 “and what do you think of him?” asked the old man.
 “i think he’s a very good boy, fond of study, obedient, kind to his
 father, and to his whole family—”
 as he was telling all these enormous lies about himself, pinocchio touched
 his nose and found it twice as long as it should be. scared out of his
 wits, he cried out:
 “don’t listen to me, good man! all the wonderful things i have said are
 not true at all. i know pinocchio well and he is indeed a very wicked
 fellow, lazy and disobedient, who instead of going to school, runs away
 with his playmates to have a good time.”
 at this speech, his nose returned to its natural size.
 “why are you so pale?” the old man asked suddenly.
 “let me tell you. without knowing it, i rubbed myself against a newly
 painted wall,” he lied, ashamed to say that he had been made ready for the
 frying pan.
 “what have you done with your coat and your hat and your breeches?”
 “i met thieves and they robbed me. tell me, my good man, have you not,
 perhaps, a little suit to give me, so that i may go home?”
 “my boy, as for clothes, i have only a bag in which i keep hops. if you
 want it, take it. there it is.”
 pinocchio did not wait for him to repeat his words. he took the bag, which
 happened to be empty, and after cutting a big hole at the top and two at
 the sides, he slipped into it as if it were a shirt. lightly clad as he
 was, he started out toward the village.
 along the way he felt very uneasy. in fact he was so unhappy that he went
 along taking two steps forward and one back, and as he went he said to
 himself:
 “how shall i ever face my good little fairy? what will she say when she
 sees me? will she forgive this last trick of mine? i am sure she won’t.
 oh, no, she won’t. and i deserve it, as usual! for i am a rascal, fine on
 promises which i never keep!”
 he came to the village late at night. it was so dark he could see nothing
 and it was raining pitchforks.
 pinocchio went straight to the fairy’s house, firmly resolved to knock at
 the door.
 when he found himself there, he lost courage and ran back a few steps. a
 second time he came to the door and again he ran back. a third time he
 repeated his performance. the fourth time, before he had time to lose his
 courage, he grasped the knocker and made a faint sound with it.
 he waited and waited and waited. finally, after a full half hour, a
 top-floor window (the house had four stories) opened and pinocchio saw a
 large snail look out. a tiny light glowed on top of her head. “who knocks
 at this late hour?” she called.
 “is the fairy home?” asked the marionette.
 “the fairy is asleep and does not wish to be disturbed. who are you?”
 “it is i.”
 “who’s i?”
 “pinocchio.”
 “who is pinocchio?”
 “the marionette; the one who lives in the fairy’s house.”
 “oh, i understand,” said the snail. “wait for me there. i’ll come down to
 open the door for you.”
 “hurry, i beg of you, for i am dying of cold.”
 “my boy, i am a snail and snails are never in a hurry.”
 an hour passed, two hours; and the door was still closed. pinocchio, who
 was trembling with fear and shivering from the cold rain on his back,
 knocked a second time, this time louder than before.
 at that second knock, a window on the third floor opened and the same
 snail looked out.
 “dear little snail,” cried pinocchio from the street. “i have been waiting
 two hours for you! and two hours on a dreadful night like this are as long
 as two years. hurry, please!”
 “my boy,” answered the snail in a calm, peaceful voice, “my dear boy, i am
 a snail and snails are never in a hurry.” and the window closed.
 a few minutes later midnight struck; then one o’clock—two o’clock.
 and the door still remained closed!
 then pinocchio, losing all patience, grabbed the knocker with both hands,
 fully determined to awaken the whole house and street with it. as soon as
 he touched the knocker, however, it became an eel and wiggled away into
 the darkness.
 “really?” cried pinocchio, blind with rage. “if the knocker is gone, i can
 still use my feet.”
 he stepped back and gave the door a most solemn kick. he kicked so hard
 that his foot went straight through the door and his leg followed almost
 to the knee. no matter how he pulled and tugged, he could not pull it out.
 there he stayed as if nailed to the door.
 poor pinocchio! the rest of the night he had to spend with one foot
 through the door and the other one in the air.
 as dawn was breaking, the door finally opened. that brave little animal,
 the snail, had taken exactly nine hours to go from the fourth floor to the
 street. how she must have raced!
 “what are you doing with your foot through the door?” she asked the
 marionette, laughing.
 “it was a misfortune. won’t you try, pretty little snail, to free me from
 this terrible torture?”
 “my boy, we need a carpenter here and i have never been one.”
 “ask the fairy to help me!”
 “the fairy is asleep and does not want to be disturbed.”
 “but what do you want me to do, nailed to the door like this?”
 “enjoy yourself counting the ants which are passing by.”
 “bring me something to eat, at least, for i am faint with hunger.”
 “immediately!”
 in fact, after three hours and a half, pinocchio saw her return with a
 silver tray on her head. on the tray there was bread, roast chicken,
 fruit.
 “here is the breakfast the fairy sends to you,” said the snail.
 at the sight of all these good things, the marionette felt much better.
 what was his disgust, however, when on tasting the food, he found the
 bread to be made of chalk, the chicken of cardboard, and the brilliant
 fruit of colored alabaster!
 he wanted to cry, he wanted to give himself up to despair, he wanted to
 throw away the tray and all that was on it. instead, either from pain or
 weakness, he fell to the floor in a dead faint.
 when he regained his senses, he found himself stretched out on a sofa and
 the fairy was seated near him.
 “this time also i forgive you,” said the fairy to him. “but be careful not
 to get into mischief again.”
 pinocchio promised to study and to behave himself. and he kept his word
 for the remainder of the year. at the end of it, he passed first in all
 his examinations, and his report was so good that the fairy said to him
 happily:
 “tomorrow your wish will come true.”
 “and what is it?”
 “tomorrow you will cease to be a marionette and will become a real boy.”
 pinocchio was beside himself with joy. all his friends and schoolmates
 must be invited to celebrate the great event! the fairy promised to
 prepare two hundred cups of coffee-and-milk and four hundred slices of
 toast buttered on both sides.
 the day promised to be a very gay and happy one, but—
 unluckily, in a marionette’s life there’s always a but which is apt to
 spoil everything.
 pinocchio, instead of becoming a boy, runs away to the land of toys with
 his friend, lamp-wick.
 coming at last out of the surprise into which the fairy’s words had thrown
 him, pinocchio asked for permission to give out the invitations.
 “indeed, you may invite your friends to tomorrow’s party. only remember to
 return home before dark. do you understand?”
 “i’ll be back in one hour without fail,” answered the marionette.
 “take care, pinocchio! boys give promises very easily, but they as easily
 forget them.”
 “but i am not like those others. when i give my word i keep it.”
 “we shall see. in case you do disobey, you will be the one to suffer, not
 anyone else.”
 “why?”
 “because boys who do not listen to their elders always come to grief.”
 “i certainly have,” said pinocchio, “but from now on, i obey.”
 “we shall see if you are telling the truth.”
 without adding another word, the marionette bade the good fairy good-by,
 and singing and dancing, he left the house.
 in a little more than an hour, all his friends were invited. some accepted
 quickly and gladly. others had to be coaxed, but when they heard that the
 toast was to be buttered on both sides, they all ended by accepting the
 invitation with the words, “we’ll come to please you.”
 now it must be known that, among all his friends, pinocchio had one whom
 he loved most of all. the boy’s real name was romeo, but everyone called
 him lamp-wick, for he was long and thin and had a woebegone look about
 him.
 lamp-wick was the laziest boy in the school and the biggest
 mischief-maker, but pinocchio loved him dearly.
 that day, he went straight to his friend’s house to invite him to the
 party, but lamp-wick was not at home. he went a second time, and again a
 third, but still without success.
 where could he be? pinocchio searched here and there and everywhere, and
 finally discovered him hiding near a farmer’s wagon.
 “what are you doing there?” asked pinocchio, running up to him.
 “i am waiting for midnight to strike to go—”
 “where?”
 “far, far away!”
 “and i have gone to your house three times to look for you!”
 “what did you want from me?”
 “haven’t you heard the news? don’t you know what good luck is mine?”
 “what is it?”
 “tomorrow i end my days as a marionette and become a boy, like you and all
 my other friends.”
 “may it bring you luck!”
 “shall i see you at my party tomorrow?”
 “but i’m telling you that i go tonight.”
 “at what time?”
 “at midnight.”
 “and where are you going?”
 “to a real country—the best in the world—a wonderful place!”
 “what is it called?”
 “it is called the land of toys. why don’t you come, too?”
 “i? oh, no!”
 “you are making a big mistake, pinocchio. believe me, if you don’t come,
 you’ll be sorry. where can you find a place that will agree better with
 you and me? no schools, no teachers, no books! in that blessed place there
 is no such thing as study. here, it is only on saturdays that we have no
 school. in the land of toys, every day, except sunday, is a saturday.
 vacation begins on the first of january and ends on the last day of
 december. that is the place for me! all countries should be like it! how
 happy we should all be!”
 “but how does one spend the day in the land of toys?”
 “days are spent in play and enjoyment from morn till night. at night one
 goes to bed, and next morning, the good times begin all over again. what
 do you think of it?”
 “h’m—!” said pinocchio, nodding his wooden head, as if to say, “it’s
 the kind of life which would agree with me perfectly.”
 “do you want to go with me, then? yes or no? you must make up your mind.”
 “no, no, and again no! i have promised my kind fairy to become a good boy,
 and i want to keep my word. just see: the sun is setting and i must leave
 you and run. good-by and good luck to you!”
 “where are you going in such a hurry?”
 “home. my good fairy wants me to return home before night.”
 “wait two minutes more.”
 “it’s too late!”
 “only two minutes.”
 “and if the fairy scolds me?”
 “let her scold. after she gets tired, she will stop,” said lamp-wick.
 “are you going alone or with others?”
 “alone? there will be more than a hundred of us!”
 “will you walk?”
 “at midnight the wagon passes here that is to take us within the
 boundaries of that marvelous country.”
 “how i wish midnight would strike!”
 “why?”
 “to see you all set out together.”
 “stay here a while longer and you will see us!”
 “no, no. i want to return home.”
 “wait two more minutes.”
 “i have waited too long as it is. the fairy will be worried.”
 “poor fairy! is she afraid the bats will eat you up?”
 “listen, lamp-wick,” said the marionette, “are you really sure that there
 are no schools in the land of toys?” “not even the shadow of one.”
 “not even one teacher?”
 “not one.”
 “and one does not have to study?”
 “never, never, never!”
 “what a great land!” said pinocchio, feeling his mouth water. “what a
 beautiful land! i have never been there, but i can well imagine it.”
 “why don’t you come, too?”
 “it is useless for you to tempt me! i told you i promised my good fairy to
 behave myself, and i am going to keep my word.”
 “good-by, then, and remember me to the grammar schools, to the high
 schools, and even to the colleges if you meet them on the way.”
 “good-by, lamp-wick. have a pleasant trip, enjoy yourself, and remember
 your friends once in a while.”
 with these words, the marionette started on his way home. turning once
 more to his friend, he asked him:
 “but are you sure that, in that country, each week is composed of six
 saturdays and one sunday?”
 “very sure!”
 “and that vacation begins on the first of january and ends on the
 thirty-first of december?”
 “very, very sure!”
 “what a great country!” repeated pinocchio, puzzled as to what to do.
 then, in sudden determination, he said hurriedly:
 “good-by for the last time, and good luck.”
 “good-by.”
 “how soon will you go?”
 “within two hours.”
 “what a pity! if it were only one hour, i might wait for you.”
 “and the fairy?”
 “by this time i’m late, and one hour more or less makes very little
 difference.”
 “poor pinocchio! and if the fairy scolds you?”
 “oh, i’ll let her scold. after she gets tired, she will stop.”
 in the meantime, the night became darker and darker. all at once in the
 distance a small light flickered. a queer sound could be heard, soft as a
 little bell, and faint and muffled like the buzz of a far-away mosquito.
 “there it is!” cried lamp-wick, jumping to his feet.
 “what?” whispered pinocchio.
 “the wagon which is coming to get me. for the last time, are you coming or
 not?”
 “but is it really true that in that country boys never have to study?”
 “never, never, never!”
 “what a wonderful, beautiful, marvelous country! oh—h—h!!”
 after five months of play, pinocchio wakes up one fine morning and finds a
 great surprise awaiting him.
 finally the wagon arrived. it made no noise, for its wheels were bound
 with straw and rags.
 it was drawn by twelve pair of donkeys, all of the same size, but all of
 different color. some were gray, others white, and still others a mixture
 of brown and black. here and there were a few with large yellow and blue
 stripes.
 the strangest thing of all was that those twenty-four donkeys, instead of
 being iron-shod like any other beast of burden, had on their feet laced
 shoes made of leather, just like the ones boys wear.
 and the driver of the wagon?
 imagine to yourselves a little, fat man, much wider than he was long,
 round and shiny as a ball of butter, with a face beaming like an apple, a
 little mouth that always smiled, and a voice small and wheedling like that
 of a cat begging for food.
 no sooner did any boy see him than he fell in love with him, and nothing
 satisfied him but to be allowed to ride in his wagon to that lovely place
 called the land of toys.
 in fact the wagon was so closely packed with boys of all ages that it
 looked like a box of sardines. they were uncomfortable, they were piled
 one on top of the other, they could hardly breathe; yet not one word of
 complaint was heard. the thought that in a few hours they would reach a
 country where there were no schools, no books, no teachers, made these
 boys so happy that they felt neither hunger, nor thirst, nor sleep, nor
 discomfort.
 no sooner had the wagon stopped than the little fat man turned to
 lamp-wick. with bows and smiles, he asked in a wheedling tone:
 “tell me, my fine boy, do you also want to come to my wonderful country?”
 “indeed i do.”
 “but i warn you, my little dear, there’s no more room in the wagon. it is
 full.”
 “never mind,” answered lamp-wick. “if there’s no room inside, i can sit on
 the top of the coach.”
 and with one leap, he perched himself there.
 “what about you, my love?” asked the little man, turning politely to
 pinocchio. “what are you going to do? will you come with us, or do you
 stay here?”
 “i stay here,” answered pinocchio. “i want to return home, as i prefer to
 study and to succeed in life.”
 “may that bring you luck!”
 “pinocchio!” lamp-wick called out. “listen to me. come with us and we’ll
 always be happy.”
 “no, no, no!”
 “come with us and we’ll always be happy,” cried four other voices from the
 wagon.
 “come with us and we’ll always be happy,” shouted the one hundred and more
 boys in the wagon, all together. “and if i go with you, what will my good
 fairy say?” asked the marionette, who was beginning to waver and weaken in
 his good resolutions.
 “don’t worry so much. only think that we are going to a land where we
 shall be allowed to make all the racket we like from morning till night.”
 pinocchio did not answer, but sighed deeply once—twice—a third
 time. finally, he said:
 “make room for me. i want to go, too!”
 “the seats are all filled,” answered the little man, “but to show you how
 much i think of you, take my place as coachman.”
 “and you?”
 “i’ll walk.”
 “no, indeed. i could not permit such a thing. i much prefer riding one of
 these donkeys,” cried pinocchio.
 no sooner said than done. he approached the first donkey and tried to
 mount it. but the little animal turned suddenly and gave him such a
 terrible kick in the stomach that pinocchio was thrown to the ground and
 fell with his legs in the air.
 at this unlooked-for entertainment, the whole company of runaways laughed
 uproariously.
 the little fat man did not laugh. he went up to the rebellious animal,
 and, still smiling, bent over him lovingly and bit off half of his right
 ear.
 in the meantime, pinocchio lifted himself up from the ground, and with one
 leap landed on the donkey’s back. the leap was so well taken that all the
 boys shouted,
 “hurrah for pinocchio!” and clapped their hands in hearty applause.
 suddenly the little donkey gave a kick with his two hind feet and, at this
 unexpected move, the poor marionette found himself once again sprawling
 right in the middle of the road.
 again the boys shouted with laughter. but the little man, instead of
 laughing, became so loving toward the little animal that, with another
 kiss, he bit off half of his left ear.
 “you can mount now, my boy,” he then said to pinocchio. “have no fear.
 that donkey was worried about something, but i have spoken to him and now
 he seems quiet and reasonable.”
 pinocchio mounted and the wagon started on its way. while the donkeys
 galloped along the stony road, the marionette fancied he heard a very
 quiet voice whispering to him:
 “poor silly! you have done as you wished. but you are going to be a sorry
 boy before very long.”
 pinocchio, greatly frightened, looked about him to see whence the words
 had come, but he saw no one. the donkeys galloped, the wagon rolled on
 smoothly, the boys slept (lamp-wick snored like a dormouse) and the
 little, fat driver sang sleepily between his teeth.
 after a mile or so, pinocchio again heard the same faint voice whispering:
 “remember, little simpleton! boys who stop studying and turn their backs
 upon books and schools and teachers in order to give all their time to
 nonsense and pleasure, sooner or later come to grief. oh, how well i know
 this! how well i can prove it to you! a day will come when you will weep
 bitterly, even as i am weeping now—but it will be too late!”
 at these whispered words, the marionette grew more and more frightened. he
 jumped to the ground, ran up to the donkey on whose back he had been
 riding, and taking his nose in his hands, looked at him. think how great
 was his surprise when he saw that the donkey was weeping—weeping
 just like a boy!
 “hey, mr. driver!” cried the marionette. “do you know what strange thing
 is happening here! this donkey weeps.”
 “let him weep. when he gets married, he will have time to laugh.”
 “have you perhaps taught him to speak?”
 “no, he learned to mumble a few words when he lived for three years with a
 band of trained dogs.”
 “poor beast!”
 “come, come,” said the little man, “do not lose time over a donkey that
 can weep. mount quickly and let us go. the night is cool and the road is
 long.”
 pinocchio obeyed without another word. the wagon started again. toward
 dawn the next morning they finally reached that much-longed-for country,
 the land of toys.
 this great land was entirely different from any other place in the world.
 its population, large though it was, was composed wholly of boys. the
 oldest were about fourteen years of age, the youngest, eight. in the
 street, there was such a racket, such shouting, such blowing of trumpets,
 that it was deafening. everywhere groups of boys were gathered together.
 some played at marbles, at hopscotch, at ball. others rode on bicycles or
 on wooden horses. some played at blindman’s buff, others at tag. here a
 group played circus, there another sang and recited. a few turned
 somersaults, others walked on their hands with their feet in the air.
 generals in full uniform leading regiments of cardboard soldiers passed
 by. laughter, shrieks, howls, catcalls, hand-clapping followed this
 parade. one boy made a noise like a hen, another like a rooster, and a
 third imitated a lion in his den. all together they created such a
 pandemonium that it would have been necessary for you to put cotton in
 your ears. the squares were filled with small wooden theaters, overflowing
 with boys from morning till night, and on the walls of the houses, written
 with charcoal, were words like these: hurrah for the land of toys! down
 as soon as they had set foot in that land, pinocchio, lamp-wick, and all
 the other boys who had traveled with them started out on a tour of
 investigation. they wandered everywhere, they looked into every nook and
 corner, house and theater. they became everybody’s friend. who could be
 happier than they?
 what with entertainments and parties, the hours, the days, the weeks
 passed like lightning.
 “oh, what a beautiful life this is!” said pinocchio each time that, by
 chance, he met his friend lamp-wick.
 “was i right or wrong?” answered lamp-wick. “and to think you did not want
 to come! to think that even yesterday the idea came into your head to
 return home to see your fairy and to start studying again! if today you
 are free from pencils and books and school, you owe it to me, to my
 advice, to my care. do you admit it? only true friends count, after all.”
 “it’s true, lamp-wick, it’s true. if today i am a really happy boy, it is
 all because of you. and to think that the teacher, when speaking of you,
 used to say, ‘do not go with that lamp-wick! he is a bad companion and
 some day he will lead you astray.’”
 “poor teacher!” answered the other, nodding his head. “indeed i know how
 much he disliked me and how he enjoyed speaking ill of me. but i am of a
 generous nature, and i gladly forgive him.”
 “great soul!” said pinocchio, fondly embracing his friend.
 five months passed and the boys continued playing and enjoying themselves
 from morn till night, without ever seeing a book, or a desk, or a school.
 but, my children, there came a morning when pinocchio awoke and found a
 great surprise awaiting him, a surprise which made him feel very unhappy,
 as you shall see.
 pinocchio’s ears become like those of a donkey. in a little while he
 changes into a real donkey and begins to bray.
 everyone, at one time or another, has found some surprise awaiting him. of
 the kind which pinocchio had on that eventful morning of his life, there
 are but few.
 what was it? i will tell you, my dear little readers. on awakening,
 pinocchio put his hand up to his head and there he found—
 guess!
 he found that, during the night, his ears had grown at least ten full
 inches!
 you must know that the marionette, even from his birth, had very small
 ears, so small indeed that to the naked eye they could hardly be seen.
 fancy how he felt when he noticed that overnight those two dainty organs
 had become as long as shoe brushes!
 he went in search of a mirror, but not finding any, he just filled a basin
 with water and looked at himself. there he saw what he never could have
 wished to see. his manly figure was adorned and enriched by a beautiful
 pair of donkey’s ears.
 i leave you to think of the terrible grief, the shame, the despair of the
 poor marionette.
 he began to cry, to scream, to knock his head against the wall, but the
 more he shrieked, the longer and the more hairy grew his ears.
 at those piercing shrieks, a dormouse came into the room, a fat little
 dormouse, who lived upstairs. seeing pinocchio so grief-stricken, she
 asked him anxiously:
 “what is the matter, dear little neighbor?”
 “i am sick, my little dormouse, very, very sick—and from an illness
 which frightens me! do you understand how to feel the pulse?”
 “a little.”
 “feel mine then and tell me if i have a fever.”
 the dormouse took pinocchio’s wrist between her paws and, after a few
 minutes, looked up at him sorrowfully and said: “my friend, i am sorry,
 but i must give you some very sad news.”
 “what is it?”
 “you have a very bad fever.”
 “but what fever is it?”
 “the donkey fever.”
 “i don’t know anything about that fever,” answered the marionette,
 beginning to understand even too well what was happening to him.
 “then i will tell you all about it,” said the dormouse. “know then that,
 within two or three hours, you will no longer be a marionette, nor a boy.”
 “what shall i be?”
 “within two or three hours you will become a real donkey, just like the
 ones that pull the fruit carts to market.”
 “oh, what have i done? what have i done?” cried pinocchio, grasping his
 two long ears in his hands and pulling and tugging at them angrily, just
 as if they belonged to another.
 “my dear boy,” answered the dormouse to cheer him up a bit, “why worry
 now? what is done cannot be undone, you know. fate has decreed that all
 lazy boys who come to hate books and schools and teachers and spend all
 their days with toys and games must sooner or later turn into donkeys.”
 “but is it really so?” asked the marionette, sobbing bitterly.
 “i am sorry to say it is. and tears now are useless. you should have
 thought of all this before.”
 “but the fault is not mine. believe me, little dormouse, the fault is all
 lamp-wick’s.”
 “and who is this lamp-wick?”
 “a classmate of mine. i wanted to return home. i wanted to be obedient. i
 wanted to study and to succeed in school, but lamp-wick said to me, ‘why
 do you want to waste your time studying? why do you want to go to school?
 come with me to the land of toys. there we’ll never study again. there we
 can enjoy ourselves and be happy from morn till night.’”
 “and why did you follow the advice of that false friend?”
 “why? because, my dear little dormouse, i am a heedless marionette—heedless
 and heartless. oh! if i had only had a bit of heart, i should never have
 abandoned that good fairy, who loved me so well and who has been so kind
 to me! and by this time, i should no longer be a marionette. i should have
 become a real boy, like all these friends of mine! oh, if i meet lamp-wick
 i am going to tell him what i think of him—and more, too!”
 after this long speech, pinocchio walked to the door of the room. but when
 he reached it, remembering his donkey ears, he felt ashamed to show them
 to the public and turned back. he took a large cotton bag from a shelf,
 put it on his head, and pulled it far down to his very nose.
 thus adorned, he went out. he looked for lamp-wick everywhere, along the
 streets, in the squares, inside the theatres, everywhere; but he was not
 to be found. he asked everyone whom he met about him, but no one had seen
 him. in desperation, he returned home and knocked at the door.
 “who is it?” asked lamp-wick from within.
 “it is i!” answered the marionette.
 “wait a minute.”
 after a full half hour the door opened. another surprise awaited
 pinocchio! there in the room stood his friend, with a large cotton bag on
 his head, pulled far down to his very nose.
 at the sight of that bag, pinocchio felt slightly happier and thought to
 himself:
 “my friend must be suffering from the same sickness that i am! i wonder if
 he, too, has donkey fever?”
 but pretending he had seen nothing, he asked with a smile:
 “how are you, my dear lamp-wick?”
 “very well. like a mouse in a parmesan cheese.”
 “is that really true?”
 “why should i lie to you?”
 “i beg your pardon, my friend, but why then are you wearing that cotton
 bag over your ears?”
 “the doctor has ordered it because one of my knees hurts. and you, dear
 marionette, why are you wearing that cotton bag down to your nose?”
 “the doctor has ordered it because i have bruised my foot.”
 “oh, my poor pinocchio!”
 “oh, my poor lamp-wick!”
 an embarrassingly long silence followed these words, during which time the
 two friends looked at each other in a mocking way.
 finally the marionette, in a voice sweet as honey and soft as a flute,
 said to his companion:
 “tell me, lamp-wick, dear friend, have you ever suffered from an earache?”
 “never! and you?”
 “never! still, since this morning my ear has been torturing me.”
 “so has mine.”
 “yours, too? and which ear is it?”
 “both of them. and yours?”
 “both of them, too. i wonder if it could be the same sickness.”
 “i’m afraid it is.”
 “will you do me a favor, lamp-wick?”
 “gladly! with my whole heart.”
 “will you let me see your ears?”
 “why not? but before i show you mine, i want to see yours, dear
 pinocchio.”
 “no. you must show yours first.”
 “no, my dear! yours first, then mine.”
 “well, then,” said the marionette, “let us make a contract.”
 “let’s hear the contract!”
 “let us take off our caps together. all right?”
 “all right.”
 “ready then!”
 pinocchio began to count, “one! two! three!”
 at the word “three!” the two boys pulled off their caps and threw them
 high in air.
 and then a scene took place which is hard to believe, but it is all too
 true. the marionette and his friend, lamp-wick, when they saw each other
 both stricken by the same misfortune, instead of feeling sorrowful and
 ashamed, began to poke fun at each other, and after much nonsense, they
 ended by bursting out into hearty laughter.
 they laughed and laughed, and laughed again—laughed till they ached—laughed
 till they cried.
 but all of a sudden lamp-wick stopped laughing. he tottered and almost
 fell. pale as a ghost, he turned to pinocchio and said:
 “help, help, pinocchio!”
 “what is the matter?”
 “oh, help me! i can no longer stand up.”
 “i can’t either,” cried pinocchio; and his laughter turned to tears as he
 stumbled about helplessly.
 they had hardly finished speaking, when both of them fell on all fours and
 began running and jumping around the room. as they ran, their arms turned
 into legs, their faces lengthened into snouts and their backs became
 covered with long gray hairs.
 this was humiliation enough, but the most horrible moment was the one in
 which the two poor creatures felt their tails appear. overcome with shame
 and grief, they tried to cry and bemoan their fate.
 but what is done can’t be undone! instead of moans and cries, they burst
 forth into loud donkey brays, which sounded very much like, “haw! haw!
 haw!”
 at that moment, a loud knocking was heard at the door and a voice called
 to them:
 “open! i am the little man, the driver of the wagon which brought you
 here. open, i say, or beware!”
 pinocchio, having become a donkey, is bought by the owner of a circus, who
 wants to teach him to do tricks. the donkey becomes lame and is sold to a
 man who wants to use his skin for a drumhead.
 very sad and downcast were the two poor little fellows as they stood and
 looked at each other. outside the room, the little man grew more and more
 impatient, and finally gave the door such a violent kick that it flew
 open. with his usual sweet smile on his lips, he looked at pinocchio and
 lamp-wick and said to them:
 “fine work, boys! you have brayed well, so well that i recognized your
 voices immediately, and here i am.”
 on hearing this, the two donkeys bowed their heads in shame, dropped their
 ears, and put their tails between their legs.
 at first, the little man petted and caressed them and smoothed down their
 hairy coats. then he took out a currycomb and worked over them till they
 shone like glass. satisfied with the looks of the two little animals, he
 bridled them and took them to a market place far away from the land of
 toys, in the hope of selling them at a good price.
 in fact, he did not have to wait very long for an offer. lamp-wick was
 bought by a farmer whose donkey had died the day before. pinocchio went to
 the owner of a circus, who wanted to teach him to do tricks for his
 audiences.
 and now do you understand what the little man’s profession was? this
 horrid little being, whose face shone with kindness, went about the world
 looking for boys. lazy boys, boys who hated books, boys who wanted to run
 away from home, boys who were tired of school—all these were his joy
 and his fortune. he took them with him to the land of toys and let them
 enjoy themselves to their heart’s content. when, after months of all play
 and no work, they became little donkeys, he sold them on the market place.
 in a few years, he had become a millionaire.
 what happened to lamp-wick? my dear children, i do not know. pinocchio, i
 can tell you, met with great hardships even from the first day.
 after putting him in a stable, his new master filled his manger with
 straw, but pinocchio, after tasting a mouthful, spat it out.
 then the man filled the manger with hay. but pinocchio did not like that
 any better.
 “ah, you don’t like hay either?” he cried angrily. “wait, my pretty
 donkey, i’ll teach you not to be so particular.”
 without more ado, he took a whip and gave the donkey a hearty blow across
 the legs.
 pinocchio screamed with pain and as he screamed he brayed:
 “haw! haw! haw! i can’t digest straw!”
 “then eat the hay!” answered his master, who understood the donkey
 perfectly.
 “haw! haw! haw! hay gives me a headache!”
 “do you pretend, by any chance, that i should feed you duck or chicken?”
 asked the man again, and, angrier than ever, he gave poor pinocchio
 another lashing.
 at that second beating, pinocchio became very quiet and said no more.
 after that, the door of the stable was closed and he was left alone. it
 was many hours since he had eaten anything and he started to yawn from
 hunger. as he yawned, he opened a mouth as big as an oven.
 finally, not finding anything else in the manger, he tasted the hay. after
 tasting it, he chewed it well, closed his eyes, and swallowed it.
 “this hay is not bad,” he said to himself. “but how much happier i should
 be if i had studied! just now, instead of hay, i should be eating some
 good bread and butter. patience!”
 next morning, when he awoke, pinocchio looked in the manger for more hay,
 but it was all gone. he had eaten it all during the night.
 he tried the straw, but, as he chewed away at it, he noticed to his great
 disappointment that it tasted neither like rice nor like macaroni.
 “patience!” he repeated as he chewed. “if only my misfortune might serve
 as a lesson to disobedient boys who refuse to study! patience! have
 patience!”
 “patience indeed!” shouted his master just then, as he came into the
 stable. “do you think, perhaps, my little donkey, that i have brought you
 here only to give you food and drink? oh, no! you are to help me earn some
 fine gold pieces, do you hear? come along, now. i am going to teach you to
 jump and bow, to dance a waltz and a polka, and even to stand on your
 head.”
 poor pinocchio, whether he liked it or not, had to learn all these
 wonderful things; but it took him three long months and cost him many,
 many lashings before he was pronounced perfect.
 the day came at last when pinocchio’s master was able to announce an
 extraordinary performance. the announcements, posted all around the town,
 and written in large letters, read thus:
 of the
 first public appearance
 of the
 called
 the theater will be as light as day
 that night, as you can well imagine, the theater was filled to overflowing
 one hour before the show was scheduled to start.
 not an orchestra chair could be had, not a balcony seat, nor a gallery
 seat; not even for their weight in gold.
 the place swarmed with boys and girls of all ages and sizes, wriggling and
 dancing about in a fever of impatience to see the famous donkey dance.
 when the first part of the performance was over, the owner and manager of
 the circus, in a black coat, white knee breeches, and patent leather
 boots, presented himself to the public and in a loud, pompous voice made
 the following announcement:
 “most honored friends, gentlemen and ladies!
 “your humble servant, the manager of this theater, presents himself before
 you tonight in order to introduce to you the greatest, the most famous
 donkey in the world, a donkey that has had the great honor in his short
 life of performing before the kings and queens and emperors of all the
 great courts of europe.
 “we thank you for your attention!”
 this speech was greeted by much laughter and applause. and the applause
 grew to a roar when pinocchio, the famous donkey, appeared in the circus
 ring. he was handsomely arrayed. a new bridle of shining leather with
 buckles of polished brass was on his back; two white camellias were tied
 to his ears; ribbons and tassels of red silk adorned his mane, which was
 divided into many curls. a great sash of gold and silver was fastened
 around his waist and his tail was decorated with ribbons of many brilliant
 colors. he was a handsome donkey indeed!
 the manager, when introducing him to the public, added these words:
 “most honored audience! i shall not take your time tonight to tell you of
 the great difficulties which i have encountered while trying to tame this
 animal, since i found him in the wilds of africa. observe, i beg of you,
 the savage look of his eye. all the means used by centuries of
 civilization in subduing wild beasts failed in this case. i had finally to
 resort to the gentle language of the whip in order to bring him to my
 will. with all my kindness, however, i never succeeded in gaining my
 donkey’s love. he is still today as savage as the day i found him. he
 still fears and hates me. but i have found in him one great redeeming
 feature. do you see this little bump on his forehead? it is this bump
 which gives him his great talent of dancing and using his feet as nimbly
 as a human being. admire him, o signori, and enjoy yourselves. i let you,
 now, be the judges of my success as a teacher of animals. before i leave
 you, i wish to state that there will be another performance tomorrow
 night. if the weather threatens rain, the great spectacle will take place
 at eleven o’clock in the morning.”
 the manager bowed and then turned to pinocchio and said: “ready,
 pinocchio! before starting your performance, salute your audience!”
 pinocchio obediently bent his two knees to the ground and remained
 kneeling until the manager, with the crack of the whip, cried sharply:
 “walk!”
 the donkey lifted himself on his four feet and walked around the ring. a
 few minutes passed and again the voice of the manager called:
 “quickstep!” and pinocchio obediently changed his step.
 “gallop!” and pinocchio galloped.
 “full speed!” and pinocchio ran as fast as he could. as he ran the master
 raised his arm and a pistol shot rang in the air.
 at the shot, the little donkey fell to the ground as if he were really
 dead.
 a shower of applause greeted the donkey as he arose to his feet. cries and
 shouts and handclappings were heard on all sides.
 at all that noise, pinocchio lifted his head and raised his eyes. there,
 in front of him, in a box sat a beautiful woman. around her neck she wore
 a long gold chain, from which hung a large medallion. on the medallion was
 painted the picture of a marionette.
 “that picture is of me! that beautiful lady is my fairy!” said pinocchio
 to himself, recognizing her. he felt so happy that he tried his best to
 cry out:
 “oh, my fairy! my own fairy!”
 but instead of words, a loud braying was heard in the theater, so loud and
 so long that all the spectators—men, women, and children, but
 especially the children—burst out laughing.
 then, in order to teach the donkey that it was not good manners to bray
 before the public, the manager hit him on the nose with the handle of the
 whip.
 the poor little donkey stuck out a long tongue and licked his nose for a
 long time in an effort to take away the pain.
 and what was his grief when on looking up toward the boxes, he saw that
 the fairy had disappeared!
 he felt himself fainting, his eyes filled with tears, and he wept
 bitterly. no one knew it, however, least of all the manager, who, cracking
 his whip, cried out:
 “bravo, pinocchio! now show us how gracefully you can jump through the
 rings.”
 pinocchio tried two or three times, but each time he came near the ring,
 he found it more to his taste to go under it. the fourth time, at a look
 from his master he leaped through it, but as he did so his hind legs
 caught in the ring and he fell to the floor in a heap.
 when he got up, he was lame and could hardly limp as far as the stable.
 “pinocchio! we want pinocchio! we want the little donkey!” cried the boys
 from the orchestra, saddened by the accident.
 no one saw pinocchio again that evening.
 the next morning the veterinary—that is, the animal doctor—declared
 that he would be lame for the rest of his life.
 “what do i want with a lame donkey?” said the manager to the stableboy.
 “take him to the market and sell him.”
 when they reached the square, a buyer was soon found.
 “how much do you ask for that little lame donkey?” he asked.
 “four dollars.”
 “i’ll give you four cents. don’t think i’m buying him for work. i want
 only his skin. it looks very tough and i can use it to make myself a
 drumhead. i belong to a musical band in my village and i need a drum.”
 i leave it to you, my dear children, to picture to yourself the great
 pleasure with which pinocchio heard that he was to become a drumhead!
 as soon as the buyer had paid the four cents, the donkey changed hands.
 his new owner took him to a high cliff overlooking the sea, put a stone
 around his neck, tied a rope to one of his hind feet, gave him a push, and
 threw him into the water.
 pinocchio sank immediately. and his new master sat on the cliff waiting
 for him to drown, so as to skin him and make himself a drumhead.
 pinocchio is thrown into the sea, eaten by fishes, and becomes a
 marionette once more. as he swims to land, he is swallowed by the terrible
 shark.
 down into the sea, deeper and deeper, sank pinocchio, and finally, after
 fifty minutes of waiting, the man on the cliff said to himself:
 “by this time my poor little lame donkey must be drowned. up with him and
 then i can get to work on my beautiful drum.”
 he pulled the rope which he had tied to pinocchio’s leg—pulled and
 pulled and pulled and, at last, he saw appear on the surface of the water—can
 you guess what? instead of a dead donkey, he saw a very much alive
 marionette, wriggling and squirming like an eel.
 seeing that wooden marionette, the poor man thought he was dreaming and
 sat there with his mouth wide open and his eyes popping out of his head.
 gathering his wits together, he said:
 “and the donkey i threw into the sea?”
 “i am that donkey,” answered the marionette laughing.
 “you?”
 “ah, you little cheat! are you poking fun at me?”
 “poking fun at you? not at all, dear master. i am talking seriously.”
 “but, then, how is it that you, who a few minutes ago were a donkey, are
 now standing before me a wooden marionette?”
 “it may be the effect of salt water. the sea is fond of playing these
 tricks.”
 “be careful, marionette, be careful! don’t laugh at me! woe be to you, if
 i lose my patience!”
 “well, then, my master, do you want to know my whole story? untie my leg
 and i can tell it to you better.”
 the old fellow, curious to know the true story of the marionette’s life,
 immediately untied the rope which held his foot. pinocchio, feeling free
 as a bird of the air, began his tale:
 “know, then, that, once upon a time, i was a wooden marionette, just as i
 am today. one day i was about to become a boy, a real boy, but on account
 of my laziness and my hatred of books, and because i listened to bad
 companions, i ran away from home. one beautiful morning, i awoke to find
 myself changed into a donkey—long ears, gray coat, even a tail! what
 a shameful day for me! i hope you will never experience one like it, dear
 master. i was taken to the fair and sold to a circus owner, who tried to
 make me dance and jump through the rings. one night, during a performance,
 i had a bad fall and became lame. not knowing what to do with a lame
 donkey, the circus owner sent me to the market place and you bought me.”
 “indeed i did! and i paid four cents for you. now who will return my money
 to me?”
 “but why did you buy me? you bought me to do me harm—to kill me—to
 make a drumhead out of me!”
 “indeed i did! and now where shall i find another skin?”
 “never mind, dear master. there are so many donkeys in this world.”
 “tell me, impudent little rogue, does your story end here?”
 “one more word,” answered the marionette, “and i am through. after buying
 me, you brought me here to kill me. but feeling sorry for me, you tied a
 stone to my neck and threw me to the bottom of the sea. that was very good
 and kind of you to want me to suffer as little as possible and i shall
 remember you always. and now my fairy will take care of me, even if you—”
 “your fairy? who is she?”
 “she is my mother, and, like all other mothers who love their children,
 she never loses sight of me, even though i do not deserve it. and today
 this good fairy of mine, as soon as she saw me in danger of drowning, sent
 a thousand fishes to the spot where i lay. they thought i was really a
 dead donkey and began to eat me. what great bites they took! one ate my
 ears, another my nose, a third my neck and my mane. some went at my legs
 and some at my back, and among the others, there was one tiny fish so
 gentle and polite that he did me the great favor of eating even my tail.”
 “from now on,” said the man, horrified, “i swear i shall never again taste
 fish. how i should enjoy opening a mullet or a whitefish just to find
 there the tail of a dead donkey!”
 “i think as you do,” answered the marionette, laughing. “still, you must
 know that when the fish finished eating my donkey coat, which covered me
 from head to foot, they naturally came to the bones—or rather, in my
 case, to the wood, for as you know, i am made of very hard wood. after the
 first few bites, those greedy fish found out that the wood was not good
 for their teeth, and, afraid of indigestion, they turned and ran here and
 there without saying good-by or even as much as thank you to me. here,
 dear master, you have my story. you know now why you found a marionette
 and not a dead donkey when you pulled me out of the water.”
 “i laugh at your story!” cried the man angrily. “i know that i spent four
 cents to get you and i want my money back. do you know what i can do; i am
 going to take you to the market once more and sell you as dry firewood.”
 “very well, sell me. i am satisfied,” said pinocchio. but as he spoke, he
 gave a quick leap and dived into the sea. swimming away as fast as he
 could, he cried out, laughing:
 “good-by, master. if you ever need a skin for your drum, remember me.”
 he swam on and on. after a while, he turned around again and called louder
 than before:
 “good-by, master. if you ever need a piece of good dry firewood, remember
 me.”
 in a few seconds he had gone so far he could hardly be seen. all that
 could be seen of him was a very small black dot moving swiftly on the blue
 surface of the water, a little black dot which now and then lifted a leg
 or an arm in the air. one would have thought that pinocchio had turned
 into a porpoise playing in the sun.
 after swimming for a long time, pinocchio saw a large rock in the middle
 of the sea, a rock as white as marble. high on the rock stood a little
 goat bleating and calling and beckoning to the marionette to come to her.
 there was something very strange about that little goat. her coat was not
 white or black or brown as that of any other goat, but azure, a deep
 brilliant color that reminded one of the hair of the lovely maiden.
 pinocchio’s heart beat fast, and then faster and faster. he redoubled his
 efforts and swam as hard as he could toward the white rock. he was almost
 halfway over, when suddenly a horrible sea monster stuck its head out of
 the water, an enormous head with a huge mouth, wide open, showing three
 rows of gleaming teeth, the mere sight of which would have filled you with
 fear.
 do you know what it was?
 that sea monster was no other than the enormous shark, which has often
 been mentioned in this story and which, on account of its cruelty, had
 been nicknamed “the attila of the sea” by both fish and fishermen.
 poor pinocchio! the sight of that monster frightened him almost to death!
 he tried to swim away from him, to change his path, to escape, but that
 immense mouth kept coming nearer and nearer.
 “hasten, pinocchio, i beg you!” bleated the little goat on the high rock.
 and pinocchio swam desperately with his arms, his body, his legs, his
 feet.
 “quick, pinocchio, the monster is coming nearer!”
 pinocchio swam faster and faster, and harder and harder.
 “faster, pinocchio! the monster will get you! there he is! there he is!
 quick, quick, or you are lost!”
 pinocchio went through the water like a shot—swifter and swifter. he
 came close to the rock. the goat leaned over and gave him one of her hoofs
 to help him up out of the water.
 alas! it was too late. the monster overtook him and the marionette found
 himself in between the rows of gleaming white teeth. only for a moment,
 however, for the shark took a deep breath and, as he breathed, he drank in
 the marionette as easily as he would have sucked an egg. then he swallowed
 him so fast that pinocchio, falling down into the body of the fish, lay
 stunned for a half hour.
 when he recovered his senses the marionette could not remember where he
 was. around him all was darkness, a darkness so deep and so black that for
 a moment he thought he had put his head into an inkwell. he listened for a
 few moments and heard nothing. once in a while a cold wind blew on his
 face. at first he could not understand where that wind was coming from,
 but after a while he understood that it came from the lungs of the
 monster. i forgot to tell you that the shark was suffering from asthma, so
 that whenever he breathed a storm seemed to blow.
 pinocchio at first tried to be brave, but as soon as he became convinced
 that he was really and truly in the shark’s stomach, he burst into sobs
 and tears. “help! help!” he cried. “oh, poor me! won’t someone come to
 save me?”
 “who is there to help you, unhappy boy?” said a rough voice, like a guitar
 out of tune.
 “who is talking?” asked pinocchio, frozen with terror.
 “it is i, a poor tunny swallowed by the shark at the same time as you. and
 what kind of a fish are you?”
 “i have nothing to do with fishes. i am a marionette.”
 “if you are not a fish, why did you let this monster swallow you?”
 “i didn’t let him. he chased me and swallowed me without even a ‘by your
 leave’! and now what are we to do here in the dark?”
 “wait until the shark has digested us both, i suppose.”
 “but i don’t want to be digested,” shouted pinocchio, starting to sob.
 “neither do i,” said the tunny, “but i am wise enough to think that if one
 is born a fish, it is more dignified to die under the water than in the
 frying pan.”
 “what nonsense!” cried pinocchio.
 “mine is an opinion,” replied the tunny, “and opinions should be
 respected.”
 “but i want to get out of this place. i want to escape.”
 “go, if you can!”
 “is this shark that has swallowed us very long?” asked the marionette.
 “his body, not counting the tail, is almost a mile long.”
 while talking in the darkness, pinocchio thought he saw a faint light in
 the distance.
 “what can that be?” he said to the tunny.
 “some other poor fish, waiting as patiently as we to be digested by the
 shark.”
 “i want to see him. he may be an old fish and may know some way of
 escape.”
 “i wish you all good luck, dear marionette.”
 “good-by, tunny.”
 “good-by, marionette, and good luck.”
 “when shall i see you again?”
 “who knows? it is better not to think about it.”
 in the shark’s body pinocchio finds whom? read this chapter, my children,
 and you will know.
 pinocchio, as soon as he had said good-by to his good friend, the tunny,
 tottered away in the darkness and began to walk as well as he could toward
 the faint light which glowed in the distance.
 as he walked his feet splashed in a pool of greasy and slippery water,
 which had such a heavy smell of fish fried in oil that pinocchio thought
 it was lent.
 the farther on he went, the brighter and clearer grew the tiny light. on
 and on he walked till finally he found—i give you a thousand
 guesses, my dear children! he found a little table set for dinner and
 lighted by a candle stuck in a glass bottle; and near the table sat a
 little old man, white as the snow, eating live fish. they wriggled so
 that, now and again, one of them slipped out of the old man’s mouth and
 escaped into the darkness under the table.
 at this sight, the poor marionette was filled with such great and sudden
 happiness that he almost dropped in a faint. he wanted to laugh, he wanted
 to cry, he wanted to say a thousand and one things, but all he could do
 was to stand still, stuttering and stammering brokenly. at last, with a
 great effort, he was able to let out a scream of joy and, opening wide his
 arms he threw them around the old man’s neck.
 “oh, father, dear father! have i found you at last? now i shall never,
 never leave you again!”
 “are my eyes really telling me the truth?” answered the old man, rubbing
 his eyes. “are you really my own dear pinocchio?”
 “yes, yes, yes! it is i! look at me! and you have forgiven me, haven’t
 you? oh, my dear father, how good you are! and to think that i—oh,
 but if you only knew how many misfortunes have fallen on my head and how
 many troubles i have had! just think that on the day you sold your old
 coat to buy me my a-b-c book so that i could go to school, i ran away to
 the marionette theater and the proprietor caught me and wanted to burn me
 to cook his roast lamb! he was the one who gave me the five gold pieces
 for you, but i met the fox and the cat, who took me to the inn of the red
 lobster. there they ate like wolves and i left the inn alone and i met the
 assassins in the wood. i ran and they ran after me, always after me, till
 they hanged me to the branch of a giant oak tree. then the fairy of the
 azure hair sent the coach to rescue me and the doctors, after looking at
 me, said, ‘if he is not dead, then he is surely alive,’ and then i told a
 lie and my nose began to grow. it grew and it grew, till i couldn’t get it
 through the door of the room. and then i went with the fox and the cat to
 the field of wonders to bury the gold pieces. the parrot laughed at me
 and, instead of two thousand gold pieces, i found none. when the judge
 heard i had been robbed, he sent me to jail to make the thieves happy; and
 when i came away i saw a fine bunch of grapes hanging on a vine. the trap
 caught me and the farmer put a collar on me and made me a watchdog. he
 found out i was innocent when i caught the weasels and he let me go. the
 serpent with the tail that smoked started to laugh and a vein in his chest
 broke and so i went back to the fairy’s house. she was dead, and the
 pigeon, seeing me crying, said to me, ‘i have seen your father building a
 boat to look for you in america,’ and i said to him, ‘oh, if i only had
 wings!’ and he said to me, ‘do you want to go to your father?’ and i said,
 ‘perhaps, but how?’ and he said, ‘get on my back. i’ll take you there.’ we
 flew all night long, and next morning the fishermen were looking toward
 the sea, crying, ‘there is a poor little man drowning,’ and i knew it was
 you, because my heart told me so and i waved to you from the shore—”
 “i knew you also,” put in geppetto, “and i wanted to go to you; but how
 could i? the sea was rough and the whitecaps overturned the boat. then a
 terrible shark came up out of the sea and, as soon as he saw me in the
 water, swam quickly toward me, put out his tongue, and swallowed me as
 easily as if i had been a chocolate peppermint.”
 “and how long have you been shut away in here?”
 “from that day to this, two long weary years—two years, my
 pinocchio, which have been like two centuries.”
 “and how have you lived? where did you find the candle? and the matches
 with which to light it—where did you get them?”
 “you must know that, in the storm which swamped my boat, a large ship also
 suffered the same fate. the sailors were all saved, but the ship went
 right to the bottom of the sea, and the same terrible shark that swallowed
 me, swallowed most of it.”
 “what! swallowed a ship?” asked pinocchio in astonishment.
 “at one gulp. the only thing he spat out was the main-mast, for it stuck
 in his teeth. to my own good luck, that ship was loaded with meat,
 preserved foods, crackers, bread, bottles of wine, raisins, cheese,
 coffee, sugar, wax candles, and boxes of matches. with all these
 blessings, i have been able to live happily on for two whole years, but
 now i am at the very last crumbs. today there is nothing left in the
 cupboard, and this candle you see here is the last one i have.”
 “and then?”
 “and then, my dear, we’ll find ourselves in darkness.”
 “then, my dear father,” said pinocchio, “there is no time to lose. we must
 try to escape.”
 “escape! how?”
 “we can run out of the shark’s mouth and dive into the sea.”
 “you speak well, but i cannot swim, my dear pinocchio.”
 “why should that matter? you can climb on my shoulders and i, who am a
 fine swimmer, will carry you safely to the shore.”
 “dreams, my boy!” answered geppetto, shaking his head and smiling sadly.
 “do you think it possible for a marionette, a yard high, to have the
 strength to carry me on his shoulders and swim?”
 “try it and see! and in any case, if it is written that we must die, we
 shall at least die together.”
 not adding another word, pinocchio took the candle in his hand and going
 ahead to light the way, he said to his father:
 “follow me and have no fear.”
 they walked a long distance through the stomach and the whole body of the
 shark. when they reached the throat of the monster, they stopped for a
 while to wait for the right moment in which to make their escape.
 i want you to know that the shark, being very old and suffering from
 asthma and heart trouble, was obliged to sleep with his mouth open.
 because of this, pinocchio was able to catch a glimpse of the sky filled
 with stars, as he looked up through the open jaws of his new home.
 “the time has come for us to escape,” he whispered, turning to his father.
 “the shark is fast asleep. the sea is calm and the night is as bright as
 day. follow me closely, dear father, and we shall soon be saved.”
 no sooner said than done. they climbed up the throat of the monster till
 they came to that immense open mouth. there they had to walk on tiptoes,
 for if they tickled the shark’s long tongue he might awaken—and
 where would they be then? the tongue was so wide and so long that it
 looked like a country road. the two fugitives were just about to dive into
 the sea when the shark sneezed very suddenly and, as he sneezed, he gave
 pinocchio and geppetto such a jolt that they found themselves thrown on
 their backs and dashed once more and very unceremoniously into the stomach
 of the monster.
 to make matters worse, the candle went out and father and son were left in
 the dark.
 “and now?” asked pinocchio with a serious face.
 “now we are lost.”
 “why lost? give me your hand, dear father, and be careful not to slip!”
 “where will you take me?”
 “we must try again. come with me and don’t be afraid.”
 with these words pinocchio took his father by the hand and, always walking
 on tiptoes, they climbed up the monster’s throat for a second time. they
 then crossed the whole tongue and jumped over three rows of teeth. but
 before they took the last great leap, the marionette said to his father:
 “climb on my back and hold on tightly to my neck. i’ll take care of
 everything else.”
 as soon as geppetto was comfortably seated on his shoulders, pinocchio,
 very sure of what he was doing, dived into the water and started to swim.
 the sea was like oil, the moon shone in all splendor, and the shark
 continued to sleep so soundly that not even a cannon shot would have
 awakened him.
 pinocchio finally ceases to be a marionette and becomes a boy
 “my dear father, we are saved!” cried the marionette. “all we have to do
 now is to get to the shore, and that is easy.”
 without another word, he swam swiftly away in an effort to reach land as
 soon as possible. all at once he noticed that geppetto was shivering and
 shaking as if with a high fever.
 was he shivering from fear or from cold? who knows? perhaps a little of
 both. but pinocchio, thinking his father was frightened, tried to comfort
 him by saying:
 “courage, father! in a few moments we shall be safe on land.”
 “but where is that blessed shore?” asked the little old man, more and more
 worried as he tried to pierce the faraway shadows. “here i am searching on
 all sides and i see nothing but sea and sky.”
 “i see the shore,” said the marionette. “remember, father, that i am like
 a cat. i see better at night than by day.”
 poor pinocchio pretended to be peaceful and contented, but he was far from
 that. he was beginning to feel discouraged, his strength was leaving him,
 and his breathing was becoming more and more labored. he felt he could not
 go on much longer, and the shore was still far away.
 he swam a few more strokes. then he turned to geppetto and cried out
 weakly:
 “help me, father! help, for i am dying!”
 father and son were really about to drown when they heard a voice like a
 guitar out of tune call from the sea:
 “what is the trouble?”
 “it is i and my poor father.”
 “i know the voice. you are pinocchio.”
 “exactly. and you?”
 “i am the tunny, your companion in the shark’s stomach.”
 “and how did you escape?”
 “i imitated your example. you are the one who showed me the way and after
 you went, i followed.”
 “tunny, you arrived at the right moment! i implore you, for the love you
 bear your children, the little tunnies, to help us, or we are lost!”
 “with great pleasure indeed. hang onto my tail, both of you, and let me
 lead you. in a twinkling you will be safe on land.”
 geppetto and pinocchio, as you can easily imagine, did not refuse the
 invitation; indeed, instead of hanging onto the tail, they thought it
 better to climb on the tunny’s back.
 “are we too heavy?” asked pinocchio.
 “heavy? not in the least. you are as light as sea-shells,” answered the
 tunny, who was as large as a two-year-old horse.
 as soon as they reached the shore, pinocchio was the first to jump to the
 ground to help his old father. then he turned to the fish and said to him:
 “dear friend, you have saved my father, and i have not enough words with
 which to thank you! allow me to embrace you as a sign of my eternal
 gratitude.”
 the tunny stuck his nose out of the water and pinocchio knelt on the sand
 and kissed him most affectionately on his cheek. at this warm greeting,
 the poor tunny, who was not used to such tenderness, wept like a child. he
 felt so embarrassed and ashamed that he turned quickly, plunged into the
 sea, and disappeared.
 in the meantime day had dawned.
 pinocchio offered his arm to geppetto, who was so weak he could hardly
 stand, and said to him:
 “lean on my arm, dear father, and let us go. we will walk very, very
 slowly, and if we feel tired we can rest by the wayside.”
 “and where are we going?” asked geppetto.
 “to look for a house or a hut, where they will be kind enough to give us a
 bite of bread and a bit of straw to sleep on.”
 they had not taken a hundred steps when they saw two rough-looking
 individuals sitting on a stone begging for alms.
 it was the fox and the cat, but one could hardly recognize them, they
 looked so miserable. the cat, after pretending to be blind for so many
 years had really lost the sight of both eyes. and the fox, old, thin, and
 almost hairless, had even lost his tail. that sly thief had fallen into
 deepest poverty, and one day he had been forced to sell his beautiful tail
 for a bite to eat.
 “oh, pinocchio,” he cried in a tearful voice. “give us some alms, we beg
 of you! we are old, tired, and sick.”
 “sick!” repeated the cat.
 “addio, false friends!” answered the marionette. “you cheated me once, but
 you will never catch me again.”
 “believe us! today we are truly poor and starving.”
 “starving!” repeated the cat.
 “if you are poor; you deserve it! remember the old proverb which says:
 ‘stolen money never bears fruit.’ addio, false friends.”
 “have mercy on us!”
 “on us.”
 “addio, false friends. remember the old proverb which says: ‘bad wheat
 always makes poor bread!’”
 “do not abandon us.”
 “abandon us,” repeated the cat.
 “addio, false friends. remember the old proverb: ‘whoever steals his
 neighbor’s shirt, usually dies without his own.’”
 waving good-by to them, pinocchio and geppetto calmly went on their way.
 after a few more steps, they saw, at the end of a long road near a clump
 of trees, a tiny cottage built of straw.
 “someone must live in that little hut,” said pinocchio. “let us see for
 ourselves.”
 they went and knocked at the door.
 “who is it?” said a little voice from within.
 “a poor father and a poorer son, without food and with no roof to cover
 them,” answered the marionette.
 “turn the key and the door will open,” said the same little voice.
 pinocchio turned the key and the door opened. as soon as they went in,
 they looked here and there and everywhere but saw no one.
 “oh—ho, where is the owner of the hut?” cried pinocchio, very much
 surprised.
 “here i am, up here!”
 father and son looked up to the ceiling, and there on a beam sat the
 talking cricket.
 “oh, my dear cricket,” said pinocchio, bowing politely.
 “oh, now you call me your dear cricket, but do you remember when you threw
 your hammer at me to kill me?”
 “you are right, dear cricket. throw a hammer at me now. i deserve it! but
 spare my poor old father.”
 “i am going to spare both the father and the son. i have only wanted to
 remind you of the trick you long ago played upon me, to teach you that in
 this world of ours we must be kind and courteous to others, if we want to
 find kindness and courtesy in our own days of trouble.”
 “you are right, little cricket, you are more than right, and i shall
 remember the lesson you have taught me. but will you tell how you
 succeeded in buying this pretty little cottage?”
 “this cottage was given to me yesterday by a little goat with blue hair.”
 “and where did the goat go?” asked pinocchio.
 “i don’t know.”
 “and when will she come back?”
 “she will never come back. yesterday she went away bleating sadly, and it
 seemed to me she said: ‘poor pinocchio, i shall never see him again. .
 .the shark must have eaten him by this time.’”
 “were those her real words? then it was she—it was—my dear
 little fairy,” cried out pinocchio, sobbing bitterly. after he had cried a
 long time, he wiped his eyes and then he made a bed of straw for old
 geppetto. he laid him on it and said to the talking cricket:
 “tell me, little cricket, where shall i find a glass of milk for my poor
 father?”
 “three fields away from here lives farmer john. he has some cows. go there
 and he will give you what you want.”
 pinocchio ran all the way to farmer john’s house. the farmer said to him:
 “how much milk do you want?”
 “i want a full glass.”
 “a full glass costs a penny. first give me the penny.”
 “i have no penny,” answered pinocchio, sad and ashamed.
 “very bad, my marionette,” answered the farmer, “very bad. if you have no
 penny, i have no milk.”
 “too bad,” said pinocchio and started to go.
 “wait a moment,” said farmer john. “perhaps we can come to terms. do you
 know how to draw water from a well?”
 “i can try.”
 “then go to that well you see yonder and draw one hundred bucketfuls of
 water.”
 “very well.”
 “after you have finished, i shall give you a glass of warm sweet milk.”
 “i am satisfied.”
 farmer john took the marionette to the well and showed him how to draw the
 water. pinocchio set to work as well as he knew how, but long before he
 had pulled up the one hundred buckets, he was tired out and dripping with
 perspiration. he had never worked so hard in his life.
 “until today,” said the farmer, “my donkey has drawn the water for me, but
 now that poor animal is dying.”
 “will you take me to see him?” said pinocchio.
 “gladly.”
 as soon as pinocchio went into the stable, he spied a little donkey lying
 on a bed of straw in the corner of the stable. he was worn out from hunger
 and too much work. after looking at him a long time, he said to himself:
 “i know that donkey! i have seen him before.”
