 was called down, told to tell the truth after this, and sent about his
 business.
 the captain.
 crossing the equator.—barney looking for the “line.”—spoke ship
 “java.”—spoke ship “ontario,” homeward bound.—writing letters home
 “under difficulties.”—sperm whales again.—a fast boat.—the red
 flag.—the flurry.—the fluke-chain passed.
 on the th of december, —, we crossed the equator in longitude °
 ´ west. the weather was delightful; pleasant breezes and sunshine;
 the heat not uncomfortable, but just enough to make thin clothing
 desirable. old neptune did not favor us with a visit, although rather
 fearfully expected by some. this practice, we believe, has become
 obsolete, and we rejoice heartily at it, for a more barbarous one
 never was invented.
 barney was very anxiously and busily engaged during the middle and
 morning watches, and most of the day, in looking for the “line” as
 we crossed it. he had talked of nothing else for several days, and
 was keeping a bright look-out for it, losing his watch below for the
 purpose. but he was doomed to disappointment. no “line” was visible
 when we crossed the equator, and poor barney went below, when the
 announcement was made that we were south of it, muttering to himself,
 “it is certainly strange; i have often seen it on the maps, and i
 can’t imagine how we crossed it without seeing it.” barney found out
 his error before the voyage was up.
 the same day we saw the first whale-ship at sea, the ship “java,” of
 fairhaven, captain thompson. she, like ourselves, was bound for the
 pacific. had taken no whales as yet.
 on the twentieth of the same month, while in company
  with the java,
 we spoke the “ontario,” of sag harbor, bound home, with a full cargo
 of whale oil. paper, pens, and ink were now in great demand, all eager
 to send letters home. and now a great many of those who attempted
 writing for the first time found out the difficulty, we might almost
 say folly, of attempting to write legibly at sea. we had by this
 time, from having practiced it daily in keeping a journal, acquired
 the knack, though at first our efforts in that line were really
 astounding, to us at all events. even now it is hard deciphering the
 marks we first “entered in our log,” they having a closer resemblance
 to the tracks of an old turkey who had stepped in a pool of ink and
 walked over paper than any thing else we can liken them to.
 but we must hasten, as the good ship “ontario” is waiting
 anxiously for her master to return on board, that she may be
 on her way “homeward bound.” her crew were pitying us poor
 fellows—outward-bounders on a long voyage—while we were vainly
 endeavoring to conjecture how soon the time would arrive when we
 should be homeward bound with a full ship, and could look with an eye
 of pity upon poor outward-bound whalemen.
 the morning of the twenty-second commences with light breezes from the
 northeast; pleasant weather. suddenly, about  a.m., the monotony is
 broken by the welcome cry from masthead,
“t-h-e-r-e she b-l-o-w-s! t-h-e-r-e she b-l-o-w-s!”
“where away?”
“four points off the lee bow, sir.”
“how far off?”
“about two miles, sir.”
“what does it look like?”
“sperm whales, sir.”
“ay, ay; sing out every time you holler.”
 by this time the captain was aloft, and, on taking a view with his
 spy-glass at the “spouts,” sings out, “sperm whales! call all hands;
 bear a hand there, and get your boats ready.”
 “ay, ay, sir,” is the reply. all hands are called, and the different
 crews stand by their respective boats, “all eager for the fray,” and
 expressing their determination to capture a whale before returning to
 the ship, taking for their motto, “a dead whale or a stove boat.”
 “lower away the boats!” shouts the captain, as he descends to the
 deck. they are instantly lowered, followed by the crews, and now
 comes the tug of war. each boat sets her sail, and the men pull in
 good earnest. while they are skimming the waves the whale is still
 spouting, and all are anxious to reach him before his “spoutings
 are out.” it frequently happens, when in pursuit, that, just at the
 moment the boat-steerer “stands up” to strike the whale, he suddenly
 descends; but experienced whalemen can generally tell the direction
 they take while down by the position of the “flukes” when going down.
 the boats are then pulled in the direction the whale is supposed to
 have taken. they also judge of the distance the whale will go under
 water by the velocity of the animal when last seen. after the boats
 have pulled what is judged to be the proper distance, they “heave up,”
 or cease pulling. a large whale, when not “gallied,” or frightened,
 generally spouts from sixty to seventy times before going down, and
 remains down from fifty to seventy minutes.
 the boats have now got close on. those left on board the ship are
 watching with breathless anxiety, occasionally exclaiming, “oh pull,
 boys! do pull!” meantime the men in the boats are bending back to it,
 but the bow boat has the advantage; she is the head boat. mr. k. is
 jumping up and down in the stern, crying, “once more, my hearties;
 give it to her! a few
 more strokes, and we have him; pull, my
 children! why don’t you break your backbones, you rascals? so there
 you are now; that’s the stroke for a thousand pounds; start her, but
 keep cool; cucumbers is the word; easy, easy; only start her! why
 don’t you snap your oars, you rascals? bite something, you dogs! easy
 now, but pull; oh, you’re all asleep! stop snoring, and pull; pull,
 will ye? pull, can’t ye? pull, won’t ye? pull, and start your eyes
 out! that’s it; now you start her.” thus, one moment coaxing and
 the next scolding; but no one heeds him, as all are bent on taking
 the whale. “stand up!” shouted he; and the boat-steerer rose to his
 feet, grasped his iron, and, as the boat neared the monster, “give it
 to him!” is the next cry, and “chock to the socket” went the first
 iron, followed as quick as thought by the second.
 one deafening cheer, and the cry resounded
 over the waters, “we are fast! we are fast!”
 the sea, which but a moment before lay still and quiet,
 with scarcely a ripple to break its even surface, is now lashed into
 foam by the writhings of the whale. “stern all!” shouts the officer.
 the boat is immediately backed, and removed from present danger; the
 officer takes the head of the boat, and the boat-steerer takes the
 steering oar to manage the boat; the whale is sounding, and the line
 is running through the “chocks,” or groove in the head of the boat,
 with the rapidity of lightning, and as it passes round the loggerhead
 it ignites from the heat produced by friction, but the tub-oarsman is
 continually dashing water upon it in the line-tub. the whale sounds
 deep, and the line is almost out; a signal is made to the other boats,
 which are coming down. they come near enough, and bend on their lines;
 but presently it ceases running out and slackens; the whale is coming
 to the surface again. all hands now commence to “haul in line” as fast
 as he rises, and the boat-steerer coils it away, as fast as hauled in,
 in the
 stern sheets. he soon breaks water, and the boat is gradually hauled
 up to him. another boat now fastens, and he again attempts to sound;
 but, being weakened by loss of blood, he is soon at the surface again.
 the boats now draw alongside, and the officer of the first boat fast
 prepares his lance. he darts it for his vitals (just behind the fin),
 and the first one proves fatal, for in a moment more he shows the “red
 flag;” the blood flows freely from the spout-hole in a thick, dark
 stream; the sea is stained for some distance, and the men in the boats
 are covered with the bloody spray, but glory in it.
 the monster now attempts to sound, but is obliged to keep to the
 surface, and he soon goes in what is technically termed by whalemen
 his “flurry,” but what landsmen would call his dying agonies—and
 terrible
 they are. the sea is beaten into a perfect foam by his
 writhings and contortions; and, after a short time, as if with
 accelerated strength, he starts off with lightning speed, describing
 in his course circles, each growing smaller than the preceding one,
 and his speed slackening, until he finally gives one monster throe and
 dies, rolling fin out, with his head to the
 sun.[]
 the battle is now ended, and the “huge leviathan lies a victim to the
 superior power and mind of man.”
 now that life is extinct, a hole is cut in his head, the line made
 fast, and all the boats “hook on” and tow him to the ship, where he
 is made fast by means of a fluke-chain being passed around his tail,
 which chain is brought to the forward part of the ship, and passed
 through a “hawse-hole,” and made fast to the “bowsprit bits,” bringing
 the whale with his head pointing aft, and in a proper position to
 commence the operation of “cutting in.”
 this is stated to be a fact by old and experienced
 whalemen, who assert they have never seen a sperm whale die in any
 other manner. this peculiarity we have never heard accounted for.
 description of the sperm whale.—described externally.—difference
 between the sperm and right whale.
 before proceeding farther, perhaps it will be interesting to the
 reader if we give a brief description of the external form of the
 sperm whale. the following draft represents the shape of the animal,
 and the various dotted lines show the manner of dividing it, in order
 to “heave it in on deck.”
a, the nostril, or spout-hole; b, the situation of the
 case; c, the junk; d, the bunch of the neck; e, the eye; f, the fin;
 g, the spiral strips, or “blanket-pieces;” h, the hump; i, the ridge;
 k, the small; l, the tail, or flukes; m, the jaw.
 the head of the whale presents in front a thick, blunt appearance, and
 constitutes about one third the length of the animal. at its junction
 with the body is a protuberance on its back, called the “bunch of the
 neck;” immediately back of this is the thickest part of the body. it
 then gradually tapers for about another third of the whole length,
 when the “small,” as it is called, commences; and at this point on the
 back is another and larger prominence of a pyramidal form, called the
 “hump,” from which a series of smaller prominences runs half way down
 the small, forming the “ridge.” the body then contracts so much as
 to become not larger than the body of a man, and terminates by being
 expanded on the sides into the “flukes,” or tail. the flukes
  resemble
 somewhat in shape the tail of a fish, only being placed horizontal
 instead of perpendicular. in the larger whales these flukes are from
 eight to ten feet in length, and from fourteen to sixteen feet in
 breadth. the depth of the head and body is greater than the width.
 at the angle formed by the superior and anterior surfaces of the head,
 a little on the left side, is the nostril, or “spout-hole,” which,
 in the dead animal, presents the appearance of a slit, or fissure,
 in form resembling an s, extending longitudinally, and about twelve
 inches in length. the “case,” situated in the upper part of the head,
 is a large, almost triangular-shaped cavity, lined by a beautiful
 glistening membrane, and covered by a thick layer of muscular fibres
 and tendons running in various directions, and finally united by
 common integuments. this cavity is for the purpose of containing and
 secreting an oily fluid, which after death concretes into a granulated
 substance of a yellowish-white color—the spermaceti. the quantity of
 fluid contained in the case depends on the size of the whale; from
 that of a large whale fifteen barrels of liquid spermaceti are often
 taken.
 immediately beneath the case, and projecting beyond the lower jaw,
 is situated the junk, which is composed of dense cellular tissue,
 strengthened by numerous strong tendons and fibres, and infiltrated
 with spermaceti.
 the mouth is at the base of the head, and continues nearly its whole
 length. the lower jaw is pointed in front, and gradually widens
 till it is received in the socket of the upper jaw. it contains
 forty-two teeth, conical in shape, and, in the large whale, formidable
 in appearance. there are none, however, in the upper jaw, but
 indentations which receive the points of those in the lower jaw.
 sometimes a few rudimentary teeth are found in the upper jaw, never,
 however, projecting beyond
 the gums, upon which those in the lower jaw strike when the mouth is closed.
 the tongue is of a white color, exceedingly small, and does not appear
 to possess the power of very extended motion.
 the mouth is lined throughout with a white membrane, which becomes
 continuous at the lips, and borders with the common integument, where
 it becomes of a dark brown or black color.
 the eyes are small, and are furnished with eyelids. they are situated
 above and behind the angle of the mouth, at the widest part of the
 head. at a short distance behind the eyes are the external openings of
 the ears, of sufficient size to admit a small quill, and unprovided
 with any external auricular appendage.
 the fins are not far from the posterior angle of the mouth, and are
 analogous in their formation to the anterior extremities of other
 animals. they are not much used as instruments of progression, but
 probably in giving a direction to motions in balancing the body, in
 sinking suddenly, and occasionally in protecting and supporting their
 young.
 in a full-grown male sperm whale of the largest size the dimensions
 may be given as follows: length, from eighty to ninety feet; depth
 of head, from ten to twelve feet; breadth, from seven to ten feet;
 depth of body, from sixteen to eighteen feet; swimming paws, or fins,
 about eight feet long and three broad; the tail, or flukes, have been
 previously mentioned.
 in reviewing the description of the external form and some of the
 organs of the sperm whale, it will, perhaps, not be uninteresting
 if some comparison is instituted between them and the corresponding
 points of the right whale. one of the greatest peculiarities of the
 sperm whale, which strikes, at first sight, every beholder, is the
 apparently disproportionate and unwieldy bulk of the head; but this,
 instead of being, as might be supposed, an impediment to the freedom
 of the animal’s motion in his native element, is, on the contrary,
 in some respects very conducive to his lightness and agility. a
 great part of the bulk of the head is composed of a large, thin,
 membraneous case, containing, during life, a thin oil of much less
 specific gravity than water, below which again is the junk, which,
 although heavier than the spermaceti, is still lighter than the
 element in which the whale moves; consequently, the head is lighter
 than any other part of the body, and will always have a tendency to
 rise, at least so far above the surface as to elevate the nostril,
 or “spout-hole,” sufficiently for all purposes of respiration. in
 case the animal should wish to increase his speed to the utmost, the
 narrow anterior and inferior surface, which bears a resemblance to the
 cut-water of a ship, and which would, in fact, answer the same purpose
 to the whale, would be the only part exposed to the pressure of the
 water in front, enabling him thus to pass, with the greatest ease and
 celerity, through the boundless track of his wide domain.
 it is in the shape of the head that the sperm whale differs, in the
 most remarkable degree, from the right whale—the shape of whose
 head more resembles that of a porpoise—and in it the spout-hole is
 situated much farther back, rendering it seldom or never necessary for
 the nose to be elevated above the surface of the water. the eyes, in
 both the sperm and right whale, are exceedingly small in comparison
 with their bulk; still,
 they are tolerably quick-sighted. we are not aware that the sperm
 whale possesses, in any respect, any superiority. we again observe,
 in the formation of the mouth, a very remarkable difference in the
 two animals; for, in place of the enormous plates of whalebone which
 are found attached to the upper jaw of the right whale, we only find
 depressions for the reception of the teeth of the lower jaw, which
 plainly point out that the food of the two animals must be very
 different.
 there are several prominences or humps on the back of the sperm whale,
 which constitutes another difference in their external aspect. these
 prominences are not altogether peculiar to the sperm whale, as there
 is a species of fish, called by whalemen “humpbacks,” which possesses
 a prominence on the back very similar to that of the sperm whale.
 the skin of the sperm whale is smooth, but occasionally, in old
 whales, wrinkled. the color of the skin, over the greatest part of the
 body, is very dark. in different whales there is considerable variety
 of shade; some are even piebald. “old bulls,” as full-grown males are
 called by whalemen, have generally a portion
 of gray on the nose
 above the fore-part of the upper jaw, and they are then said to be
 “gray headed.” in young whales the “black skin,” as it is called, is
 about three eighths of an inch thick, but in old ones it is not more
 than one eighth.
 immediately beneath the black skin is the blubber, or fat, which is
 contained in a cellular membrane, and which is much strengthened by
 numerous fibres. the average thickness of the fat on the breast of a
 large whale, when in good condition, is about eighteen inches. the
 “hump” is generally the thickest part of the blubber, being sometimes
 from twenty-two to twenty-six inches in thickness; and, in most other
 parts of the body, it measures from nine to fourteen inches. the head
 is not, however, supplied with this covering, or blubber, having only
 the black skin, which lies close to a layer of very dense cellular
 tissue, under which is seen a considerable thickness of numerous small
 tendons, intermixed with muscular fibres.
 this thick covering of blubber, or fat, is called the “blanket;” it
 is of a yellowish color, and, when melted down, furnishes the sperm
 oil. it also serves two excellent purposes to the whale: rendering it
 buoyant, and furnishing it with a warm protection from the coldness of
 the surrounding element—in this last respect, answering well to the
 name bestowed upon it by whalemen.
 “cutting in.”
 as we are now ready to “cut in” the whale, we will briefly explain
 the modus operandi. in the first place the decks are cleared, in
 order to have room to work. the ponderous cutting tackles are swayed
 up to the lower-mast head (the main), the strongest point any where
 above a ship’s deck. large hawsers are then rove through these blocks,
 then through similar ones on deck, to the windlass, in the forward
 part of the ship. to the lower blocks are attached ponderous iron
 hooks, weighing over one hundred pounds each. these hooks are for
 the purpose of “hooking on” to the blubber, and can be put on and
 taken off the blocks at pleasure. and now, suspended in stages over
 the side, the first and second mates, armed with their long spades,
 begin cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just
 above one of the fins. this done, a broad semicircular line is cut
 round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew,
 striking up a wild chorus, now commence heaving at the windlass.
 the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her starts
 like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
 quivers, and nods her frighted mastheads to the sky. more and more she
 leans over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass
 is answered by a helping heave of the billows, till at last a swift,
 startling snap is heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upward and
 backward from the whale, and the triumphant tackle rises into sight,
 dragging
 after it the disengaged semicircular end of the first strip
 of blubber. now, as the blubber envelops the whale, as we described
 in the last chapter, precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it
 stripped off the body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped
 by spiralizing it. the strain, constantly kept up by the windlass,
 continually keeps the whale rolling over and over in the water; and as
 the blubber in one strip uniformly peels off along the line called the
 “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of the mates—the chief mate
 separating the head from the body while the whale is being rolled over
 the first time—and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and indeed
 by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
 higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the
 windlass then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious,
 blood-dripping mass sways to and fro as if let down from the sky; and
 every one present must take good care to dodge it when it swings, else
 it may box his ears and pitch him overboard.
 one of the attending boat-steerers now advances with a long, keen
 weapon, called a boarding-knife, and, watching his opportunity, he
 dexterously slices out a considerable hole in the lower part of the
 swaying mass. into this hole the end of the second alternating great
 tackle is hooked, so as to retain a hold upon the blubber, in order
 to prepare for what follows. whereupon this accomplished swordsman,
 warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a scientific dash at
 the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging slicings, severs
 it completely in two; so that, while the short lower part is still
 fast, the long upper strip, the “blanket piece,” swings clear, and
 is all ready for lowering. the heavers forward now resume their song
 and their work, and, while the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a
 second strip from the whale, the other is slowly slackened away, and
 down
 goes the first strip through the main hatchway right beneath,
 into an unfurnished parlor called the “blubber-room.” into this
 twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
 blanket-pieces, as if they were a great live mass of plaited serpents.
 and thus the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering
 simultaneously, both whale and windlass heaving, the crew singing, the
 blubber-room gentlemen coiling, the mates cutting, the ship straining,
 and all hands swearing occasionally, by way of assuaging the general
 friction.
 and now the “body” of the whale is all in; the carcass has floated
 off, food for the sharks; the head, which has been made fast alongside
 the ship, is brought to the gangway, and the junk is separated from
 the case, and “hove in” on deck. now comes the bailing of the case.
 it is hoisted up alongside the gangway, nearly level with the ship’s
 deck; a “whip” is rigged, being simply a rope, one end on deck, the
 other passing through a single block made fast to the main-yard, to
 which is attached a bucket of the capacity of about a gallon. one
 of the boat-steerers stands on the end of the case, with a short
 spade cuts a hole in the case, and the bucket is then sunk into it
 by means of a long pole, until it is filled, when it is hoisted out
 and emptied, and so on until the liquid oil is all bailed out. from
 the case of a hundred-barrel sperm whale from fifteen to seventeen
 barrels of liquid oil is generally obtained, though a great deal is
 unavoidably wasted. after the case is bailed it is cut loose, and
 immediately sinks with great rapidity.
 “trying out.”—“stowing down.”—“cleaning up.”—gale off the river de
 la plata.—thunder and lightning.—narrow escape of the ship.
 the whale is now cut in; then comes the process of “trying out.” in
 the centre of the deck, somewhat forward, are the try-works for the
 purpose of trying out the oil. it is a square place, built up with
 bricks and iron, about four feet high and ten square. it has two
 large iron pots in the centre, each one containing between three
 and four barrels, with furnaces underneath. the liquid spermaceti
 from the case is first put into the pots, the fires are lighted, and
 the process of “trying out” commences. here we would state that, in
 a whaling voyage, the first fire in a try-works has to be fed for
 a time with wood. after that no wood is used, except as the means
 of quick ignition to the staple fuel. in a word, after being tried
 out, the crisp, shriveled blubber, now called scraps, still contains
 considerable of its unctuous properties. these scraps feed the flames.
 like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming misanthrope, once
 ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his own body.
 would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
 inhale, and inhale it you must; and not only that, but you must live
 in it for the time. it has an indescribable odor about it, such as one
 might imagine would arise from a hindoo funeral pile.
 the blanket-pieces are cut into small pieces, varying from twelve to
 twenty inches in length, and about as wide as the thickness of the
 blubber, called “horse
 pieces.” they are then pitched on deck, and
 forward to the mincing machine, where they are cut into very thin
 slices, and are then ready for the pots.
 as soon as the oil is extracted from the blubber, the scraps are
 skimmed off, and the oil bailed out of the pots into a large copper
 cooler, which stands by the side of the try-works. when it is
 sufficiently cool that it will not burn the casks, it is poured into
 them, and allowed to remain on deck for two or three days. it is then
 “coopered,” that is, the hoops on the casks are all driven tight, to
 prevent them from leaking, it having been rendered necessary by the
 hot oil shrinking the casks. at length, when the last pint is casked
 and coopered, and all is sufficiently cool, then the great hatchways
 are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go the
 casks to their rest in the hold. this done,
  the hatches are replaced
 and hermetically sealed, like a closet walled up.
 and now comes the process of cleaning up. from the ashes of the
 scraps is made a powerful lye, which is used in removing the grease
 from the bulwarks and decks of the ship. hands go diligently along,
 and with buckets of lye and water, and rags, restore all to its full
 tidiness. the soot is brushed from the lower rigging; all the numerous
 implements which have been in use are likewise faithfully cleansed and
 put away. the great hatch is scrubbed and placed upon the try-works;
 every cask is out of sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks;
 and when, by the combined and almost simultaneous industry of the
 ship’s company, the whole of this duty is concluded, then the crew
 themselves proceed to their own ablutions, shift themselves from top
 to toe, and issue forth to the cleaned and white decks, fresh and all
 aglow, as bridegrooms new leaped from out the daintiest holland.
 we now continued our way for cape horn, having beautiful clear weather
 with fine southeast trade-winds.
 on tuesday, january th, , we were off the river de la plata. this
 region is notorious for its heavy gales and “pamperos,” a species of
 hurricane. we had, for three days, been having a severe gale. on this
 evening (the third day) the wind died away; the heavens were shrouded
 with heavy black clouds; every thing so quiet, and yet so gloomy,
 seemed but the forerunner of a storm of the wildest description.
 sail was taken in, and all put in readiness, awaiting its approach.
 presently the heavens were illuminated with the glare of lightning,
 followed by the hoarse and deep thunder that appeared to come from
 the very bottom of the great deep. it increased until the whole
 heavens were one broad sheet of flame, and the reflection upon the
 surface of the water gave it the resemblance of a sea of fire;
  and
 the constant thunder, seeming to shake the earth to the very centre,
 added to the sublime grandeur of the awe-inspiring scene. on every
 hand, and in whatever direction the eye turned, the same continual
 blaze of lightning, accompanied by the heavy and continuous thunder,
 presented itself to the beholder. it was certainly the most awful and
 yet sublime scene we had ever witnessed.
“the storm howled madly on the sea,
the clouds their thunder-anthems sang;
and billows rolling fearfully,
in concert with the whirlwinds rang.”
 all hands were gazing upon the grand spectacle, when, suddenly, a
 clap immediately over our heads—a sudden flash—a jar, followed by
 impenetrable darkness. all hands were dumb; no one dared to speak.
 the ship had been struck, but none could ask where, fearful
 of being told we were lost. the mate, however, soon came along, and
 gave proper directions to examine the ship. he then went to the
 main-top, and found the powder, which had been placed there for
 safety, all right. another descended to the hold, but discovered
 no fire. it appears the lightning struck our main-royal truck, and
 descended to the deck, which being wet, it passed off with but little
 damage. the next morning, on unfurling the main-royal sail, we found
 thirteen holes burned in it, about the size of a musket ball. the
 lightning went through the “bunt,” as it was rolled on the yard, thus
 accounting for the large number of holes.
 as soon as it was generally known we had escaped with so little
 injury, all experienced a feeling of gratitude for our truly
 remarkable escape. as we before remarked, the powder, which was
 contained in two “breakers,” or long, narrow barrels, each containing
 four kegs, was placed in the main and mizzen tops, one
  breaker
 on each side of the mast. the lightning had descended immediately
 between the two breakers in the main-top. had it ignited the powder
 contained in one of the kegs, in all probability our voyage at sea,
 and perhaps for life, would have been soon ended. we felt truly
 thankful that we had so miraculously escaped. some two or three of
 the men were knocked down, and others stunned, but nothing serious.
 the night slowly wore away; the constant glare of the fierce
 lightning, and the never-ceasing roar of the thunder, continuing
 until day dawned.
 we all felt relieved when daybreak once more came over the sea. the
 gale, which had increased during the night, now abated; the clouds
 broke away, even the one with the “silver lining,” and “old sol” once
 more showed his cheering face, and sent his gladsome rays rejoicing
 over the face of the great deep.
 preparing for cape horn.—head winds.—staten land.—cape horn.—heavy
 gale.—porpoises and albatross.—mackey and the third mate.—captured a
 sperm whale.—preparing for port.—the anchor down.
 we now commenced making preparations for that much-dreaded place,
 cape horn. took the anchors in on deck, and lashed them solid; also
 the boats from off the cranes, and secured every thing generally.
 we were now sailing along with fine breezes from the northward, but
 the coolness of the air reminded us that we were approaching the
 southernmost point of land. on the th of january the wind veered
 round to the south, and increased to a heavy gale. we reduced the
 sail to a close-reefed main-topsail, sent down top gallant yards,
 and prepared for a regular “cape horner.” at midnight, however,
 the wind abated, and sea went down; next morning it was pleasant,
 with fine northerly breezes; but at night the wind again hauled to
 the southward, blowing heavy, with rain, which obliged us to heave to.
 thus the wind often changes in the atlantic in this latitude;
 sometimes ships are kept here for weeks by head winds.
 on the th we were off staten land. this island presents a bleak,
 rocky appearance. saw a ship trying out, which assures us that sperm
 whales have been taken here lately.
 on saturday, the th, we were off the island of cape horn. this
 island is said to have received its name from its conical shape. we
 here saw quite a fleet of merchantmen and whalemen bound round the
 horn,
 no less than twenty-two ships being in sight from masthead.
 about nine o’clock this morning, while sailing along with a fair,
 pleasant wind, carrying studding-sails, all hands were suddenly
 called to take in sail, and, before the ship was under snug canvas,
 the gale broke upon us in all its fury, coming, as seamen say,
 “butt-end first.” however, we soon had every thing snug, and then
 “let the winds pipe.” with a good ship and plenty of sea-room, we
 felt no danger. the next day great numbers of porpoises were seen,
 going through the water like race-horses. plenty of albatross and
 cape pigeons were in sight also. we caught an albatross, a beautiful
 large bird, perfectly white, measuring sixteen feet from tip to tip
 of its wings. they are called by seamen “goneys,” for what reason we
 know not. we also saw large numbers of “mother carey’s chickens,”
 that beautiful little bird so well known to all. they were flying in
 the wake of the ship, skimming along its surface, apparently happy
 and contented. as we sat watching them and the noble albatross, as
 he went wheeling and circling in the air, we could not but think of
 that great creator who endowed them with the instinct which they
 possess—an instinct that guides them over the trackless waste of
 waters hundreds and thousands of miles from land, and then to land
 again, day after day, and week after week. no place in the world
 presents so many evidences of a great and a good god as the vast and
 mighty ocean.
 spoke the ship “henry,” of portsmouth, new hampshire, bound for
 california. the heavy gales of wind still continued, with rain, hail,
 snow, and sleet at intervals, until friday, the th of february, when
 we found we had passed the horn, and were fairly in the pacific.
 about this time an occurrence transpired which shows a seaman’s love
 of a good joke, even at the expense of an officer. it appears our
 third mate, mr. k.,
 whom we have before spoken of as a very pompous,
 great-i-and-little-you sort of a man, was much opposed to the men
 enjoying themselves in any manner if he could prevent it, and, for
 this reason, they were continually devising some plan to torment
 him. he had given express orders that no one of the watch should go
 below during their watch on deck. mackey, who much preferred the warm
 forecastle to the cold deck, would skulk below every opportunity
 he could get. mr. k. went forward on this occasion, and, as usual,
 mackey was enjoying a fine nap on a chest. mr. k. ordered him on
 deck, telling him “if he caught him in the forecastle again that
 night he would break his head,” and then strutted aft. it was not
 long after this before one of the watch sang out, in a voice just
 loud enough to be heard aft, “mackey, you had better come up on deck;
 if mr. k. catches you down in the forecastle, he will surely kill
 you.”
 then another sings out, “mackey, come up out of that; the third mate
 is coming.”
 mr. k., who had been listening, rushes forward with a determined air;
 “he would show that mackey that he had got to walk chalk, or he would
 break his head.” arriving at the forecastle scuttle, he cried out, in
 a voice of thunder, “come up here, you blackguard, and bear a hand,
 too.” no answer.
 “do you hear me? if i come down there, i’ll kill you deader than the
 d—l.” no answer yet. mr. k., now fairly boiling with rage, cries out,
 “i’ll fetch you out of that; i’ll show you a trick or two;” and, on
 turning to go down, espied some one dodging around the foremast that
 bore a striking resemblance to the missing mackey. quickly coming up
 again, he saw that it was really mackey, who had not left the deck.
 he then turned to the men, quite chopfallen, telling them he “never
 wanted to hear any more such stuff,”
 and, cursing them until he was satisfied, he turned and went aft,
 leaving the watch convulsed with laughter.
 as we were now fairly in the pacific, with pleasant weather and
 fine breezes, steering to the northward, we put the boats upon the
 cranes, the anchors on the bows, and cleared up generally, all hands
 rejoicing that the stormy cape had been at length passed.
 on the th of february we saw our first sperm whale in the pacific.
 it was not long after our boats were down and pursuing him before the
 starboard boat fastened, and the old man brought the “claret” the
 first lance. soon we had him alongside, his coat on deck, tried out,
 and down in the hold. we were now about four months out, with one
 hundred and eighty barrels of oil, which was a good foundation for a
 first-rate voyage.
 on the st day of march, —, the welcome news came from aft, “all
 hands to bend cables,” and soon the massive chains were dragged from
 their resting-places below, and fastened to the huge anchors, which
 were got ready for “letting go” in the harbor of talcahuana, chili.
 but there is “many a slip,” etc., and we experienced it here, as we
 were beating about for nine days, unable to enter port on account of
 boisterous head winds. at length, however, on the th, we got a fair
 wind, and entered the harbor with every thing set, and “let go” our
 anchor—the old ship at rest for the first time in four and a half
 months.
 talcahuana.—its streets.—public buildings.—market.—calaboose.—the
 harbor.—churches.—paulparees.—inhabitants.—manners and
 customs.—getting off water.—mackey again in trouble.—in the
 calaboose.—californians.—climate and products of chili.—horseback
 riding.—spanish wake.—desertion.—american consul.—mackey’s
 oration.—swimming ashore.—departure.
 talcahuana is the sea-port of the city of conception, and is situated
 at the head of a beautiful bay, protected from all winds by the high
 lands inclosing it. at the entrance of the harbor is the island of
 karakina, on the north side of which is the passage, and on the south
 side the false passage, as it is called, not being navigable for
 ships. abreast of the anchorage, which is immediately in front of the
 town, is a small fort, with but few guns, and in a very good position
 to do execution, with proper management. the houses are mostly one
 story, and of stone. they are obliged to build them thus on account
 of frequent earthquakes. they present a very neat appearance, being
 nearly all painted white, or whitewashed. the streets are rather
 narrow, but kept very clean. talcahuana can not boast much of her
 public buildings, they being “few and far between.” the market, if
 it may be so called, is very large in proportion to the size of the
 town, being a wide space of ground, inclosed by high brick walls,
 with no roof. the church, of which the inhabitants appear very proud,
 presents much the appearance of an old stone barn. the calaboose, or
 jail, is an old stone building in rather a dilapidated condition; but
 the “city fathers,” with a just appreciation of the wants of their
 “constituents,”
 are engaged in the erection of a new one on a much larger scale.
 immediately in the rear of the town is a fine eminence. on arriving
 at its summit we found ourselves well repaid for our trouble by the
 beautiful prospect before us. the busy multitude in the streets
 below—the neat, bright appearance of the houses—the shipping lying
 at anchor, with their various national colors flying—the smooth,
 unruffled surface of the waters of the bay, inclosed by beautiful
 green hills and mountains—in the distance the blue waters of the
 pacific—all united to bring before us one of the most beautiful
 scenes our eyes ever beheld.
 a number of years since the old city of talcahuana was destroyed by
 an earthquake, a large portion of which sunk. where the most thriving
 part once stood, nothing is now to be seen but a low, marshy waste.
 some remains of the old city are yet visible in the town.
 the inhabitants speak the spanish language—are hospitable,
 good-natured, and, as a general thing, very indolent. they are very
 loose in their morals, but warm supporters of their religion, which
 is the roman catholic, it being the only creed tolerated. the females
 are rather dark, very graceful and sprightly, beautiful singers, and
 some of them are very handsome. the town is filled with “paulparee,”
 or rum-shops, which are frequented principally by spaniards and
 seamen.
 on monday, march th, we commenced getting off water and fresh
 provisions, such as potatoes, onions, turnips, etc. in getting
 off water, two boat’s crews are generally dispatched to the
 watering-place with a “raft of casks,” which are filled and towed
 to the ship, and then hoisted on board. in this manner four or five
 hundred barrels of water are obtained in about two days—a sufficient
 quantity for a six months’ cruise. by some fortune or misfortune,
 mackey was one of the crew dispatched
 to the watering-place, and,
 while there, he thought he would take an observation of the country
 round about. accordingly, he wandered some distance to the top of a
 high hill, and, while much engaged in viewing the beauties of nature,
 two or three “vigilantes,” or policemen, appeared, and demanded of
 him “what he was doing there.” mackey replied, “nothing, but looking
 at the country.” they then asked him if he had a pass (which is a
 necessary article to every person while on shore), and mackey was
 obliged to confess he had not, when they very politely offered to
 show him “the elephant.” mackey begged to be excused, declining
 their services; but the vigilantes were not to be put off. there was
 no help for him; go he must; he was in a fix; so off he marched,
 muttering about liberty, etc., until they arrived at the calaboose,
 where he was snugly quartered.
 the next day, being on shore, we thought we would give mackey a call,
 and see how the poor fellow fared. we found him in excellent spirits.
 he said he “had just as lief stop there as not; for, if he was on
 board the ship, he would have to work, and there he got plenty to eat
 and had nothing to do.”
 to-day the town was filled with californians and sailors—some trying
 their hands at riding on horseback, and rather comical work they make
 of it. others are exploring the town, chatting with pretty girls,
 bantering with the spaniards, or enjoying themselves in dancing.
 some of them require considerable sea-room, whether it is from the
 effects of coming ashore after a long passage, or the spiritual
 influence of the aguadente, we can not say. however, they appear to
 be perfectly at home and contented.
 chili has a very mild and wholesome climate, and is very fertile.
 large quantities of fine wheat are raised, and agriculture generally
 receives much attention. apples,
 peaches, and pears are raised
 in abundance, while grapes are cultivated to a very great extent,
 principally for the purpose of making wine, which is said to be of
 a very superior flavor. the face of the country presents a rolling
 appearance, with occasional high hills, and in the distance are seen,
 towering above the clouds, the snow-covered peaks of the andes.
 chili is also renowned for its extensive mines of silver, gold,
 and copper, which, however, are not worked so much at present as
 formerly. the government is republican, and quite liberal in its
 views.
 the next day, friday, the th of march, we devoted to riding
 through the country. the horses here are well trained, but, to one
 unaccustomed to the chilian mode of guiding them, ludicrous incidents
 will sometimes occur. if you wish to turn to the left, you must pull
 the right rein, and vice versa. they are very tender-bitted, and a
 slight jerk of the reins will bring the horse to an immediate stand.
 it is very common to see a rider urging his horse to a full run,
 and, not understanding them, pull the reins in order to sit secure,
 when, lo and behold, the horse suddenly stops, and the rider keeps on
 going, measuring his length in the road some distance ahead.
 while strolling about town in the evening, we heard low musical
 sounds proceeding from a house near by. on presenting ourselves at
 the door we were cordially invited to enter, and were immediately
 ushered into a large, square room, filled with spaniards of both
 sexes. on a table at the farther end of the room was the corpse of a
 beautiful child of about two years of age, in a sitting posture. its
 little arms were crossed on its breast; the sweet, heavenly smile
 that still lingered on the features of clay, and the fresh, rosy
 cheeks, gave it a most beautiful and angelic appearance. our first
 conjecture on entering the room was that it was wax-work. it
  was
 dressed in white, and decorated with flowers. on the table were a
 large number of wax tapers burning, while the wall around and above
 was covered with paintings of the crucifixion, virgin mary, etc. in
 one corner of the room some seven or eight persons were chanting the
 solemn death-chants of the catholic church, accompanied by several
 guitars. the parents of the child were seated on a low bed, mourning
 and sobbing in a most piteous manner, while several relatives, as we
 supposed them to be, were gathered around, endeavoring to comfort
 them in their affliction.
 we advanced by invitation and saluted the corpse, and, as our eyes
 were fixed on the lovely image, we thought we could almost perceive
 it answer our gaze by a sweet smile, so fresh and life-like did it
 look. it was truly a solemn, mournful, and yet beautiful sight.
 still, the appearance of the bottle disgraced the scene, as it was
 passed from one to the other, although it is customary at all spanish
 wakes.
 on the morning of saturday, the th of march, we found that five
 men had deserted from the ship. the liberty of the remainder of the
 crew was therefore stopped, which appeared to cause considerable
 dissatisfaction. however, this was the only course left for the
 captain, as most of the men on board had made up their minds to
 desert in order to get to california. stopping all communication of
 the crew with the shore must put an end to the desertions.
 this state of affairs continued until the following monday, when
 the crew, being so very much dissatisfied, sent a petition to the
 american consul requesting to be discharged from the ship. he came
 on board, and all those wishing to be discharged were ordered to
 take the starboard side of the quarter-deck. the captain, by request
 of the consul, inquired of each separately his reasons for wishing
 to be discharged. some gave as a reason
 that they did not like the
 business; others, that they had been ill treated; and one, that he
 was under age when he shipped, and he wanted to go home. the consul
 could scarcely refrain from laughing outright at such reasons, and
 finally told them he could not help them. as they had signed the
 ship’s articles, he could not interfere in the matter; the captain
 was the man to settle that.
 mackey, who had been intently watching every word that fell from the
 lips of the consul, thought it about time for him to put in his oar,
 and, speaking out, said he “had been abused at various times, and
 once had been kicked while at the helm.” the officer who had taken
 this liberty said that “mackey was asleep at the helm one night, and
 he gave him a slight kick, just sufficient to waken him.” the consul
 replied that he could do nothing about that. mackey now broke forth
 with great earnestness: “i thought american consuls were sent to
 these places to protect and defend american citizens, whether sailors
 or captains; but you say you can do nothing about it. what are you
 good for, then? what business have you here? you might much better be
 at home about your business. any way, you are good for nothing here
 but to pamper to every captain’s wishes that will give you a cake of
 hard bread and a pint of beans.”
 this speech mackey delivered with great gusto, making flourishes that
 would have shamed an orator. the speech, of course, “brought down
 the house,” and caused a broad grin upon the countenance of all. the
 consul took it very coolly; the men were sent forward, and he, in
 company with the captain, left for shore.
 and here we would remark that in many cases mackey’s words were
 true. it is a shameful and lamentable fact, that in many instances
 american consuls regard seamen as “having no rights that they are
 bound to respect;”
 and it is often the case that masters of vessels
 who have been ill treating their men will, on entering port, present
 the consul with a small quantity of provisions, or something of that
 kind, and the result is, that no “foremast hand” from that ship can
 obtain justice from the consul. we make no comments on this; we
 simply state the facts, and let our readers make their own.
 our crew were now heartily sick and tired of port, and longed to be
 on the “open sea” again. on wednesday, march th, while all hands
 were at breakfast, mackey determined to make one more effort for
 his liberty. accordingly, he made his clothes up in a nice little
 bundle, fastened them on his back, slipped cautiously down the cable,
 and struck boldly out for the shore. on his crossing the stern of a
 ship, the captain of which had just come on deck, and espying a man
 swimming, hailed him:
“where are you going, my man?”
“going ashore; where do you suppose?” shouted mackey.
 one of our officers, happening to come up on deck at this moment,
 thought he saw something black bobbing up and down in the water
 quite a distance off. on looking with the glass, it was found to be
 mackey, with his bunch of clothes on his back, and almost ashore.
 a boat was immediately lowered and went in chase. mackey espied it
 coming, and struck out manfully; as for dear life he swam, but it was
 of no avail. when nearly to the shore, he was taken and thrust into
 the bottom of the boat, brought on board, and put in irons. a ship’s
 company near us mounted their rigging and gave “three cheers for the
 man who attempted to swim ashore!”
 at  a.m. of that day we weighed anchor, and, with beautiful weather
 and a fine breeze, left the port of talcahuana.
 cruising.—boats’-crew watches.—deserters by wholesale.—a large
 reward.—public auction.—juan fernandez.—peaches.—robinson crusoe’s
 cave.—fishing.—ship “java.”—masa fuero.—st. felix.—st. ambrose.—san
 lorenzo.—callao.—a railroad.
 we were now fairly at sea again, cruising for whales. we were now, as
 is customary for whalemen alone while on cruising ground, standing
 “boats’-crew watches.” it will be recollected that in a former
 chapter we explained the “regular watches” of a ship’s company; but
 this is something entirely different. the ship’s company are now
 divided into three equal portions, and each watch has only “four
 hours out” each night and “eight hours in,” instead of four and eight
 hours alternately, as in the regular watches. they are regulated so
 as to alternate them every night, and are generally “headed” or in
 charge of the boat-steerers.
 it was during one of these watches, on the morning of the th of
 march, that a boat-steerer and five foremast hands took the bow boat
 from off the cranes and deserted the ship. the boat-steerer who
 left was the one who headed the watch. it was blowing quite fresh
 from the southeast at the time, the ship standing to the westward
 under double-reefed topsails. the plot had probably been concocting
 for some days, as they took with them, in addition to most of their
 clothing, all the boat sails and a quantity of provisions and water,
 disabling the other boats by taking the “thole-pins” and hiding them.
 it was very rugged weather, and the experiment was dangerous, as the
 ship was going through
 the water about six knots. they succeeded,
 however, in getting clear.
 as soon as their absence was discovered, all hands were called, sail
 made, and we tacked ship and stood in for the land, which was about
 one hundred and eighty miles distant. at daybreak the captain offered
 a reward of one hundred dollars to the person who should first
 raise the boat from the masthead, but the reward was never claimed.
 the man who was at the wheel at the time the boat was taken said he
 knew nothing about the boat going, although the boat-steerer came to
 the binnacle and took one of the ship’s compasses before his face. he
 said he thought the man wished to fix the compass. the captain was
 very much enraged, and could hardly keep his hands off the man.
 after cruising a few days for the missing boat, and seeing nothing,
 we squared away for juan fernandez. the remark that “we see something
 new every day” is as applicable to whalers, and perhaps more so, as
 to any thing else. we now had something new, a public auction;
 the public, the ship’s company; the auctioneer, the captain; the
 “stock,” not central railroad, nor yet la crosse and milwaukie bonds,
 but the clothing and other valuables (!) left on board by deserters.
 this is the usual practice on board of whalemen, and we had several
 “public auctions” during the voyage.
 on tuesday, april d, , we first sighted the island of juan
 fernandez, and the next day sent a boat on shore for peaches. another
 boat and crew were dispatched fishing. this island looks beautiful
 from the sea, being very high land, and completely covered with
 verdure. peaches and quinces grow here in great abundance. wild
 goats are also found here in large numbers. there was but one family
 living on the island at this time, the head of which, we believe,
 was governor! we need hardly repeat here that this island is famous
 for having been the residence of alexander selkirk, a scotch sailor,
 who was put ashore some years since, and remained a long time on
 the island, his adventures giving rise to the well-known story
 of robinson crusoe. the cave spoken of in that work as “robinson
 crusoe’s cave” is still pointed out, whether the true one or not we
 are unable to say.
 we now returned to the ship with our fish, etc., after having spent
 most of the day with poor success, and lost our boat-anchor. we found
 the other boat had arrived with peaches and quinces. we altered our
 course and steered north.
 the next day we saw the island of masa fuero, very similar in its
 appearance to juan; and on the th sighted the islands of st. felix
 and st. ambrose. they present a rocky, barren appearance, and are
 uninhabited except by sea-birds, who flock there in great numbers.
 on the th we saw the island of san lorenzo, off the town of
 callao; and the next day we were “standing off and on” in the bay of
 callao, peru. our captain here went ashore to obtain medical advice
 and assistance for mr. lowe, our second officer, who has been for
 some time off duty, sick, his right side being affected with palsy.
 this town is well laid out, the houses mostly one story. the streets
 are of good width and clean. this city was also destroyed in  by
 an earthquake, and remains are yet to be seen as gloomy monuments
 placed over the ill-fated persons who were thus suddenly cut off.
 there is a railroad building from callao to lima, which is but seven
 miles distant. about  p.m. the captain and mr. lowe returned, and we
 filled away for payta.
 payta.—its appearance.—inhabitants.—shipped three
 spaniards.—gamming.—exchanged boat-steerers.—gloomy
 forebodings.—whales again.—stove boat.—manuel overboard.—no sunday
 off soundings.—mackey and the mate.—star-gazing.—reflections.—a
 county fair.—lawrence in trouble.
 on thursday, th of april, we were off the anchorage of payta. the
 land here presents a bleak, barren appearance; not a tree or shrub
 in sight; nothing but sand and rocks as far as the eye can reach.
 water is furnished the inhabitants by persons who make it a business,
 and bring it a long distance in skins on mules. the streets of this
 town are narrow and dirty; the houses are miserable; women and men
 dissipated and ugly-looking; fleas abundant, and loafers plenty.
 while on shore here the captain shipped three green peruvians, who
 answered to the cognomens of manuel maria, tom, and jack; the last
 two soon getting additions to their titles, making them “spanish
 tom” and “nigger jack.” we now squared our yards, made sail, and bid
 farewell to this outlandish hole, and also to the south american
 coast. we here spoke and gammed with the “president,” of nantucket,
 and the “marcus,” of fairhaven, bound home. this gave us another
 opportunity of sending a line to the “loved ones at home,” which we
 were glad to improve. one of our boat-steerers, having been on the
 sick-list nearly all the voyage, expressed a wish to return home in
 the “marcus.” accordingly, an arrangement was soon made between the
 two captains, and we took a mr. smith in exchange. all bid gifford an
 affectionate farewell, hoping he might
 be spared to reach his native
 land, and be restored to the bosom of his family. farewell, gifford—a
 long farewell. you are going to your own dear home; you will soon be
 clasped in the embrace of a dear mother and affectionate sisters.
 god grant that your life may be spared, that you may enjoy these
 blessings.
 we are bound for the cruising grounds to the westward, with some
 three or four years yet before us ere we can behold those that are
 near and dear to us; and how many of our small company may be spared
 to again tread their native shores, god alone knows. let us yield a
 cheerful compliance to the will of the almighty, knowing that we are
 safe in his hands, and in faith say, “thy will, not mine, be done,
 o lord.” with heavy hearts we squared our yards and headed for our
 cruising grounds.
 on monday, may th, spoke ship “rebecca sims,” of new bedford, with
 whose ship’s company we passed a very pleasant day. how cheering to
 the lone mariner while cruising, with no land in sight, and thousands
 of miles from our own home, to meet a ship from the same port, and a
 crew speaking the same language as ourselves! it is like meeting old
 friends.
 on saturday, the th of may, we raised a school of sperm whales.
 we immediately down boats and after them. after some pretty hard
 pulling, the chief mate’s boat fastened to a cow whale, and killed
 it. during the melee the boat was badly stove, and our giant manuel,
 the portugee, knocked overboard. the whale was running with great
 speed at the time, and, as a matter of course, poor gee was soon left
 a long distance astern. however, one of the other boats, seeing what
 had transpired, came to the rescue, and manuel was picked up. when
 they reached him he was striking out manfully for the boat, which was
 now miles ahead of him, and calling on all the saints in the calendar
 for help at the
 top of his voice. he was an excellent swimmer, but
 greatly frightened; so much so that some of the boat’s crew that
 picked him up declared that he was ten shades lighter. at sundown we
 had the jacket of the whale on deck.
 the next day was sunday, but not sabbath. on all whalers, while at
 sea, mast-heads are manned, whales chased and captured, cut in and
 tried out on sunday as much as any other day in the week. nothing
 else, however, except what is absolutely necessary for navigating
 the ship, is done on this day, which is generally spent by the crew
 in reading and writing. to-day, while all hands were busily employed
 in cutting up the blubber, trying out, and clearing up the decks
 generally, the mate missed our friend mackey from his post, which
 was to assist in hoisting the blubber from the blubber-room. he
 accordingly went forward to the forecastle, and, calling out, asked
 him what he was doing below.
mackey replied, “breaking out my chest to get a chaw o’ tobacco.”
“but would not any of the men on deck give you a chew?”
“no, sir, i don’t believe they would,” replied he, coolly.
 “well, just point yourself out of that, aft, to the main hatchway,
 and get up on the bitts, and stand by to hoist that blubber on deck.
 now, mind, don’t let me have to look after you again, if you do there
 will be trouble; stay there till i call you down!”
 mackey took the place, and appeared perfectly contented with his new
 position, as he could sit down. presently the mate sang out, “come
 this way, all of you, and shove this case overboard.” it had just
 been bailed, and was now ready to launch into its native element,
 from which it had been taken. after tugging and shoving for a long
 time to no purpose, the mate
 looked around to see if any one was
 missing, and, not seeing him, called out, “where is that mackey?”
 “here i am, sir,” shouted mackey, sitting at his ease on the bitts,
 looking on with perfect indifference and composure.
“what in the name of goodness are you doing there?”
 “you told me to stay here till you called me, sir,” said mackey, not
 loving work well enough to offer his services until he was called on.
 “get down out of that, you blackguard, and come here where the work
 is.”
 mackey left his stand amid the roars of the crew; the mate himself,
 who could always appreciate a good joke, could not refrain from
 joining in the general laugh.
 on tuesday, may th, we had most delightful weather, and the evening
 was one of those beautiful, mild, calm nights so common to the
 pacific. with gentle breezes, we were slowly plowing our way to the
 marquesas islands. the stars shone forth in all their resplendent
 beauty, and not a cloud was to be seen in the whole face of the
 heavens. it was truly a lovely night, and the all-pervading stillness
 seemed to remind us of our own loneliness, and our thoughts naturally
 reverted to other scenes—to the far-distant home; to the dear friends
 and loved ones to whom we bid a hasty but sad farewell. do these dear
 friends ever bestow a thought or breathe a prayer for the welfare of
 the wanderer? were they thinking of the one far, far away? and when
 they assemble around the festive board, or form the family circle
 about the fireside, do they miss the absent one? oh, what joy would
 it have been to have known that there were some in the land of our
 birth that missed us, and prayed for the return of the wanderer! what
 joy would it have been to know that our friends were enjoying that
 blessing, health! what a consolation
  to have been assured that
 they were spared the ravages of disease and death! but this pleasure
 was denied us. thousands of miles of blue water rolled between us
 and our homes. what recollections crowd upon the mind at the mention
 of home! the dear old village, where we have sported with all the
 joys of youth—the old school-house, where we for hours and hours have
 sat trying the patience of the teacher, conning our lesson, perhaps,
 or engaged in some mischief—the stream, along whose banks we have
 so often strolled, listening to the merry carol of the birds, and
 annoying the finny tribe—the hills, over which we have rambled with
 boyish glee—the woods, in whose pleasant retreats we have passed so
 many happy hours—schoolmates, the beautiful fair ones—and lastly,
 though not least, dear parents, brothers and sisters—all rushed
 through the brain in a tumultuous whirl, and we found ourselves
 unconsciously sighing for the pleasures of home. but, alas! we awoke
 to the sad reality of our situation. thousands and tens of thousands
 of miles of blue water, must be beat ere we could again clasp in our
 arms those we held so dear; and we could only look up to him who
 “ruleth the waves,” and trust in his protection. what consolation
 to our fainting heart these words: “be still, and know that i am
 god.”
 the men forward had aroused from their lethargy, and some were
 whiling away the time singing, others telling yarns; spanish jack
 and portuguese manuel were seated by themselves, thumping on an old
 fiddle; jo bob was amusing some of the boys by giving them a specimen
 of his island dancing and singing. the watch below were in about the
 same condition, “lying around loose,” listening to a long yarn spun
 by lawrence about a county fair that took place down in maine. as
 usual, his stories would not “match.” he gave a full description of
 the whole affair. “the table,”
 he said, “was about three or four
 hundred feet long, and about six thousand people sat down to dinner
 at one time!” some of the boys inquired “what they had to drink.”
 “strong beer,” replied lawrence; whereupon one of the watch said
 “he had lied to him, as he had often stated that the people down in
 maine never indulged in strong drink.” but lawrence was not to be
 caught in this manner, and he readily replied, “well, it was not so
 very strong; it was made of spruce!” all the watch now joined in
 a hearty laugh at lawrence’s expense.
 meanwhile the order of arrangements on deck were somewhat different.
 it happened that lawrence’s berth, which was an upper one, was chock
 forward in the “eyes” of the ship, and one of the dead lights—used
 for the purpose of letting air and light into the forecastle, which
 opened exactly abreast his face—was left open. one of the watch on
 deck, having listened to lawrence’s yarn, and wishing to have a
 little sport at his expense, stationed himself over the bows, on the
 martingale guys, and, as lawrence rolled over, gave him a bucket of
 water, dash in the face, almost drowning the poor fellow. as soon
 as he could speak, for he was terribly frightened, and his bed was
 fairly afloat, lawrence commenced jawing about the man at the helm
 “getting the ship off her course.” it was as smooth as a mill-pond,
 but he had the idea that the sea had washed in. his sleep was spoiled
 for that watch below, as the whole watch were shouting and laughing,
 and he growling and putting on dry clothing.
 marquesas islands.—dominica.—its appearance.—visitors.—tattooing.—the
 chief.—his costly dress.—delivers his papers.—a “recommend.”—society
 islands.—roratonga.—its appearance.—new york.—new bedford.—too
 many friends.—the universal remedy.—fruit.—a thieving
 set.—missionaries.—petty tyrannies practiced.—rev. john williams.—his
 death.—the staple commodity.—the desire for sea.—queen and
 government.—desertion.—general losses.—jo bob’s choice.—a merry time.
 on thursday, june th, we raised the island of dominica, one of
 the marquesas group. this island presents a beautiful appearance
 from the sea. the thick groves of the cocoanut, orange, lime, and
 bread-fruit-trees, with the native huts occasionally peeping out from
 under the foliage; the mountains in the background, thickly studded
 with magnolia groves; a beautiful stream of water tickling down the
 sides of large mountains, here and there inclosed by the trees, are
 all plainly visible from the ship, and make us long to ramble among
 them.
 a canoe was seen approaching us, and the main yard was hauled aback,
 when it was soon alongside. the natives were certainly the most
 singular-looking beings we had ever beheld. they are about medium
 size, copper-colored, and wear no clothing except a small piece of
 tappa—a native cloth pounded out from bark—around their loins.
 their faces and bodies were tattooed in such a manner that they look
 truly frightful. some have a broad stripe running diagonally across
 the face; others had half the face tattooed; others one eye, with a
 black mark abreast of it; some the lower half
  of the face. their
 bodies presented all the variations of the kaleidoscope.
 the chief, who is quite a dignitary, was “dressed up” for the great
 occasion. his dress consisted of an old overcoat that reached nearly
 to his knees, with a large white button tied by a string about a foot
 in length to the back part, and an old bell-crown “beaver,” about
 four sizes too large, completely covering his head and ears. this
 completed his wardrobe, and a truly comical appearance he presented
 as he approached the captain, pulled off his beaver, pulled out his
 papers, and presented them with the air of a man of business. the
 papers were recommends from captains who had traded with him, but
 he knew nothing contained in them. one of them, of which we obtained
 a sight, read in this wise: “beware of this fellow; he is dishonest
 and a villain; do not allow him to persuade you to go ashore with
 him.” a nice “recommend,” truly. and here we will remark that the
 tribe at this bay are cannibals of the fiercest kind, and it would
 not be very safe for a boat’s crew to go among them.
 as we were in haste to reach the society islands, we politely took
 leave of our visitors and the comical-looking old chief, and braced
 forward, soon leaving the beautiful island of dominica far astern.
 we, in the course of two or three days, passed several of the
 societies, and on saturday the d of june, sighted the island of
 roratonga, the one to which we were bound. the island, like all those
 in the tropics, especially those composing the marquesan and society
 group, presents the most rich and beautiful appearance. the land, as
 it recedes back from the sea, rises to a considerable height, and
 is dressed in the brightest green foliage; the sandy beach, washed
 by the never-ceasing rollers, with the neat white houses quietly
 reposing beneath the thick shade of the myriads of cocoanut, orange,
 and banana trees, renders
 it the most beautiful island we have ever
 beheld. as we stood viewing it from the ship, while drawing nearer
 and nearer, we could but imagine it to be some eden of happiness,
 where yet the passion of man had not stepped in to mar and spoil its
 beauty. but even here we found that the “serpent” had entered and
 filled it with sin.
 there are three villages on this island, named new york, new
 bedford, and the one at which we stopped, roratongo. we believe
 there are about eight hundred inhabitants in this village. from
 appearances, they are not very cleanly in their persons, and are
 rather forbidding. most of them, however, wear european clothing,
 which they obtain from ships. they endeavor to make themselves
 very friendly, and, as soon as you land, they throng about you
 as numerous as runners in albany on landing from a north river
 steam-boat, exclaiming, in very good broken english, “how de do,
 my fliend? you be my fliend? go my house; me got plenty fruit my
 house.” each one does his best to make you understand he is your
 very particular friend; very disinterestedly, of course, as we found
 to our cost. we accepted the invitation of one of these, who would
 have it that he was our very particular friend—in fact, he almost
 claimed relationship—and accompanied him to his house. on arriving at
 his “house,” we found it to be a long stone building, whitewashed,
 consisting of but one apartment, with a curtain or screen in the
 centre, which probably served as a partition, making two rooms. the
 inmates consisted of two or three young, dirty, ugly-looking females,
 one of them cross-eyed, and another that had lost an eye, and an old
 lady, who kept up a constant cry, begging for tobacco. “too much
 sore, my toose; small piece bacca.” we soon found this “sore toose”
 very prevalent, and “bacca” the universal remedy—the great cure-all.
 after supplying their “immediate necessities,”
 we sat down to eat
 some oranges and bananas offered to us. this island abounds with all
 kinds of tropical fruit, and we soon struck a bargain for all we
 wanted; and, on arising to go, found they had stolen all our tobacco
 and pocket-knives. they are expert thieves and arrant rogues; no
 dependence can be placed on them.
 the english have a missionary station here, established several years
 since. some of the natives like the present missionary, and some do
 not. the chiefs or rulers uphold him, but the “people” say he is “no
 good;” he makes them “work too much.” one of them informed us—and
 we afterward found it to be true—that if a kanaka failed to attend
 church on sabbath, he had to pay the missionary one dollar, either in
 money or fruit; if he smoked on the sabbath, the same penalty; and
 several other petty tyrannies are practiced, which has the effect of
 causing the natives to hate the missionary and the gospel he teaches,
 and shows that unprincipled as well as good men are sent out, though
 not known to be such by those who send them, to spread the gospel
 among the heathen. if a native wishes a bible, he must pay the sum of
 one dollar for it, and the same if a sailor wants one. such things as
 these tend more to cause a feeling of hatred against the missionary
 and his work than of love.
 on this island is the grave of the rev. john williams, the
 pioneer missionary, who was universally beloved and respected by
 the natives. he was a noble as well as a good man, and was actuated
 by none but the purest motives. he faithfully labored to enlighten
 the heathen, and to diffuse the glorious blessings of the gospel of
 jesus christ among them, and his labors were greatly blessed. after
 establishing several missionary stations, he went to the island of
 tanna, one of the hebrides, where the natives were cannibals, and
 groveling
 in the darkest superstition. on attempting to land, with a
 desire to create a friendly feeling with the natives, they rushed for
 him, and, as he attempted to reach the boat, he was struck by a spear
 and killed. they hauled the body clear of the beach, and refused
 to give it up. however, we learn they have since delivered up the
 remains, which were taken to roratonga and buried. thus perished this
 great and good man, at the hand of those to whom he would have done
 naught but good.
 the staple commodity here is tobacco, which is very scarce, and
 readily commands a high price. for instance, half a pound of ordinary
 “plug” will purchase two hundred oranges, and other fruit in the same
 proportion. the natives, both male and female, are very much addicted
 to its use—never chewing, but forever smoking.
 quite a number of the natives came on board, wishing to go to sea
 with us, as they say “too much work ashore.” it appears they are
 building a church, and they do not wish to work, as they receive no
 pay. we are glad to be able to say that this missionary station is an
 exception; that at no other one that we visited during our wanderings
 were the natives tyrannized over as they were here. we are glad,
 too, for the honor of our country, that this missionary was not an
 american.
 the government is administered by the queen and missionary, or, we
 should rather say, the missionary and the queen, as she is merely a
 nominal sovereign. she is a very dignified lady, weighing about three
 hundred pounds. next in rank come the “chiefs,” who are members of
 the royal family, and, with the sovereigns above mentioned, form the
 council, or law-making power. next come the “kikos,” or constables,
 who see that all laws are properly enforced, and arrest those who are
 guilty of violating them. as there was a law in force preventing any
 of the inhabitants leaving the island
 without the consent of the
 missionary, those who had come on board, wishing to go to sea with
 us, were compelled to return to land, which they did with sorrowful
 hearts. our captain, however, obtained the necessary consent, and
 shipped three, whom he chose while ashore.
 wood and water all aboard, ship loaded down with luscious tropical
 fruit, such as oranges, bananas, pine-apples, cocoanuts, limes,
 lemons, plantains, etc., on tuesday, june th, we were ready to
 take our departure from this lovely isle. in the last boat that went
 ashore this morning, one of the crew, by the name of bob white, a
 miserable specimen of a most miserable frenchman, who had imposed
 upon the captain, palming himself off as a “first-rate steward,”
 and who had been shipped in that capacity in america, but kicked
 forward the second day out from home, managed to steal into the boat
 unobserved, and, while ashore, deserted. all hands, from captain
 down, were glad to be well rid of him.
 when once more at sea, the crew, on looking into chests and examining
 their possessions, begin to miss different articles of clothing,
 etc.: one has had his shoes stolen; another a shirt; another his
 blanket; another his jacket, etc. all appear to have lost something,
 and they say, if we had remained there much longer, the natives would
 have stolen us poor.
“isle of booty, fare thee well.”
 perhaps, however, we were well recompensed, as, upon examination when
 the watch was set, we found that we had three more kanakas than were
 shipped by the captain. the old ship had stolen them in return for
 the natives plundering her crew. the captain was much opposed to this
 proceeding on the part of the ship, but, as the island was now out of
 sight, and we were fast leaving it with a fair wind, he consented to
 their going with us.
 our old kanaka friend, jo bob, who had come from america with us for
 the express purpose of going home and remaining, after being ashore
 a day or two, came on board, and wished to “go the voyage.” we were
 very much surprised at this, and at first could not account for it,
 but presently he “let the cat out of the bag,” saying the “kanakas
 had got to work—build meetin’-house,” and, as he was a sailor, he
 spurned the idea of mixing mortar or carrying the hod. jo thought
 the least of the two evils was the old ship; and he might well say
 that, for he was as lazy as a “mahone soger,” and had seen easy times
 on board.
 in the evening all hands appeared to be in the best humor possible.
 the fruit had been freely distributed, and each man had received
 as much as he wanted for a month. all were busy discussing its
 qualities, spinning yarns, singing and dancing; while the kanakas,
 seven in number, were having their “hula hula,” or dances,
 accompanied with songs, in high glee. these performances were very
 interesting to us, as we never before witnessed them. they have what
 they call their love dance, missionary dance, whaling dance, and war dance.
 their gestures, songs, and dances very much resemble those of
 the north american indians.
 making passage to king mill group.—fourth of july.—byron’s
 island.—perote island.—drummond’s island.—sydenham’s island.—visit
 from the natives.—their canoes.—themselves.—trade.—“dittoes.”—taking
 of the “triton.”—a treacherous portuguese.—a bloody massacre.—a
 just retribution.—the kanaka’s stratagem.—the natives
 frightened.—prisoners ashore.—a young hero.—hostages.—the
 prisoners released.—proceed to the sandwich islands.—henderville’s
 island.—woodle’s island.—natives again.—“teka moi moi.”—young
 cocoanuts.—decidedly jewish.—easily satisfied.—description of
 natives.—the females.—a large fleet.—comparisons.—simpson’s
 island.—ship “narragansett.”—stove boat.—fisherman’s
 luck.—experiments in mesmerism.—somebody “sold.”
 we were now making passage for the “king mill group,” which is a
 group of small islands greatly celebrated for being a good sperm
 whaling ground. our captain had filled the same ship in which we now
 were on this ground but a few years before, and it was to be our
 principal place of cruising for a year or fourteen months, at least.
 and now we come to thursday, july th—the never-to-be-forgotten
 fourth of july—our first one at sea. while our friends at home are
 celebrating the anniversary of american independence, we are deprived
 the pleasure of being with them in person, yet we are with them in
 spirit, and the spark of patriotism glows as brightly in the small
 company of americans on board as if we had been within hearing of
 the booming cannon, the joyful peal rung out by the merry bells,
 the patriotic oration and sentiment; and, although among the wild
 isles of the pacific, and thousands of leagues from the “home of
 the free,” yet the return of this day
 sent a thrill of joy through
 every frame, and we felt thankful to the god who watched
 over the cradle of the infant nation, who still guides its footsteps
 as it approaches manhood, and who is ever blessing it with heaven’s
 choicest blessings. may no american ever fail to render thanks for
 this anniversary, in whatever clime he may be situated.
 on tuesday, july d, we saw the most eastern island of the group,
 byron’s island, and the next day sighted perote island. these islands
 are all coral formations, very low, are inhabited, and thickly
 covered with cocoanut-trees. on saturday, the th, we passed
 drummond’s island, and sighted sydenham’s island. from the latter
 the natives came off in great numbers to trade. their canoes are
 constructed of narrow, thin
 strips of wood, the cocoanut, fastened
 with small line made from the cocoanut husk; are sharp at both ends,
 very narrow, and are prevented from capsizing by a long piece of
 wood placed parallel with the canoe and made fast to it, called the
 “outrigger.” they have a mast, with a three-cornered mat sail, made
 from the leaf of the cocoanut-tree, and rigged in such a manner as to
 admit of sailing in either direction without turning the canoe. they
 have them of all sizes, from the small one carrying but one person,
 to the large war-canoes carrying one hundred.
 the natives are a wild-looking set of copper-colored beings, in a
 complete state of nudity, their bodies tattooed, and covered with
 cocoanut oil, which is their perfumery. they are of medium size,
 but very powerful. they are all merchants, bringing with them, to
 trade with ships, shells, fish, mats, cocoanuts, and a species of
 fruits called “dittoes.” these grow in large bunches, very compact,
 and similar to figs packed in a box. on the outside of the bunch
 they are green; on breaking them apart, you find about two thirds of
 the length, from the inner end, is of a bright golden color, and of
 an excellent flavor. the currency here, as at most of the kanaka
 islands, is tobacco and pipes, and for this they will follow a ship
 for miles. as it was near night, we made sail and motioned them
 ashore.
 at this island a few years since, the natives, led on by a portugee,
 who was living among them at this time, attempted to take the ship
 “triton,” of new bedford, captain spencer. the plot was well laid
 and matured, and the natives went off to the ship and informed the
 captain, by signs, they had a fine “fluke-chain” ashore, and wanted
 to sell it. he asked them where they got it, when they replied,
 “kiabuka broke” (ship broke), conveying the idea that a ship had
 been wrecked here some time previous. as the captain was desirous
 of obtaining
 a chain of this description, he immediately, without
 suspecting their dark and bloody designs, ordered his boat to be
 lowered away and manned. on arriving on shore, and before they
 suspected any treachery, they were seized and bound. the portugee
 then, with a large number of natives, went off to the ship to trade,
 as they intimated. the crew, when they arrived, were mostly down
 below, and the third mate was asleep in one of the boats. when the
 natives had collected on deck in sufficient numbers, they made a
 rush for the “spades,” which hung overhead on the quarter-deck, and,
 before any one was aware of what was transpiring, had possession of
 the deck. they killed the man at the helm, two or three foremast
 hands, the second mate, steward, and cook, and then proceeded to the
 cabin, where the mate was lying asleep. he was aroused by the noise,
 but too late to offer any resistance; they, attacking him, cut and
 mangled him in a horrible manner, and left him, as they supposed,
 dead.
 the portugee, who led on the savages, now proceeded to the deck in
 order to make a finish of the bloody job, massacre the remainder of
 the crew, who were confined in the forecastle, and then work the ship
 ashore into the breakers. the third mate, who had become aroused by
 the noise, but wisely kept quiet until he saw the portugee passing
 abreast of him, suddenly darted a lance with such unerring aim that
 it was driven completely through his body, killing him instantly.
 the natives were greatly frightened at this, and attacked the third
 officer, but he managed to elude them, and escaped below. they now
 fired muskets, which they had taken from the cabin, already loaded,
 down the skylight, until they saw it was useless, when they directed
 their whole energies to getting the ship into the breakers. one of
 the crew happened to be a kanaka, and they ordered him to the helm,
 and to keep the ship headed for the
 land, threatening him with
 instant death if he failed. but he was secretly determined to thwart
 their horrible purposes, and accordingly kept the ship headed nearly
 in a contrary direction. as soon as the natives discovered they were
 leaving the land instead of approaching it, they were about to put
 their threat into execution; but he made them to understand that he
 could not steer the ship, knew nothing about it, etc. one of the
 chiefs then told him to go to masthead and keep a look-out, and he
 would steer the ship ashore. he immediately mounted the rigging, and
 with the agility of a monkey was soon aloft at masthead. not deeming
 it prudent to make known his purpose too soon, he waited; the ship
 was gradually approaching the breakers, where she would soon be more
 than ever in the power of these bloodthirsty cannibals. but the time
 has come for relief; “sail ho!” is the cry from aloft; and
 the rascals are jumping overboard into the water and their canoes,
 and paddling for dear life to the shore, with fright depicted on
 every countenance. the brave kanaka, who had by this stratagem
 succeeded in saving the ship, now came down on deck and released
 the men in the forecastle, who, with the third mate, immediately
 headed the ship off shore, and, supposing the captain and his boat’s
 crew all murdered, made all sail. the mate, who was left for dead,
 recovered gradually. after a long passage, they made the port of
 honolulu, sandwich islands.
 the captain, together with his boat’s crew, whom we left on shore
 bound, were, for some unknown reason, kept still alive as prisoners.
 the natives finally, at a council held, determined to murder them
 all. the arrangements were all completed. the captain was first led
 forth, firmly bound, and, in imitation of our north american indians,
 they laid his head upon the fatal block; the executioner, with his
 massive war-club in readiness, awaits but the word from the chief
 which is
 to send a soul into eternity. but who is this rushing
 forward, and, pocahontas-like, braving the ire of that dread chief,
 and proudly, firmly demanding the life of captain spencer and the
 white men with him? ’tis the son of the chief, who, with fire in
 his eye and determination in every line of his features, tells them
 “they must not murder the white men; if they do, plenty america
 fire kiabuka come, kill all kanaka.” the bravery and reasoning of the
 brave boy-chief prevailed, and their lives were spared, though still
 kept “in bonds.”
 after some weeks had passed a ship came to the island to trade, and,
 through some one of the natives, the captain ascertained the fact
 that captain spencer and his men were held prisoners. the captain
 and crew of the ship trading immediately seized and bound a number
 of the natives on board as hostages, telling the remainder that if
 captain s. and his men were not instantly forth-coming, unharmed,
 those detained on board as hostages should swing at the yard-arm.
 this threat had the desired effect. captain spencer and his men were
 liberated from their cruel bondage, and kindly received by all on
 board. the captain proceeded to the sandwich islands, where he now
 resides; and when narrating to us the above particulars, although
 an old sea-dog, the tear would trickle down the weather-beaten
 cheek as he recalled to mind the fate of those who were so cruelly
 murdered, and his own miraculous escape.
 on wednesday, july st, we saw henderville’s and woodle’s islands.
 we headed for the latter, and when two or three miles from land our
 decks were crowded with natives, all bringing something to trade. a
 lively scene now presented itself, equaling any of our large trading
 marts, though not, perhaps, on quite as extensive a scale. here might
 be seen a native offering a hat to a sailor, and each one endeavoring
 to get the best of the bargain; another was offering mats, another
 shells, and
 so on to the end, all for “’baccy.” at this island we
 found something in the shape of molasses that we had never yet seen.
 it is made from the milk of the cocoanut boiled down, and called by
 them “teka moi moi.” it resembles maple molasses, both in color and
 flavor, more than any thing else, and was quite a treat to our ship’s
 company, who purchased large quantities—five cocoanut shells filled
 with it for one “plug” of tobacco.
 those who have never tasted the young cocoanut may be excusable
 in eating, and drinking the milk of the miserable things called
 cocoanuts which are exposed for sale at our fruit-stands. but, to
 enjoy it in all its delicious fullness, one must eat them when they
 are green, and when the shell is so soft as to admit of a knife being
 passed through the husk and shell, as one would “plug” a melon. in
 this state the nut is full of the rich milk, and, on breaking them
 open, some are so young that no meat has yet formed; in others it
 is like jelly; and, as it advances in age, the milk loses its rich
 flavor, and the meat becomes hard and oily.
 the natives of this island are shrewd customers, and drive a bargain
 with all the tightness of a jew, bantering until they find they can
 obtain no more, and then sell. in one respect, however, comparatively
 speaking, they are easily satisfied. a “head” of tobacco goes a
 great way with them; and he is considered a rich man among them who
 becomes possessed of two or three “heads.” they appear, also, to be
 much better natured and better looking than any we have yet seen;
 have more of that noble, manly appearance than those of sydenham’s
 island. they are much larger, also, and many of them wear the
 “tappa” about the loins. the females are very fair-looking, with
 regular features, small and delicate in size and structure, and
 appear very graceful and sprightly. they are very cleanly, and when
 they come off to ships have their heads decorated with wreaths
  of
 wild flowers, and generally a bunch in each ear as a substitute for
 ear-rings. they are merry creatures, always laughing, and showing
 teeth of pearly whiteness, that any woman might be proud of, which
 are not manufactured for the occasion by a dentist. were they
 white, they would create no small sensation among the belles and
 beaux of america; and we have seen some who have just color enough
 in the cheek to make them truly beautiful. in fact, it is rather a
 dangerous affair to be placed amid such fascinating creatures after
 a long cruise, and having seen none but our own ship’s company. from
 the affectionate glances bestowed by some of our sailors upon the
 dark-eyed beauties, we fear they will leave their hearts behind as
 well as their tobacco.
 the sea between the ship and the shore was completely covered by
 myriads of canoes, some going ashore, and others paddling for the
 ship. we were thus trading about four hours, till, having procured
 all we desired “in their line,” we bid them adieu, and turned our
 thoughts to whaling.
 thursday, august th, we again sighted sydenham’s island, the natives
 coming off as usual to trade. one can not but notice the difference
 in the appearance of the natives of this and woodle’s island; yet
 they are only sixty miles apart. those of the latter have a noble,
 manly look, are smooth-skinned and good-natured, while those of the
 former are a sullen, inferior-looking set of beings, many of them
 scaly or rough-skinned. they have a regular hang-dog, villainous
 expression, that plainly says “plunder and murder.” the females
 are even worse than the men, being very masculine in appearance,
 manners, and speech, with high cheek-bones, and mouths that would
 drive a hungry man crazy. they are very indolent, and seldom bring
 of any trade, a few fish or shells generally comprising the whole
 assortment.
 the next island we saw was simpson’s, but passed it without stopping.
 on friday, august th, we spoke the ship “narragansett,” captain
 rogers, soon bound home. we enjoyed a very pleasant “gam” with them,
 they all feeling very happy, thinking they would so soon be homeward
 bound. we could but wish them joy, with a safe and quick passage home.
 on the lst, tuesday, we lowered for whales. one of the boats
 succeeded in fastening to a “cow,” and, after some running, sounding,
 etc., she began to think it “boys’ play,” and about time to end the
 sport, and coming up under the boat, gave it a rap that knocked it
 into “kindling wood,” and hoisted the boys a pretty good distance
 in the air. appearing perfectly satisfied with this part of the
 performance, she departed for “parts unknown” with two irons and
 about eighteen hundred feet of line attached to her. the crew were
 picked up after a bath of about an hour. the next day saw whales, and
 concluded to try our luck again. the waist-boat finally succeeded in
 fastening to a large fat cow, and all hands were chuckling over the
 idea of having outwitted this one, when lo, and behold! her majesty
 turns and bites the line in two as coolly as you please, and makes
 off. the boys returned on board, acknowledging that “there’s many a
 slip ’twixt the cup and the lip” in whaling as well as every thing
 else.
 about this time mackey and tom w. had quite an extensive argument on
 mesmerism. mackey was a great skeptic, but finally agreed to become a
 sound believer and disciple if tom would mesmerize him. to all this
 tom readily consented, and preparations were accordingly made with
 the gravity and demeanor of a regular professor of the humbug. strict
 silence was imposed upon all hands; not a word was to be uttered, not
 even in a whisper, or the spell would be broken. two tin pans were
 introduced as “mediums,” and mackey was
 instructed to hold one with
 the bottom toward the mesmerizer, and look him steadily in the eye,
 while he took the other in the same manner. tom now informed mackey
 that he must do exactly as he did—go through with the same motions,
 etc.; to all of which he readily consented, and the manipulations
 commenced. unfortunately, it happened that the bottom of mackey’s
 pan had been smoked considerably, if not more, and as tom would
 draw his fingers around on the bottom of his own pan (which was
 clean), and then over his face, mackey would “follow suit,” and
 by this operation his face soon began to assume the appearance of
 a striped zebra. the hands were then changed, and the other side
 mesmerized in the same manner. after mackey was nicely blacked, so
 that it was almost impossible to tell whether he most resembled an
 indian painted for the war-dance or the aforesaid striped zebra, tom
 said he guessed he would have to give it up; there was too much noise
 on deck, and his “mediums” did not work well; but asked him if he did
 not feel sleepy. mackey stoutly denied being sleepy, and said he knew
 it was all a humbug—couldn’t fool him; saying which he started aft
 for a drink of water. the watch on deck were employed mending sails,
 and, as mackey rolled along, they all broke into one simultaneous
 roar on beholding his comical physiognomy. the mate asked him if he
 “was sick.”
“no, sir,” replied mackey, boldly.
“well, then, what is the matter with you? you look very pale!”
 mackey knew hardly what to say to this, but finally replied, “one
 of the watch has been trying to mesmerize me, and it might have
 affected me some.”
 the mate told him he had better go below and turn in instantly, as
 he was sure something ailed him. this frightened mackey, and he
 hastened down, got out his looking-glass, and, at the first sight,
 dropped it. however,
 he mustered courage, and looked again; then at
 the watch, who had all assembled about him in perfect silence; then
 at the pan; and, after a few moments, the light broke in upon him,
 and he exclaimed, “sold, by thunder!” and rushed on deck to try the
 virtues of salt water and oil soap, greeted with a perfect storm
 of laughter from the watch. it is useless to add that mackey never
 after, so long as he remained with us, had any thing to say upon the
 science of mesmerism.
 pitt’s island.—knox and charlotte’s islands.—base
 conduct.—thieving.—jack and manuel.—almost a “dead nigger.”—bark
 “belle.”—ship “boy.”—wreck of the “flying fox.”—plundered by
 the natives.—hall’s island.—desertion.—my man friday.—a wet
 berth again.—ship “hector.”—anxiety for letters.—a canoe in
 distress.—a heart-rending sight.—gratitude of the natives.—pleasant
 island.—its natives.—murder of white men.—brig “inga.”—thieves
 again.—search-warrant issued.—property found, culprit tried and
 punished.—a heavy squall.—strong’s island.
 we were now getting down to the more westward of the group,
 and on sunday, the th, saw pitt’s island. this is one of the
 finest-looking islands of the whole group; the land being higher,
 with more verdure. the next day we saw knox’s island. the natives
 of this and charlotte’s island are now at war, instigated, we are
 sorry to learn, by the base conduct of an american whaling captain,
 who has taken sides with one party, and who takes great pleasure in
 slaughtering those of the other side.
 whenever the boats are off after whales, a certain number of the
 ship’s company remain on board to work the ship, who are called
 “ship-keepers.” one of these ship-keepers was “nigger jack,” whom,
 the reader will recollect, we shipped at payta. it appears he was in
 the habit, at these times, of going down into the forecastle, and
 pilfering whatever he saw that would strike his fancy. he also was
 troubled very much with a sweet tooth, and would help himself to the
 other men’s allowance of molasses, not touching his own. this kind
 of work went on for some time, and, as the men could prove nothing,
 they kept quiet and waited, micawber-like,
  for something to “turn
 up.” the opportunity soon came. the boats were all off after whales,
 and our spanish darkey was, as usual, spending his time below, when
 one of the other ship-keepers, going into the forecastle, caught him
 in the very act of helping himself to molasses from the allowance of
 portugee manuel. he said nothing to him, however, but waited until
 the men returned for the opportunity of “opening the ball.” it so
 happened that, on this occasion, the men were down all day, from 
 a.m. to  p.m., with little or no food, and came on board, without
 having fastened, nearly exhausted with pulling, hungry as bears,
 and in none of the best of humors. supper was sent down, and manuel
 went to his keg to get some molasses for his “duff,” but, to his
 surprise, found it empty! his gee blood was up in an instant, and he
 sang out, “what man been takey my molass?” some one replied, “nigger
 jack;” and, before the darkey could contradict it, the heavy molasses
 keg struck him, bim! full in the face. the blood flew on all sides,
 and he ran for the deck, and, fully believing that he was about to
 “kick the bucket,” commenced chanting the paternoster, occasionally
 interspersing it with exclamations of “muerto! muerto!” signifying
 “killed! killed!” in a most pitiful tone. but he was suddenly
 interrupted by an order from aft to present himself. he crawled off,
 and, after a long time, succeeded in making the captain understand
 what the difficulty was. manuel was now sent for, who sputtered out
 his side of the story, in half english and half portugee, to the
 no small amusement of the captain and officers, and appeals to the
 person who saw the theft committed. the old man reprimanded manuel
 for throwing molasses kegs, and told the spaniard that if the men
 caught him stealing again, they would, in all probability, kill him
 outright, and sent him off about his business. there is nothing
 so much despised on board ship as these petty
  thefts, and he who
 commits them generally leads a hard life.
 we here saw the bark “belle,” of fairhaven, captain handy. this
 vessel was engaged in trading at the different islands for cocoanut
 oil, which was sold in sydney, new south wales.
 on thursday, september th, we picked up part of a ship’s topmast,
 and, on sighting sydenham’s island, discovered the hull of a vessel
 fast ashore on the reef, with her lower masts standing. our captain
 intended to take a boat and ascertain something in regard to this
 ill-fated vessel, but the wind died away before we approached within
 a proper distance, and the current soon drifted us far away.
 the next day we spoke the “boy,” of warren, captain luce. from him we
 ascertained the vessel ashore at sydenham’s to be the bark “flying
 fox,” of hobarton, van diemen’s land, captain brown, who, with
 his lady, and several of the officers and crew, were on board the
 “boy.” it appears, by the captain’s statement, that on the morning
 of the th they were sailing along with a fine breeze, all sail
 set, when they were suddenly startled by the ship striking a reef
 which projected two or three miles from the island, and was not
 laid down on the charts. the topmasts were all carried away by the
 shock; the ship was fast on the reef; and, had there been a heavy
 swell, she would have gone to pieces immediately. as all hopes of
 saving the ship were at an end, on seeing their situation they took
 to their boats as soon as possible. already were the decks crowded
 with natives, who had begun the work of plunder, helping themselves
 to whatever they wished. they obtained possession of the spades,
 and were ready and willing to fight, if necessary. the captain had
 to work very cautiously to get his wife into the boat without being
 seen by the natives; and, closely veiled, she was placed in
  the
 boat, choosing the mercy of the winds and waves rather than that of
 a barbarous set of cannibals, in whose hands she would have suffered
 worse than death.
 the next day, the boat containing the captain and lady, with some of
 the crew, were picked up by the “boy.” the remainder of the crew, it
 was supposed, had gone to woodle’s or simpson’s island. the captain
 of the “boy,” on learning the particulars of the sad accident,
 proceeded immediately to the wreck; but the natives had not been
 idle; they had carried off every thing of value, and that which they
 valued not had been destroyed by them. the water and oil casks had
 been stove for the sake of the iron hoops which bound them.
 on thursday, october d, we traded with the natives of hall’s island.
 cocoanut oil is the principal trade brought off here. the natives on
 the islands north of the equator look much better than those of the
 same group situated south of it.
 we were now getting short of water, and the captain determined to
 land a raft of casks at pitt’s island, leave them for the natives
 to fill, and return for them in a few days. accordingly, on the
 th, we sent a raft ashore, three boats towing it. we had now been
 out of port nearly seven months, and most of the crew were becoming
 discontented—thought it was about time they had a run ashore, etc.;
 and some of them expressed the determination to have it, if the
 opportunity offered, at pitt’s island. the officers having charge of
 the boats were ordered not to land, but to deliver the raft to the
 natives and return immediately to the ship. the third mate, however,
 who was one of the disaffected, instead of doing this, pulled close
 in shore, and told his men, if they wished, they could go; he should
 not hinder them. two of them immediately jumped out of the boat and
 went ashore; the boats returned to the ship; and the captain and
 third mate had some rather plain conversation in regard
  to the
 affair. it ended, however, in the old man’s leaving a reward for
 them, and we made sail.
 we took from this island a noble-looking, fine-built native, who is a
 chief of some importance; but he wished to try his hand at whaling,
 as near as we could understand by his signs, for he could speak but
 little english. the captain bestowed upon him the name of friday,
 which suited him just as well as any other. he soon became a general
 favorite with all hands, was very good-natured, quick to learn, as
 spry as a cat, and as strong as a giant.
 we visited the island again on tuesday, the d, for our raft of
 water. we there learned that the two deserters had sailed in the bark
 “belle,” for sydney, the day previous.
 an amusing little incident, common to whaling, but still enough of
 interest to make it worth relating, occurred on saturday, th of
 november. the waist-boat had fastened to a cow whale, and were going
 along very smoothly, when she suddenly sounded, and, by some means,
 drew the bow of the boat down with her sufficient to “end it over,”
 and spill out the whole crew very unexpectedly. it happened that
 two of the men were unable to swim, and, strange as it may appear,
 they were the first to scramble on to the bottom of the boat (which
 was upset), and that without wetting a hair of their head; and so
 anxious were they to keep dry, that they kept the boat rolling over
 and over, they meanwhile scrambling in the most ludicrous manner.
 after a little time, and partly by the threats of the second mate and
 their own fears, they became quiet, and remained so until they were
 picked up. the whale was killed by one of the other boats, and was
 soon cut in and tried out.
 monday, november th, was a very clear and calm day, not a breath
 of air stirring, and “old jamaica” coming down with a vengeance. at
 daylight the look-out
 from masthead raised a sail a long distance
 off. about  p.m., “boat ho!” was the cry, and it proved to be a
 boat pulling to us from the ship in the distance. about  they came
 alongside, and reported themselves to be from the ship “hector,”
 of new bedford, captain smith. they had pulled about sixteen
 miles, under the scorching sun of the equator, with not a breath
 of air stirring, merely to ascertain if we had letters for them.
 they were about three years out, and had heard that we were on the
 cruising-ground, and on raising us that morning hoped it might prove
 to be the “emily morgan;” and such was their anxiety for letters from
 their friends at home that they gladly pulled this long distance. we
 were glad that their labor met with its reward, for they received
 a large package, and soon forgot their fatigue amid the excitement
 incident to receiving news after so long an absence. about  p.m. a
 light breeze sprung up, and they left us in high spirits.
 as we were cruising along on wednesday, november th, with no land
 in sight, we saw a large canoe, which appeared at the mercy of
 winds and waves. we immediately bore down to it, and found that it
 contained twenty-two natives in a starving condition. we lowered
 a boat, towed them to the ship, and found them so much reduced as
 to be hardly able to speak, and could get them in on deck only by
 slinging them in a “boatswain’s chair” and hoisting them in. the
 canoe was cut adrift after taking out and sinking the dead body of
 a boy, apparently about fourteen, which it contained. some of them
 presented a wretched and distressing appearance; they were nothing
 but skin and bones, and scarcely that. in several cases the skin on
 the joints was broken, and the bones had worked through. we went to
 work and cleared out the “blubber-room,” and by spreading mats around
 made it very comfortable for them. their constant cry was “ki ki”
 (eat). we prepared
 some farina, and fed them cautiously; but they
 acted more like a pack of ravenous wolves than like human beings. by
 the aid of friday, our pitt’s island native, we learned the following
 particulars: they left their island (charlotte’s) for another on
 account of the war raging there, but lost their reckoning, and the
 current, which sets very strongly to the northwest, swept them off.
 they had been so drifting for six weeks, and during that time had no
 food except a shark, which they captured. four of their number had
 died, two men and two children. seven of them were females, two of
 whom had nursing infants. the poor creatures would fall into a short
 slumber, and awake crying for food. it was truly a heart-rending
 sight, but we felt assured every thing that could be had been done
 to render them comfortable. they endeavored, too, to express their
 heartfelt gratitude to us by signs, and would cry, “mortarkee
 kiabuka” (good ship). as we were near pleasant island, the captain
 determined to land them there.
 accordingly, we sighted it on the morning of friday, the st. about
  a.m. canoes began to flock off to us in great numbers, and the
 natives whom we had picked up were sent ashore in them. they had
 so far regained their strength as to be able to move about quite
 briskly. the chief addressed the captain in his own language, which
 was translated by friday as far as lay in his power, to the effect
 that they were very grateful to the captain and all hands for the
 kind treatment they had received; and as the poor grateful beings
 shook hands with us on passing over the gangway, tears of gratitude
 trickled down their tawny cheeks. they were placed in the canoes,
 waved their hands feebly, and started for the shore.
 pleasant island is a very beautiful island, and well does it deserve
 its name, if we say nothing of its inhabitants. it is moderately
 high, and more thickly covered
 with verdure than any island of the
 group. the natives are the most finely-built of any we have yet
 seen—large, athletic, and ferocious-appearing, presenting quite a
 contrast to some of the diminutive natives of the windward islands.
 they speak a different language, also, from that of the natives
 of the other islands, though but a few degrees apart. they appear
 far superior to them in shrewdness and cunning, it being much
 harder to drive a trade with them. the females are very small, very
 good-looking, and some of them quite handsome, several shades lighter
 than the men, and much lighter than those of the other islands. we
 bought quite a number of fowl, and some hogs of the regular racer
 breed, berkshires not having been introduced here.
 a white man came off from this island, and wished the captain to
 ship him, as he was afraid to remain on shore. he reported that,
 the day before, five white men had been murdered by the natives. a
 part of them were from the ill-fated “flying fox.” it appears that
 they had landed at this island perfectly destitute, and some of the
 white men residing there, fearing the chiefs would take them under
 their protection and allow them to remain, thereby diminishing their
 chances of trade with ships, persuaded the leading chiefs that they
 came there for the purpose of taking the island and poisoning all the
 kanakas. they are so superstitions that, no matter how absurd the
 story, they believe the white man capable of doing any thing. at the
 instigation of these rascally “beach-combers” residing on the island,
 the poor fellows were butchered in a manner too horrible to relate.
 this man informed us that his life had been repeatedly threatened,
 and, had not he had the influence of one of the highest chiefs on the
 island, he would have shared the same horrid fate as the others. the
 captain informed him he could go with us, at which he was greatly
 rejoiced.
 we spoke the brig “inga,” of new bedford, captain barnes, on sunday,
 the th. we had here an opportunity of sending letters home via
 sydney, new south wales, as she was bound there with a cargo of
 cocoanut oil. captain b. reported that, a few days previous, his
 steward and seven of his crew took a boat in the night-time and
 deserted. the steward stole about three hundred dollars from the
 captain’s state-room, a sextant, quadrant, and charts; the crew
 took provisions and water. he supposed they had gone to some of the
 windward islands.
 our “spanish jack” has got himself in trouble again. for several
 weeks complaints had been made by nearly all of the crew that their
 tobacco was disappearing very fast and very mysteriously. from
 the fact that jack never bought any, had but little when he came
 on board, and was continually smoking, he was strongly suspected.
 one fine morning the captain ordered the mate to go forward and
 search the spaniard’s chest. accordingly, the chest was hauled out
 and opened. it was well filled with clothing, all new, that he
 had bought and never worn, which he was keeping, he said, to wear
 ashore. on looking deeper, several knives were found, which were
 claimed by some of the crew, and various small articles, which he
 had pilfered at different times from different persons. finally, the
 mate found a large quantity of tobacco, and a tin box belonging to
 the captain’s son, which he had taken from the binnacle while at the
 helm. the guilty spaniard was brought aft, seized by his wrists to
 the mizzen rigging, his back bared, and a slight dose of “hemp tea”
 administered, said to be a very excellent remedy for the disease
 which troubled jack so much, viz., sticky fingers. he called on all
 the saints in the calendar to come to his assistance, but they very
 politely refused, as it is believed they did not strongly object to
 the medicine being administered. it had one good
  effect, to say the
 least; it made him promise that he would never steal again while on
 board the ship, no matter how small the value of the article. and, in
 justice to him, we will say that he kept his promise, not from want
 of a desire to steal, but from fear of punishment.
 the idea of flogging a human being is certainly shocking, and the
 poor fellow who receives it generally has the pity and sympathies of
 his shipmates; but in this case all hands felt that the culprit got
 no more than his deserts, for the true sailor despises a thief. the
 sailor is proverbially charitable; he will see a shipmate want for
 nothing so long as he can supply that want, even to dividing his last
 crust; and it is not given grudgingly, but with his whole heart.
 we were now making the passage to strong’s island, and, on the night
 of friday, december th, were struck with a severe squall, laying
 the ship almost on her beam ends. all hands were called to take in
 sail, but, before the men could get on deck, away went mainsail,
 foretopsail, and jib. whew! how the wind whistled and howled! it
 was impossible for the captain to make himself understood amid the
 deafening roar of the winds; and the waves, madly pitching and
 tossing the ship to and fro, seemed to wish to ingulf her in their
 bosom. it was grand, yet terrible. by dint of hard labor we succeeded
 finally in reducing the sail, so that she rode easy through the
 night, the gale continuing with almost unabated fury. the next day
 a tremendous whirlwind passed astern of us about a mile, and it was
 through the mercy of god alone that we escaped it. the gale
 continued, with more or less rain, until wednesday, december th,
 when strong’s island hove in sight, distant about eighty miles.
 strong’s island.—king.—canker.—dress.—chiefs.—description of
 the island.—large island.—small island.—productions.—wild
 game.—canals.—stone walls.—who built them?—ruins.—suppositions.—a
 rebellion.—customs.—queen.—princes and
 princesses.—sekane.—cæsar.—natives.—females.—“strong’s island
 trowsers.”—employments.—houses.—marriages.—sports.—canoes.—carva.—banyan-tree.—religion.—“blueskin.”—traditions.—priests.—rites
 and ceremonies.—funeral ceremonies.—rotumah tom.—food of the
 natives.—blueskin and his procession.—friday’s opinion.—the
 feast.—“very good,” but think we won’t indulge.—choose our
 “hotel.”—an unpleasant surprise.—“planter.”—mutiny and its
 consequences.—desertion.—one kind of navigation.—a stroll to
 large island.—friday and the taboo.—incidents in port.—weighed
 anchor.—“mary frazier.”—death and burial of mr. s.—a few random
 thoughts.
 for nine long and weary months had the “emily” been from port. during
 this time but few of the ship’s company had put foot upon land, and
 glad indeed were we when strong’s island hove in sight. we were
 experiencing heavy weather, but on thursday, december th, the wind
 gradually grew less boisterous, and as we neared the land, steering
 for the passage, died away, leaving us at its mouth in a dead calm;
 but we down boats, and every man “pulled with a will,” and soon towed
 the old ship in, and at  p.m. we once more dropped anchor, weary
 with labor, but refreshed at the sight of the land, and the prospect
 of “stretching our legs” on shore once more.
 his majesty king tocasaw, alias king george, accompanied by his
 eldest son, the canker, heir-apparent to the throne, and some of the
 most distinguished chiefs, came off to visit us and welcome us to
 their island.
 king george is a fine, intelligent-looking native of
 about fifty. his court dress, which is only worn on great occasions
 like the present, consists of—a red woolen shirt! canker has the
 appearance of a shrewd, unscrupulous fellow, with a most rascally
 expression of countenance. he is second in command to the king.
 cæsar, the king’s brother, is also an intelligent-looking chief, and
 appears to be full and running over with fun. we were much surprised
 to find them speaking such good english.
 the next morning, on looking about us, we found ourselves in a most
 beautiful harbor, completely shut in from the sea, lying about
 fifty yards from the shore. the beach is entirely covered with
 cocoanut-trees, and the mountains, rising with a gradual slope,
 expose to view the brilliant foliage of the bread-fruit and mangrove
 trees.
 this island is entirely surrounded by a reef, varying from a few rods
 to half a mile from the shore. through the reef nature has left an
 opening of about fifty fathoms, or one hundred yards, which admits
 of the passage of ships of the largest size. the main island is some
 thirty miles in circumference, and on the north side the shore forms
 a deep lagoon. immediately in front of this lagoon is the “small
 island,” which extends from one extreme point of the bay to the
 other, being separated on the westerly side from the large island by
 a few hundred feet of shallow water, of not sufficient depth to admit
 the passage of a craft of any size, and this is bordered by the reef.
 on the easterly side of the small island is the passage.
 the highest peak of the large island is about two thousand feet
 above the level of the sea. the king and most of the high chiefs
 reside on the small island, with many of their tribes, forming
 quite a settlement. we called at the palace to pay our respects to
 his majesty.
 he appeared very pleasant and kind to us, and, after
 presenting us to the queen and two princesses present, set before us
 such fruit as the island produces. the bananas that grow here are
 certainly the most delicious we ever tasted, being very small, and
 are called “sugar bananas.” the productions of this island are the
 cocoanut, bread-fruit, banana, mummy apples, dittoes, plantains,
 layees (a coarse species of banana), oranges, yams, and tarra. the
 bread-fruit serves as their principal food. it is rendered very
 palatable by being split open and baked, and tasted very good to us,
 after having lived on hard bread, “duff,” and “salt horse” for nine
 months. from the tree they manufacture all their culinary utensils
 and canoes. the island abounds in game, wild pigeons and wild hogs
 forming the principal part.
 after partaking heartily of the fruit the king had set before us,
 we left, promising to call and see him often during our stay, as he
 gave us a cordial invitation to do so. we then proceeded to call
 upon some of the chiefs. on rambling over the small island we found
 numerous canals cut through in all directions, which at low tide
 would be nothing but small streams, but at high tide of sufficient
 depth to float the largest canoes. these canals, as well as some
 of the roads, are walled up from fifteen to thirty feet high. they
 are well built, and range from six to nine feet in thickness. we
 noticed many large stones, which would weigh several tons, placed
 in the wall some distance from the ground. there is something very
 mysterious about these walls and canals. as the natives know nothing
 about them, they say the evil spirit built them; and one of the most
 intelligent chiefs on the island informed us that the oldest records
 or traditions they have give no account of them whatever.
 we also came in contact with what appeared to be the ruins of a
 large building. it was surrounded by a
  stone wall, six or eight
 feet high, on all four sides, with but one entrance, which was by
 stone steps. we then came to a second wall, somewhat smaller, but
 similar to the first; and, on ascending a few more steps, came to
 a level place paved with large flat stones. in the centre were two
 square deep pits, from eighteen to twenty feet deep, walled up with
 stone. the natives know nothing concerning this pile of ruins, and
 only answer your questions with the english word “devil.” we think
 there is no doubt but that this island has once been the stronghold
 of a band of pirates, as every thing about it would seem to indicate.
 the admirable situation, beautiful and snug harbor, with but a small
 entrance, in which a vessel might easily be completely shut out from
 view at sea; the mild and salubrious climate—all these combined would
 render it a desirable rendezvous. this supposition is not improbable,
 as it is well known that the pacific, years ago, was infested by
 herds of chinese and malay pirates, and these very natives bear a
 strong resemblance to the malays.
 about twenty-five or thirty years ago the island was governed by a
 king, who, from the accounts given by the chiefs, must have been a
 perfect tyrant; and during his reign two or three ships were taken
 and plundered, and all hands massacred. this tyranny had the effect
 of creating a rebellion, which was headed by tocasaw, the present
 king. after a severe struggle the rebels came off victorious, and
 tocasaw was crowned “king george.” he is very mild in his rule, and
 appears to seek the welfare of his subjects, who love him much.
 they are under complete subjection, however, and whenever in the
 presence of the king or chiefs, whether in the roads or houses, they
 immediately stoop low, and remain in this posture until he passes or
 bids them go about their business. the chiefs pay the same homage to
 the king as the natives. even his own children
  crouch down in his
 presence, and bend their heads like so many whipped spaniels.
 the queen is a small, shriveled-up old lady, and looks as though
 a good strong norwester would blow her away. she is a very greedy
 creature, and just as vicious withal, and is thoroughly detested by
 those who are so situated that they can speak their mind freely,
 without fear or favor.
 they have six children; the eldest son, canker, as we have already
 remarked, is next in rank to the king. he is about twenty-six years
 of age, and is reported to be a perfect villain, yet is very kind to
 the natives under him. he is a shrewd fellow to trade, and is always
 begging from the sailors. the second son, aleck, is a young man about
 nineteen, and is a remarkably intelligent native. he is universally
 beloved by all, both chiefs and natives. he speaks better english
 than any native on the island, and appears to have a strong desire
 to know “all ’bout ’merick.” although so young, he is the father of
 three fine children, two noble boys and a girl; and his wife is a
 very kind, good-natured creature. he resides on the north side of the
 island, and has a beautiful place. the other children of the king are
 young, two daughters and two sons. even these children command the
 same respect from the common natives as the chiefs, yet they play
 with them in common.
 the first, or war-chief; is sekane, who is the king’s half-brother.
 he also is a very intelligent native, very active, and is considered
 the king’s prime minister and counselor. next comes cæsar, who is
 also half-brother to the king—a large, noble-looking native. he is
 the grand executioner, and when any poor native has violated a law,
 the punishment of which is death, he officiates. there are two or
 three other high chiefs, possessed of no remarkable traits.
 the natives are rather diminutive in stature, but active
  when
 occasion requires. they live in great simplicity. the females are
 remarkably good-looking; but, owing to their practice of squatting
 to their work, and remaining in that posture most of the time, are
 very awkward in walking. their ears are bored when quite young, and
 the hole is made larger by inserting in it a roll of leaves, which
 causes it to enlarge as they advance in years. they generally have
 them fitted with a bunch of flowers, of which they are passionately
 fond. many of them have their noses pierced, and flowers inserted
 therein. they are generally employed making tappas, or, as they
 call them in english, “strong’s island trowsers,” for the chiefs
 to whom they belong. tappa is manufactured from the fibres of the
 banana-tree, colored with different barks to suit their taste, and
 woven, by means of a small but ingenious loom, into bands of four
 or five feet in length, and eight or ten inches in width, with the
 different colors very ingeniously and beautifully intermixed. the
 body and principal part of the tappa is black, and comprises all
 the dress worn by the men or women, from the king down. sometimes,
 however, the king and chiefs indulge in the luxury of a calico shirt;
 but the “court dress,” the red woolen shirt, is only worn on great
 occasions. the females, also, will sometimes sport a gingham shirt,
 if they are lucky enough to be presented with one by the chief to
 whom they belong. their crinoline, however, is not very extensive.
 the men are employed cutting wood for their respective chiefs,
 building houses, making canoes, gathering fruit, etc. their food
 consists principally of fish, bread-fruit, fayees, cocoanuts, and
 other fruit. the fish are generally eaten raw, and smell rather
 high before they use them.
 their houses are built of bamboo, thatched with cocoanut leaves. the
 king’s house is very large, being fifty or sixty feet high, and about
 forty feet square. some of the chiefs have also very large, roomy
 houses. the common ones for the natives are from thirty to forty feet
 high, and about twenty feet square. they are kept very neat. in the
 centre of the house is a square stone fireplace. the king and chiefs
 have large cook-houses, where all the cooking of the different tribes
 is done, and each family is served once a day. each chief has from
 fifty to two hundred natives under him, including men, women, and
 children.
 no one of the natives is allowed more than one wife, and when the
 marriage ceremony is performed (which is done by the king for the
 chiefs, and by the chiefs for the common natives), the girl is “given
 away” by the one who officiates, and is then tabooed. the penalty
 of breaking this taboo is death; therefore there is not
  much fear
 but that she will remain faithful to her husband.
 each chief is allowed a certain portion of land, which is cultivated
 by the natives under him. the produce is taken to the king, who
 retains a portion for himself and ships, if any are in the harbor,
 and the remaining portion is distributed to the chiefs for their
 tribes. their sports consist of songs, dances, and feasts. they do
 not appear to be a very warlike people, as they have no weapons of
 any account, and but four or five war-canoes. these are about sixty
 feet long and three wide. they are supplied with large outriggers
 to prevent their capsizing, and will carry from sixty to seventy
 natives. they are built very true and sharp, the bow and stern
 considerably elevated, and are fancifully decorated with shells and
 other ornaments. the smaller canoes are generally bread-fruit-tree
 logs shaped properly, and burned and dug out. they build them of all
 sizes, from those that will carry but a single person to larger ones
 that will carry twenty. it is indeed surprising to see with what
 dexterity they manage them.
 on this island is a root, which grows wild, called “carva.” they
 pound this root, extract the juice by
 squeezing it in their hands
 into cocoanut-shells, and then drink it. by taking a sufficient
 quantity, it operates very similarly to opium, causing a sleepy
 intoxication. it tastes very much like the extract of sarsaparilla
 root. this is a great article with them, and, on calling from house
 to house, you are first presented with a shell of carva. there are
 those on the island who have used it so much that they resemble in
 appearance the worst class of opium-eaters.
 there is a tree here which is a great curiosity, being a species of
 the banyan-tree of india. its branches, bending to the ground and
 taking root, make beautiful shady groves, and pleasant retreats from
 the sultriness of the scorching sun.
 in the matter of religion the natives have a singular belief. their
 deity, whom they call “blueskin,” was thus described to us by aleck:
 “all the same white gal, only he got wing all the same pigeon,”
 which is as near a description of an angel as we could have given
 him. they say, “if man be good, he go there,” pointing to the sky;
 “s’pose he no good, he stop here,” pointing to the earth. it is
 certainly very singular where or from whence they received these
 ideas; nevertheless, they sincerely believe them. they have no
 regular places of worship, neither have they any prescribed form.
 some years since a famine visited the island, and swept off many of
 the inhabitants. according to their traditions, a great quantity of
 eels, which had never before been seen by them, suddenly made their
 appearance, and prevented them from entirely perishing with hunger.
 they have now great veneration for these eels, and they are tabooed,
 as they believe blueskin sent them; and, although the waters abound
 with them, they will neither harm them nor suffer them to be harmed,
 if in their power to prevent it.
 they also believe in evil spirits. once per year, or
  oftener, if
 any thing remarkable transpires, the high-priest is followed by his
 train of natives, carefully and plentifully oiled with cocoanut
 oil, wreathed with flowers, and each one carrying fruit of some
 description to appease the angry spirit, while the priest blows away
 upon a large conch-shell, making a most hideous noise, to which is
 added a continual wail by his train, which sounds truly mournful.
 they go along the beach, and to each chief’s house, taking what has
 been collected as an offering to blueskin, generally consisting of
 pure white tappas and the general productions of the island. these
 articles are deposited by the priest in a house, tabooed to all but
 himself, on the mountain, and are left there for blueskin to take
 whenever he chooses. the priest only enters this place once a year,
 or when the island appears to be threatened with some dire calamity.
 at such times he goes in and has a talk with blueskin.
 on the death of any person, all the friends and relatives meet at
 the house of the deceased, where they join in singing, wailing,
 screeching, and weeping for about twenty-four hours, after which the
 body is buried with much solemnity, with the head to the west. we
 inquired the reason of this, and were answered, “very good; ’nother
 day’s sun he come all right.” the articles most highly prized by the
 deceased while living are always buried with them. a small fence is
 erected around the tomb of a native, and the friends every morning
 carry fruits and flowers, and place them on the grave, for they
 believe the spirits of the dead linger for a time upon the earth
 before departing for the skies. if the deceased is a chief or a
 member of the royal family, a house is erected over the grave, and
 all the chiefs on the island remove to the place, build small houses,
 and remain there for three months, the usual term of mourning, during
 which time they present offerings very bountifully, and with a great
 deal of state. after the
 ceremony of offering the fruit every
 morning, the nearest related chief makes a feast, and all the chiefs
 gather and eat, and drink carva. the females are excluded from these
 and all other public feasts. the women belonging to the departed
 chief have their heads shaved, and present a most comical appearance;
 also all the relatives cut their hair short.
 one saturday evening a native from the island of rotumah, called
 rotumah tom, came on board with a large number of fine pigeons for
 our sunday dinner, which we found very fat, and fine eating. we
 received a present of a mess of flying-fish also, on sunday morning,
 from the king, which were caught the previous night. he is very
 kind to us, sending bread-fruit, smoking hot, every meal, for all
 hands, and other food which the island produces. a favorite dish with
 them is “poey,” and is prepared as follows: they bake a quantity of
 tarra (which is something like our potato), and then pound it on a
 large flat stone, mix in some roasted bananas, and, after working it
 sufficiently, grate up the meat of old cocoanuts, and, inclosing the
 gratings in leaves, by squeezing extract the white milky substance,
 and cover the poey in such a manner as to resemble frosting. some
 of the poey is made from the banana and bread-fruit, and is truly
 excellent. after it is prepared it is placed on large banana leaves,
 and is then ready for consumption.
 we were fortunate in being at the island at this time, as monday,
 december th, was the day for the annual visit of the high-priest
 of blueskin, with his train, and we had an opportunity of witnessing
 the whole affair. the occasion was one of great excitement among
 the natives, they looking upon the proceedings with a great deal
 of solemnity and awe. our crew were all ashore, and appeared to be
 highly amused, nearly all going to the opposite side of the small
 island from the harbor to
 meet “blueskin” and his train as they
 arrived from the large island. when we expressed to some of them
 our intention of joining the procession, they exclaimed, almost
 horror-stricken, “what for? ’spose you do all the same, blueskin he
 strike; kill ’em very quick!” nevertheless, some ten or twelve of
 our men did join the procession, and “howled” in the most scientific
 manner possible, to assist in driving the evil spirits from the
 island, without interruption from blueskin. yet we imagine the
 high-priest thought if there were any greater “evil spirits” than
 some of the “emily morgan’s” men, it was high time they were driven
 off. after making the tour of the island, and consigning every thing
 evil to the spirits of the deep, the priest proceeded to the house
 of young aleck, and, after many ceremonies, gave him a new name,
 “zegrah,” which is considered a great honor, and raises his rank a
 peg or two.
 our pitt’s island native, friday, could hardly suppress his
 astonishment and laughter during the whole proceeding, and, on our
 asking him his opinion of the show, exclaimed, “what for all the
 same? all the same kanaka pool!” we proceeded to the house of cæsar,
 where a feast was to be held after the ceremonies at zegrah’s, as
 we will now call him. we had received an invitation the day before,
 so that we felt ourselves “perfectly at home” among the “nobility.”
 on arriving, we found his large cook-house filled with natives, who
 were waiting for the ceremonies to commence. cæsar was seated on a
 mat in one corner, with some of his petty chiefs about him. he very
 kindly offered us seats at his right on the mat, and we accordingly
 “squatted.” he asked us, “you been see blueskin?” and on our replying
 in the affirmative, he wished to know how we liked him. we gave him
 our opinion in as few words as possible, and expressed ourselves as
 being highly pleased with the performances.
  he laughed heartily, and
 appeared to treat the whole thing as a good joke—an excellent humbug.
 he now clapped his hands twice, and, speaking in his native language,
 the petty chiefs passed the leaves of different articles to him,
 and at the same time others helped the natives. we ate heartily of
 poey, baked bananas, bread-fruit, sugar-cane (which we had forgotten
 to mention grows here in great abundance), cocoanuts, fish (which
 were baked for our company, as they know white men will not eat
 them raw), with large shells of carva to wash it down. after these
 courses had disappeared, the dessert made its appearance in the shape
 of an animal of some kind, piping hot, which had been baked whole.
 we supposed it to be a wild hog, and were about to partake, when,
 curiosity getting the better of our appetites, we inquired if it was
 “hog.” cæsar replied, “no, dog;” at the same time urging us to help
 ourselves, and saying “very good.” we did not doubt it; but, suddenly
 recollecting that we had eaten very heartily, concluded that we
 wouldn’t “indulge,” and excused ourselves by saying we were full, and
 could eat no more. he seemed loth to let us off in this manner, but,
 finding it no use to urge us, gave it up. it was evident he was not
 pleased in our refusing to partake of his favorite dish, but we could
 not go “dog.” after he finished his “dessert” of baked dog, he sent
 several choice parcels to his wife and daughters, and women belonging
 to his tribe, and after washing, which they always do at the close of
 a meal, we retired to his house, and enjoyed a quiet smoke, spinning
 yarns, singing songs, etc., which appeared to greatly amuse cæsar,
 and then stretching ourselves upon the large cool mats, enjoyed a
 refreshing sleep.
 the next day we called upon zegrah, and, after talking with him
 some little time, he urged us to take up our quarters with him as
 long as the ship remained;
 said he had a nice, comfortable house,
 which he would taboo to the natives, and give us, and we should have
 every thing at our command. when we wished to go aboard the ship a
 large canoe was at our service, with natives to paddle. of course we
 thanked him for his kindness, and accepted his generous proposals. we
 accordingly went into our “hotel,” and arranged our beds, etc., which
 consisted merely of mats spread upon the bamboo floor, with pillows
 which we had brought from the ship, and soon found ourselves in
 comfortable, pleasant quarters, but a short distance from the beach,
 with a fine sea-breeze, and the never-ceasing roar of the breakers
 sounding in our ears, as the huge rollers come combing, dashing,
 breaking along over the rocks. it was, indeed, to the lover of nature
 a magnificent scene.
 on going home the first evening we thought best to take a stroll
 across the island, then take the sand-beach to the house. on arriving
 at the beach, behold! it was high tide, and we must either climb
 stone walls or take the water, which was some three feet in depth. we
 concluded to wade it, and prepared ourselves accordingly by assuming
 strong’s island costume, and then “pitched in.” occasionally a roller
 would come booming along, dashing over and almost taking our feet
 from under us. it was just dark, and as we were plodding along,
 consoling ourselves with the thoughts of a good night’s rest after we
 reached our “hotel,” we suddenly perceived a large shark dart between
 us toward the wall, turn himself round very easily, and then swim
 away. we made all the noise possible to frighten him, and then ensued
 some of the tallest “walking in the water” that we had ever seen.
 we could only go ahead. there were high stone walls along shore,
 water ahead, water behind, and water to our right; so we e’en made
 the best of it, and “put” as fast as our legs would carry us through
 three feet depth of water. we were fortunate enough to escape
  with
 whole limbs, and arrived safely at our stopping-place, congratulating
 ourselves upon our escape from “john shark.” friend zegrah had
 prepared for us a quantity of baked bananas, roasted fish, etc., and,
 setting them before us, with plenty of fruit, we had a very sociable
 and jovial time. his wife was present, and seemed to enter into the
 spirit of the evening with a hearty good-will. zegrah himself, as we
 before remarked, was young and full of fun, but, living on a remote
 part of the island, was very lonesome, and made us promise to spend
 all the time we possibly could with him, and he would pilot us over
 the island.
 the next morning, wednesday, december th, “sail ho!” was the cry.
 on looking, we saw a ship off the passage, and presently a boat made
 its appearance and came ashore. the ship proved to be the “planter,”
 of nantucket, full, bound home. captain h. came ashore in the boat,
 and brought his clothing and some goods. he informed the king that he
 wished to reside on the island for a short time, as he did not like
 to go to america at present. we learned the following particulars in
 regard to captain h. and the “planter:” while the ship was cruising
 off pitt’s island, a barrel of bad meat had been opened, which
 created considerable dissatisfaction among the crew, and they finally
 threw it overboard, and said they would do no more work until they
 had good meat. the captain told them they should have no more until
 the regular time, as they had no right to throw the other overboard.
 upon this, the men refused duty. the captain ordered them to work,
 but they firmly refused. he then ordered them to come aft, and this
 they refused to do, when he ordered the mate to go forward and bring
 the ringleader aft. upon this, one of the crew threw out a threat
 that, if he came forward and laid his hands upon any of them, they
 would break his head, or something to that effect. the captain,
 thinking
 it time something decisive was done, ordered some muskets
 to be loaded and brought on deck. they were accordingly brought, and
 he then told the men distinctly and firmly that unless they went
 below he would fire. some one of them replied, “fire, and be hanged
 to you!” after waiting a sufficient time, and repeating his orders,
 he fired, and one of the mutineers instantly fell dead, the ball
 taking effect in his brain. the men instantly rushed pell-mell for
 the forecastle. the mate now came forward, and ordered them up one by
 one, and, being perfectly tamed, they came and submitted to being
 placed in irons and stationed aft. the body, after a suitable time,
 was buried. upon the men promising to resume their duties and behave
 themselves if liberated, the irons were taken off, and they were
 allowed to go forward.
 these events transpired but a few weeks before the ship visited
 strong’s island, and the captain, thinking it better to wait a year
 or two before returning home, wished to remain on this island during
 the interim. the king, after some conversation with our captain,
 gave his consent, and, accordingly, captain h. had his property
 transferred from the ship to the shore, leaving her in command of the
 mate. the ship did not anchor, but the things were brought ashore in
 boats.
 when the last boat was about leaving the shore, “smut,” alias the
 blacksmith, and our friend mackey, stepped in, and, accordingly,
 stepped out, as that was the last we heard of them. we were sorry
 to lose mackey, as in doing so we lost one great source of amusement;
 but he was gone, and, before it was known on board that they had
 deserted, the “planter” was off, with square yards and a stiff breeze.
 some of the crew one day started for the shore in a small canoe, and
 before they had got half way it capsized, slightly spilling them out.
 they had a fine ducking, as well as a long swim for it. the same day,
 we,
 in company with another shipmate, undertook to navigate one
 of the canals in a small canoe, but, not exactly understanding the
 crooks and turns of the “ditch,” had the misfortune to be capsized in
 the mud, and received a good soaking before we “made the land.”
 hardly a day had passed since our arrival in port that we had not
 turned our eyes large-islandward, and longed for a stroll among its
 mountains, valleys, and groves, but had delayed the intended visit
 from the want of a suitable guide. on friday, the th, however, that
 want was supplied by zegrah offering his services for the occasion.
 we accepted them with pleasure, and, in company with two other
 shipmates, crossed the channel in a canoe. in low tide this channel
 is fordable. we found the houses were not so large nor comfortable
 as on the small island, nor so neatly kept, and are more scattering.
 we encountered many ruins and walls here also, but no canals. after
 rambling over hills and rocks, through woods and swamps, and finding
 ourselves completely covered with mud, we made our way back, having
 encountered nothing worthy of note, and our bright anticipations,
 which we had long cherished, just about as near realized as thousands
 of others that we have had. but we must learn wisdom by experience,
 we thought, and thus consoled ourselves.
 our man friday we find a capital fellow to stroll on shore with, he
 having a perfect fund of wit and drollery to draw upon at pleasure.
 wherever we went we introduced him as the brother to the king of his
 island, and he was accordingly treated with the greatest respect,
 which amused him infinitely. we found him very useful in our rambles
 also; for, when we were thirsty, he was always ready to ascend a
 cocoanut-tree, and pass down a sufficient quantity of the rich nuts
 to satisfy the thirst of all. one day, while he was thus engaged, a
 native came, running and hallooing, to see who was
  taking cocoanuts
 that were tabooed. of course, the boys all ran; and one of the
 crowd was in such haste to get over a stone wall with an armful of
 cocoanuts, that he lost his balance, and wall and all fell, plunging
 him almost out of sight in a mud bath. friday, however, sat in the
 tree, perfectly at his ease, laughing heartily at the mishap. the
 native sang out to him, “come down; no good; king taboo!” friday
 coolly replied, “no saba” (no understand), and again commenced
 throwing down the nuts, taking particular pains, however, to hit the
 poor native as often as possible, who would cry out, “wa-a-a, wa-a,
 what for all the same? no good.” he finally beat a retreat, leaving
 friday master of the field, and the boys laughing at the manner in
 which he had driven the “kanaka pool,” as he termed him, from the
 ground. when he came down he found himself in a quandary. he had
 got more cocoanuts than he could conveniently carry, and leave them
 he would not; and, as the boys were all supplied, he was in a fix.
 at last, however, his eye brightened, and exclaiming, “i fix ’em,”
 he stripped off his pants, reducing himself to the costume of the
 “king’s court,” and filling each leg with cocoanuts, marched along.
 we took the “spoil” to our quarters at the “hotel,” and deposited
 them there. we would here state, that when the king or chiefs wish
 to reserve any particular place or house from the intrusion of the
 natives, they place the taboo upon it; and, as the penalty of
 breaking this is death, they consider it sacrilege almost to disobey,
 or think of molesting the place. it was thus that our quarters were
 rendered perfectly safe from intrusion. zegrah tabooed the house,
 and no native dare enter it without our permission. the natives are
 very kind and hospitable to those who treat them well, but inclined
 to pilfer if a good opportunity presents itself. most of them are
 notorious beggars, and are constantly teasing for a “small piece
 ’bacca.”
 on sunday morning, december d, we found that our third mate and
 another man had deserted in the course of the night, taking with
 them all their clothing. all hands rejoiced that the third mate, the
 great bully, had left, and the captain shipped two men instead of the
 deserters. these men had been on the island some months.
 but we had been some time in port; all our wood, water, and fresh
 provisions were on board, and we were ready for sea. accordingly, at
 five a.m. on monday, december d, we weighed anchor, and left this
 beautiful harbor, some with sorrowful hearts, and others rejoicing
 that they were once more rolling on “the deep blue sea.” but we did
 not immediately leave the island. the captain had a little more
 business to transact, and we “stood off and on” the harbor for two
 days, close in sight of the land.
 the next day after weighing anchor, the bark “mary frazier,” of new
 bedford, captain haggerty, entered the harbor, so that our island
 friends were not left alone. she was from the arctic ocean, where
 she had taken thirteen hundred barrels whale oil in one season. we
 ascertained by her that our two deserters had escaped from the island
 in the bark “george champlin,” captain swain, which vessel had been
 lying in the lee harbor. in the place of our third mate who had
 deserted, and his office become vacant thereby, the captain placed
 mr. smith, whom we took from the ship “marcus,” as the reader will
 recollect, in exchange for the boat-steerer, who left us on account
 of his ill health. all hands were much pleased with the exchange,
 as mr. s. was a noble man, and a sailor every inch of him. but
 scarcely had we left port, and on the next day succeeding that in
 which we learned of the escape of his predecessor, before he was
 taken violently ill with a burning pain in his stomach. for several
 days he continued growing
 worse, becoming deranged, and continually
 vomiting, until tuesday, december st, the last day of the year, he
 departed this life. he died struggling very hard.
 this sudden death cast a gloom over the whole ship’s company. but a
 few days since, and he was the perfect embodiment of health. little
 did he or any of his shipmates imagine that one brief week would find
 him clasped in the cold arms of death. little did poor smith imagine
 that he would so soon be called upon to obey the dread summons. mr.
 s. had followed the sea from his youth, and had arrived at the age of
 about thirty, without ever experiencing sickness of any kind. he was
 a most excellent and thorough seamen, understood well his business,
 was peaceable and friendly to all, and while on board had conducted
 himself in such a manner as to take a firm hold upon the affections
 of his shipmates. he had secured the confidence and esteem of the
 captain and officers, as well as the respect and good-will of the
 men. he was prompt in the discharge of his duties, always performing
 them in a cheerful manner. but he has gone from our midst. suddenly
 he was taken from us to that bourne from whence no traveler returns.
 little does the landsman know the sweet comforts the dying sailor
 is deprived of. separated from the home of his heart by thousands
 of miles, tossed to and fro on a sick couch, with no kind father
 to watch over and soothe the anguish of his pain; no loving mother
 comforting and praying for the salvation of the dear son; no dear
 brothers or sisters to sympathize and cheer the lonely hours with
 their presence—none of these to smooth the dying sailor’s lonely
 pillow, alleviate his wants, assuage his grief, and comfort his mind
 by divine teachings; none of their cheerful countenances to light the
 dark valley of the shadow of death. yet every thing was done that was
 possible to do for mr. s. to alleviate his sufferings and comfort
 his mind. but all
 was of no avail. there is little doubt but he was
 poisoned at strong’s island. but his bodily sufferings are o’er, and
 instead of departing upon the soft, downy bed, with his dear ones
 hovering over him, he yielded his spirit to the god who gave it from
 his rolling couch, and the last sounds that reached his ears were the
 moanings of the wind, and the hoarse murmur of the waves, impatient,
 as it were, to receive their victim.
 at four p.m. we shortened sail, hauled aback the head yards, hoisted
 the ensign half-mast, and called all hands to “bury the dead.” the
 gangway board was removed, the body sewed up in a sheet, and weights
 attached to the feet, and then laid upon a plank. the services
 commenced by the captain reading a portion of the holy scriptures,
 then making some excellent and touching remarks, followed by a
 prayer. he then read the burial service, and when he said “we now
 commit this body to the deep,” the end of the plank was raised, and
 the body of poor smith was consigned to its watery grave, there
 to rest till the morn of the resurrection, when the last trump
 shall sound, and the sea shall give up its dead. the body rapidly
 disappeared beneath the blue wave, and, on glancing around, the tear
 was seen in the eyes of all those hardy men—those men who had faced
 death without a blanched cheek or a fainting heart—as they took
 their last look at the body of their late shipmate. on the land, in
 the city or town, a death is hardly noticed, and is not felt; but
 on board a ship, with but a small circle, as in our case, of about
 thirty, living together as one family, and shut out from the world,
 as it were, one snatched from our small company is seriously missed,
 and death serves to bind the remaining still closer together, as the
 loss just experienced shows us all the uncertainty of human life, and
 no one knows who will next be called upon to pay the last sad debt of
 nature. may we all be prepared, that, should
almighty god see fit at any time to
 remove us from this world of sin and sorrow, we can go with
 willing hearts—that we may “render up our account with joy, and
 not with grief.”
 “a happy new-year to all.”—rather poor luck.—pitt’s island
 again.—description.—natives.—king.—religious belief.—funeral
 ceremonies.—“jentsh.”—houses.—costume.—food.—language.—weapons
 of war.—mode of warfare.—return to strong’s
 island.—improvements.—singing-school.—the royal family to
 dinner.—canker’s guilt.—poisoned carva.—return to our “hotel.”—our
 suspicions strengthened.—“stop thief!”—gas.—new zealand dance.—grand
 feast.—tall dancing.—“cheers” by the audience.—“go it, cæsar!”—grand
 boat-race.—the boasters beaten.—another great feast.—ball alley.—narrow
 escape of the ship.—departure for guam.
 how different the “new-year” at sea from that at home, were our
 thoughts this “new-year’s morning” on first awakening. but we wished
 all on board a “happy new-year,” and then the good folks at home came
 in for a share of our prayers, and we could not but think that, while
 they were enjoying the choicest viands, our “new-year’s dinner” must
 consist of hard bread and salt junk, with a “plum duff” for dessert.
 we were again bound for the group, to try our luck for whales. and we
 had our “luck,” for we only saw them twice during the whole cruise of
 three months, and they were then going “eyes out” to windward. we did
 not even “grease an iron” that cruise.
 by this time our man friday had become somewhat civilized, and was
 able to speak pretty good english. after trading at the island one
 day, we managed to gain some very interesting accounts from him in
 regard to it and its inhabitants. it lies in latitude ° ´ n.,
 longitude ° ´ e., the northernmost island of the king mill
 group. the natives are very friendly, and have
  not yet learned the
 knavery of the other islands. the chief in command is called king,
 and is assisted by a number of chiefs. the king is allowed as many
 wives as he chooses, but the chiefs and natives but one. they have no
 religion, yet they are very superstitious. they believe in ghosts,
 and that the spirits of the dead visit them. their evil spirits they
 call “jentsh,” and they hold that when they do any thing wrong the
 “jentsh” haunt them; and if they are afflicted in any manner, either
 by sickness or otherwise, it is punishment imposed upon them by the
 evil spirits, who are sent to torment them. friday declared to us
 that he had often seen and conversed with these spirits, and upon
 being contradicted he flew off; and said, “s’pose me pool? s’pose
 me no got eye? me no all same strong’s island kanaka pool; me saba
 plenty.”
 if a native dies, they roll the body in a mat, and the relatives sit
 around the corpse and wail and mourn until the body is in a state of
 putrefaction. they never leave their places, their food being brought
 to them. the climate is so warm that it does not require much time
 for the body to decay. when it reaches this state, it is sewed up
 strongly in the mat, and buried, if a male, with his war-club and
 spear, to protect him in the spirit world; but if a female, nothing
 is buried with it, as they believe the females need no war-like
 instruments to protect them from danger. like the inhabitants of
 strong’s island, they believe that if the person who dies is good, he
 goes “up there;” but if he was bad, he remains in the ground, and is
 forever tormented by the “jentsh.”
 their houses are built of bamboo; are large and roomy, some of them
 having two or three lofts or stories, and are kept very clean and
 neat. the natives are very cleanly, but very few of the men wear
 any clothing. the females wear a tappa, about two feet in
  width,
 about the loins. they subsist principally on cocoanuts, a species
 of bread-fruit called jack-fruit, tarra, wild fowl, and fish. the
 king is a large, corpulent native, apparently about forty-five years
 of age, and is called “king george,” which appears to be the name
 of every “king” we have yet heard of in this part of the world. the
 lingo (for we suppose it can not properly be called a language) in
 the various islands of the group is nearly the same, so much so that
 natives from the various islands can understand each other.
 their weapons of warfare are principally spears, though war-clubs
 are sometimes used. the spears are made from cocoanut wood, and are
 very long, and pointed at both ends. they handle them with a great
 deal of skill, and will throw one from forty to fifty feet with
 remarkable precision. their mode of battle is very singular. both
 parties approach each other, and, when within proper distance, throw
 their spears and then run. if one party get the advantage, and throw
 their spears first, and any take effect in the opposite ranks, those
 that have received the spears make great haste to get out of the way.
 these battles seldom last long, though a great deal of time is spent
 in manœuvring, and great preparations are made, but the contest is
 soon decided.
 we had now cruised three months without getting a drop of oil, and
 the “old man” concluded to try his luck on japan. wanting wood and
 water, however, more than we had on board, for a long cruise, we
 steered for strong’s island again, and on saturday, march th, we
 sighted it. the next day we entered the harbor, and at  a.m. we
 came to an anchor. to our great surprise, we found the bark “mary
 frazier” still in port, she having been “windbound” for three months.
 we also found the bark “maria laura,” of hobarton, captain mansfield,
 in port. on going ashore, we found that many improvements had been
 made by captain h. he had
 built three nice large houses. the king,
 too, had caught the spirit, and built himself a new house; and, in
 fact, a general spirit of improvement and go-aheadativeness seemed to
 have taken possession of all.
 in the evening of the day on which we arrived, we had the opportunity
 of attending a singing-school, which the king had authorized to be
 instituted for the purpose of teaching the children the native songs
 of the island. as a matter of course, we could understand nothing
 that was sung, but we were pleased with their voices, which were very
 sweet, and they appeared to keep excellent time by clapping their
 hands.
 the next day, monday, the king, in his court dress, with all the
 royal family excepting canker, came off to dinner to the ship. canker
 evidently felt his guilt, as he appeared to keep out of the way of
 any of the ship’s company. we had no doubt, when mr. smith was first
 taken, that he had been poisoned, and circumstances pointed strongly
 to canker as the guilty person. it appears that our chief mate,
 with mr. s. and canker, had been gunning, and, on returning, the
 mate and mr. s. commenced bantering with canker in sport. however,
 he did not take it in that manner, but appeared quite offended. on
 arriving at his house he seemed to have regained his good-will, and
 invited them to drink some carva with him. they of course accepted,
 and it was accordingly ordered, and brought in two large shells.
 the mate noticed this, and asked canker why he did not drink with
 them. he replied, “never mind; me no drink; me too much sick.” this
 was something so unusual, as the general practice among them is for
 the chief to drink first, that the mate refused unless canker would
 drink, suspecting all was not right. canker refused even to taste
 it, and exclaimed, in high dudgeon, “you think carva been poison?
 strong’s island no got poison.” mr. s. laughed at the fears of the
 mate, and
 drank off his carva and in a few moments drank that which
 had been prepared for the mate. two days from that time poor smith
 was taken ill, as we have related, and soon died, leaving no doubt
 in the minds of all on board that he had been poisoned by this
 unscrupulous canker.
 his wife having died since we left the island, on our return we found
 all the chiefs living on his place. they feast every day. we called
 on our old friend zegrah, who seemed very much pleased to see us,
 gave us a hearty welcome, and accompanied us to our “hotel,” where
 we regaled ourselves on fruit, fresh fish, etc. upon mentioning the
 circumstances of the death of mr. s. to him, he remarked, “canker
 bloody rascal!”
 the next day, tuesday, april st, we called upon canker. we found him
 remarkably sociable, and his first question was, “where mr. smith?”
 we told him he was dead; whereat he raised his hands with horror, and
 exclaimed, “how long ship sail, he die?” we told him “three days,”
 when he replied that he was very sorry, as mr.s. was a good man. now
 the scamp had been made acquainted with all these particulars before.
 we asked him if he had not heard of his death, and he replied “no,”
 but we knew he lied. after some farther conversation, he asked us,
 “what make mr. s. die?” we told him plainly that he was poisoned,
 but said nothing of our suspicions as to the guilty person. he
 immediately commenced denying that he had poisoned him, and said,
 “strong’s island no got poison.” as no one had hinted or charged him
 with doing it, we regarded his denials as very suspicious. after
 remaining in deep thought, apparently, for some time, he again asked,
 “how long he been make sick, he die?” meaning, how long after he was
 taken sick before he died. we thought this suspicious also, as we had
 but just informed him that he died three days after the ship sailed,
 and we determined
 to try him on another tack, and see what he was
 driving at. we replied to him, therefore, “one week.” his countenance
 immediately brightened, as though a happy thought had suggested
 itself, and he said, “s’pose me make poison carva he drink, he no
 live one day, he die too quick.” we asked him how he made poison
 carva. he replied that he put in the juice of a certain plant. we
 reminded him that he had said but a few moments before that “strong’s
 island no got poison.” this seemed to completely stagger him, and
 he appeared lost in deep study. we now left, well convinced that
 his highness, mr. canker, was a consummate villain, and that he had
 poisoned mr. s.
 our fourth mate, mr. f., concluded to try his luck gunning one
 pleasant day on the large island. after climbing stone walls,
 rambling over mountains, and wading marshes, he thought, as game was
 scarce, he would take a short nap. he was hardly asleep before he
 felt some one about his person, and sprang to his feet just in time
 to see a kanaka running off with his sheath-knife in his hand. he
 instantly raised his gun and fired at the black rascal, but his shot
 did not take effect; so the native only ran the faster, and got clear
 with the knife.
 the crew of the “mary frazier” were a disagreeable set of men, always
 boasting and quarreling among themselves and with their officers.
 quite a number of the different ships’ companies were on shore one
 evening, rolling in the ball-alley, which had been built by captain
 h., and a disturbance occurred between the mate of the “m. f.” and
 one of her crew. the man, who was a large, two-fisted fellow, was
 blustering about, threatening to knock the mate “into the middle
 of next week;” but, as he was taken no notice of by any one, after
 suffering the superabundant flow of gas to escape, sneaked off,
 leaving the others to enjoy their exercise.
 on the evening of thursday, april d, we attended a
  dance at the
 king’s house, given by some new zealand natives. their faces and
 bodies are tattooed in a very singular manner, and look truly
 frightful. their gestures are fierce, songs wild, and their dancing
 is little more than keeping time by changing their position.
 on monday, april th, we attended a grand feast given by the king.
 all the chief’s on the island were present. every thing was served up
 in the highest style of “strong’s island fashion,” and the white men
 from all three ships were heartily invited to partake, which they did
 of every thing except “dog.” after the feast was over the “plate” was
 cleared away, and room made for a grand dance, which was led off by
 the king and followed by the chief’s, the women singing, and keeping
 time by clapping their hands and beating an instrument resembling
 a tambourine. the old king flew around quite lively, and each one
 appeared to do his utmost to excel. at the close of each dance the
 white portion of the audience would cheer the performers in the
 most approved style, which seemed to please them greatly. the natives
 appeared much amused, whether at the dancing or cheering we could not
 say, but probably a little of both, as they showed a broad grin all
 the time. old cæsar tried very hard to see how high he could kick his
 heels, and, at the same time, keep his balance, but a misstep brought
 his foot down on a piece of banana-skin, and his heels flew up, and
 down he came with a crash that seemed as if he had gone through the
 floor. upon seeing this, the king and all the dancers stopped to
 have a hearty laugh, the white men shouted and cheered, the natives
 grinned, and the house was “brought down” completely. but cæsar was
 not to be frightened in that way, and he got up and went at it again
 with redoubled energy. after dancing some two or three hours, “all
 hands” took a shell of carva and separated.
 the crew of the “mary frazier” had been bragging
 and boasting,
 since we had been in port, that they had better boats, and could
 pull faster than either of the other ships’ boats. knowing what
 braggadocios they were, our men took no notice of them, nor did the
 crew of the english bark for some time, until finally they challenged
 the englishmen to a race, and the challenge was accepted. the
 flag-boats were stationed one mile apart, and the boat that pulled
 around these stationary ones three times and came out ahead was to
 win the race, making a pull of six miles. the crew of the “m. f.’s”
 boat were down quite early in the morning on the day of the race, six
 large brawny fellows, stripped to the skin, and “eager for the fray.”
 about  a.m. the englishmen lowered their boat, the same number of
 men composing her crew, but with a far different appearance, being
 perfectly cool, and making no boasting display. our boys, thinking
 they might as well be “counted in,” though not thinking of winning,
 five of them, with the second mate, jumped into the waist-boat,
 and “struck out” for the starting-place. the boats were now ranged
 alongside, the signal was given, and away they flew like arrows
 from the bow. the “mary’s” boat soon left the others behind, our
 “plug” being distanced by both. each crew bent their backs to it,
 sending the boats through the silvery sheet with great speed. the
 englishmen’s boat seemed to skim over the surface of the water
 with the ease and grace of the swan, the crew taking it perfectly
 easy. the first flag-boat was rounded, and the “mary’s” boat was
 some distance ahead. but now was “the tug of war.” the good-natured
 johnny bulls awoke from their lethargy, and the cry rang out, “pull,
 my hearties, pull!” and every stroke lessened the distance between
 the two boats, our own boat gaining on the “head boat” about as
 fast as did the englishmen. but all was excitement; the men in each
 host were straining every nerve, and, at the end of the third mile,
 the englishmen
 passed the other boat, and, before the fourth was
 reached, ours passed it also. but still on they pulled, determined
 not to give up, yet dropping farther and farther astern, until, at
 the end of the sixth mile, the english boat was a mile ahead of the
 “mary frazier’s,” and our own about half a mile ahead. the johnny
 bulls now gave three cheers for their own boat, and “three times
 three” for ours, not so much for the victory as that the boasters
 had been so badly beaten. our boys were not interested in the race
 at all, only pulling for the “fun of the thing,” and they were more
 surprised than any one else to find that they could beat the “crack
 boat” of the “m. f.;” and her crew were so mortified that they said
 no more about “fast boats.” thus were the boasters beaten.
 on saturday, april th, the king gave another grand feast and
 dance, to which we were all invited as usual. after some time spent
 in dancing by the chiefs and king, the old black
 “doctor”[] of the
 “maria laura” struck up with his violin, and all hands joined in a
 regular breakdown. this pleased the king and natives very much, they
 laughing heartily and exclaiming, “what for all the same ’meriky
 fashion?”
 as we before remarked, captain h. had built a ball-alley on the
 island, and the king and chiefs spent a great part of their time
 there, and had become very expert players. the king might often
 be seen “rolling a string” with one of the foremast hands of the
 different ships.
 the “mary frazier” had now been in port nearly four months, the
 “maria laura” two months, and ourselves one month. the three ships
 were ready for sea, and had been for weeks, but the wind blew
 constantly into the passage—a fair wind to enter port, but impossible
 for a ship to leave. at length, however, on the morning of wednesday,
 april d, the wind died away and
 it fell a dead calm, and the old
 man determined to make the effort to tow the ship out of the passage.
 accordingly, we “hove up” anchor and down boats, and commenced to
 tow. when at the mouth of the passage a breeze sprang up, taking us
 “all aback,” and swinging the ship around. we were rapidly drifting
 into the breakers, when the pilot, rotumah tom, immediately sprang
 into a boat alongside, and, pulling for the weather side of the
 passage, with the end of a line in his hand, which he had taken with
 him, he plunged down and made it fast around a coral rock, came up,
 and made signals to “heave away” on board. this was the work of
 almost a moment; the ship was within but a few feet of the breakers,
 and we held our breath, expecting every instant to see her strike.
 but by sharp, quick work, and the good judgment and activity of
 rotumah tom, we soon cleared the breakers, and, warping up to our old
 anchorage, “let go” again.
 the other ships also dropped anchor, and congratulated us on the
 narrow escape of the “emily.” we felt thankful to god for
 the escape, narrow as it was. to have been wrecked there and then
 would have been truly lamentable.
 the next morning a light breeze sprang up from the southward, and
 all three ships left strong’s island, bidding them adieu. the breeze
 increased as we dropped the land, and with a fair wind we headed
 west-northwest for guam.
 the cook.
 guam.—invasion of the ladrone islands by the spaniards
 in .—getting off recruits.—fruit.—climate.—captain
 anderson.—massacre of captain luce and boat’s crew.—proceed to
 japan cruising-ground.—ship “boy.”—boat’s crew taken down by
 a whale.—albicore and skipjack.—“our luck” again.—the spell
 broken.—bark “medina.”—manuel and the hog.—a slight tap.
 sunday, may th, we arrived at guam. this is a beautiful island, of
 rather high land, and resembles the american coast more than any
 land we saw during our wanderings. the surface presents a rolling
 appearance, the land looks fertile, and it is interspersed with dense
 foliage. this island is the principal one of the group of the ladrone
 islands.
 these islands were invaded in  by the spaniards, but their
 conquest was not completed till the year , although they had,
 during the different years of their invasion, resorted to their
 usual sanguinary means. it was not until they had destroyed an
 immense number of the inhabitants that they could bring the warlike
 ladrones to a state of subjection. when the conquest was finished,
 they compelled the subjugated people to leave all the other islands
 which form the group, and reside on only two of them, guam and
 rotta, which placed them completely under the observation of their
 jealous invaders. they also forced them to receive the roman catholic
 religion, which continues to be the only one tolerated on the
 island. the spaniards have managed ever since to keep the people
 in a state of subjection, although the spirit of revolt still lies
 dormant in their breast, ready to burst forth at the first favorable
 opportunity.
 they speak the spanish language fluently; in fact, they
 can speak no other, or they have no knowledge of the one formerly
 spoken on the islands.
 all hands were busily engaged getting off recruits for the coming
 season on japan, which consisted of yams, sweet potatoes, melons,
 shaddock, and bananas, which grow here in great abundance. the island
 also produces tamarinds, oranges, limes, cocoanuts, citrons, and
 papaw apples, all of the finest quality. the inhabitants here enjoy
 perpetual summer; the climate is mild and salubrious, and, were they
 free from spanish oppression, might be a happy and contented people.
 we found a scotchman—captain anderson he called himself—who had
 resided here many years, and accumulated quite a little fortune
 trading with ships, etc. he informed us that captain luce, of the
 “boy,” of warren, together with his boat’s crew, had been massacred
 by the natives at m‘gaskill’s island but a short time previous. the
 captain went ashore for the purpose of trading with the natives for
 fruit, fowl, etc. he had visited the island before, and always found
 the natives friendly and peaceable. as he did not return to the ship,
 the officer in charge kept close in to the land, and fearing there
 had been foul play, early in the morning he stood in, and, by the
 aid of the spy-glass, discovered the natives dressed in the clothing
 belonging to the boat’s crew. they saw a white man coming off in a
 canoe and making signals to them. when within hailing distance, he
 reported that the captain and boat’s crew had been murdered; that he
 had resided on the island some time, and was not afraid they would
 attack him. upon learning this sad news, the ship proceeded to the
 cruising-ground in charge of the mate.
 every thing being in readiness, on monday, may th, we left guam for
 the japan ground, to cruise over a trackless waste of waters for five
 or six months in pursuit
 of dollars in the shape of sperm whales.
 nothing out of the usual routine of ship’s duties occurred for nearly
 two months. all was monotony; the same process day after day—not even
 a sail nor a whale to vary the scene. at length, however, on the
 morning of sunday, june d, our ears were startled by the cry of
 “sail ho!” from the mast-head. it was a dead calm—not a breath of air
 stirring—and the sail was just visible from aloft. about  p.m. a
 breeze sprang up, and brought the stranger with it. it proved to be
 the “boy,” and a boat’s crew came on board. they confirmed the report
 relative to the massacre of captain luce and his men. they also
 reported that a nantucket ship cruising on the ground had lost a boat
 and crew by being taken down by a whale. it was supposed the line
 became foul, and, before it could be cut, boat and crew disappeared
 beneath the surface, as they were never seen or heard from afterward.
 we now found large quantities of albicore and skipjack around the
 ship. these fish are very good eating, tasting much like fresh cod,
 and there were thousands of them to be seen in every direction. all
 that was necessary to take them was to tie a piece of white rag on a
 hook, and then sit on the bulwarks and trail the line along the top
 of the water, the fish jumping at it as fast as one wished to haul
 them in. we have seen as much as ten barrels of them caught in one
 day. they weigh from five to fifty pounds. it is singular, but they
 follow a ship as long as she remains in those latitudes.
 at length, on the morning of saturday, june th, the welcome cry was
 heard from masthead, “t-h-e-r-e she b-l-o-w-s!” all were aroused,
 and it was not long before our boats were down and after him, for
 it was a “lone whale.” the bow boat soon fastened, and just as all
 hands were congratulating themselves that we should soon have a whale
 alongside, the irons drew, and the
 whale left for parts unknown.
 “just our luck,” was the exclamation, and all returned to the ship
 with long faces, and “slightly” discouraged. it was now eight months
 since we had taken a drop of oil, and we were twenty months out,
 with but three hundred barrels. the prospect of two thousand barrels
 in four years looked very dark just then. however, the old man
 endeavored to console us by saying, “it is a long lane that has no
 turning, boys!”
 and we found this adage true, for the next morning we lowered down,
 and in less than an hour had a hundred-barrel sperm whale alongside,
 which caused every face to brighten, and before the decks were fairly
 cleared up we took another, which made us eighty barrels, making one
 hundred and eighty barrels in less than one week, more than half as
 much as we had been twenty months in getting. thus it is; whaling is
 more a lottery than any thing else.
 while cutting in the last whale, we discovered a ship running down
 to us, which soon came within hailing distance, and proved to be the
 british bark “medina,” from hong kong, bound to san francisco, with a
 load of chinese emigrants.
 we were now enjoying beautiful weather. during the days hardly
 a cloud was to be seen, and the atmosphere as clear as a bell.
 the nights were lovely, warm, and pleasant, and many of the crew
 preferred bringing their mattresses on deck and sleeping in the open
 air to sleeping below. one night portugee manuel, among the rest, was
 thus quietly taking a nap, but it happened to be his watch on deck,
 and he did not feel disposed to keep awake when he should. one of the
 watch, thinking to have a little sport, tied him fast to a large hog
 who was quietly reposing not far off, and then, taking a rope’s end,
 commenced belaboring the porker, who started up and off, dragging the
 “gee” very unceremoniously
 with him. this somewhat surprised manuel,
 who was not accustomed to this novel mode of locomotion, and, on
 being released, he swore vengeance (in portuguese) against hogs and
 yankees.
 we again raised whales on monday, july th, and gave chase as usual.
 the waist-boat soon fastened to a fine long fellow, who did not
 like to be trifled with, it seemed, in such a manner, and commenced
 thrashing about in a way that threatened destruction to the boats
 in the vicinity. after working himself into a towering passion, he
 ended the fracas by knocking the waist-boat “higher than a kite,” and
 sent the crew flying in all directions. the men were soon picked up,
 and, when the whale saw the mischief which he had done, repenting, we
 suppose, he remained quiet, and submitted to the “killing process”
 with a very good grace, and “gave up the ghost” in the usual style.
 the body was towed to the ship, and the “funeral ceremonies” were
 performed in short order, his beautiful coat soon converted into
 sperm oil and stowed away in the hold.
 food of the sperm whale.—manner of feeding.—swimming.—breathing.—herding.
 in the many books which have been written of whaling voyages, we
 recollect nowhere to have seen a natural history of the sperm
 whale, and we trust it will not be uninteresting to the reader if we
 give it in the present volume. it can not but be instructive, at all
 events, and, being satisfied on that point, we shall proceed; and,
 first,
the food of the sperm whale.—this food consists almost wholly of
 an animal called by whalemen “squid,” and by naturalists the “sepia
 octopus.” this squid forms the principal part of the sustenance of
 the sperm whale when at a distance from the shore, or what is termed
 “off shore ground.”
manner of feeding.—it appears from all that we could learn from
 the oldest and most experienced whalemen that we met, and from the
 observations we have been enabled to make upon this interesting
 subject, that when the whale is inclined to feed he descends a
 certain depth below the surface of the ocean, and there remains in
 as quiet a state as possible, opening his long and narrow mouth
 until the lower jaw hangs down almost perpendicularly. the roof of
 his mouth, the tongue, and especially the teeth, being of a bright,
 glistening color, must present a remarkable appearance, which seems
 to be the incitement by which his prey are attracted, and when a
 sufficient number are within the mouth, he rapidly closes his jaw
 and swallows the contents. this is not the only instance of animals
 obtaining their prey by such means,
 when the form of their bodies,
 from unwieldiness or some other cause, prevents them from securing
 their prey in any other manner, or by the common method of the chase.
 the crocodile frequently employs stratagems of the like nature.
 covering himself in mud, and lying still on the bank of some stream,
 he opens his enormous jaws, when hundreds of smaller reptiles,
 attracted by the mucus or slime which covers his exterior, become the
 easy prey of the artful machinations of their scaly deceiver.
 the sperm whale is frequently subject to deformity of the lower
 jaw, two instances of which we have seen, in which the deformity
 was so great as to render it impossible for the animal to find the
 jaw useful in catching its prey, or even, one might have supposed,
 in deglutition; yet these whales possessed as much blubber, and
 were as rich in oil as any of a similar size we have seen before or
 since. in both these instances of crooked jaws, the nutrition of the
 animal appeared to be equally perfect. in both cases the jaws were
 bent on one side. it would be interesting here to inquire into the
 causes of this deformity; but whether it is the effect of disease,
 or the consequence of accident, would be difficult to ascertain. old
 whalemen affirm that it is caused by fighting. they state that the
 sperm whale fights by rushing head first one upon the other, their
 mouths, at the same time, wide open; their object appearing to be the
 seizing of their opponent by the lower jaw, for which purpose they
 frequently turn themselves on their side. in this manner they become,
 as it were, locked together, their jaws crossing each other, and in
 this method they strive vehemently for the mastery. we have never had
 the fortune to witness one of these combats, but if it be the fact
 that such take place, we need not wonder at seeing so many deformed
 jaws among sperm whales; for we can easily suppose the enormous
 force exerted on these occasions,
 taking into consideration, also,
 the comparative slenderness of the jaw-bone in this animal. from
 these facts it may at least be surmised, with a great degree of
 probability, that the mode of procuring food as above stated is the
 true one; for with a jaw so much deformed, the animal would seem
 incapable of pursuing his prey, and would consequently gain but a
 very precarious subsistence, did not its food actually throng about
 its mouth and throat, invited by their appearance, and attracted in
 some degree, as is supposed, by the peculiar and very strong odor of
 the sperm whale.
 the teeth of the sperm whale are merely organs of prehension. they
 can be of no use for mastication, and consequently the fish, etc.,
 which he occasionally vomits present no marks of having undergone the
 process.
 the manner of the suckling of the young ones is a matter involved
 in some obscurity. it is impossible, from the singular conformation
 of the mouth, that the young one could seize the nipple of the
 mother with the forepart of it, for there are no soft lips at this
 part, but instead the jaws are edged with a smooth and very hard
 cartilaginous substance; but about two feet from the angle of the
 mouth they begin to be furnished with something like lips, which form
 at the angle some loose folds, soft and elastic, and it is commonly
 believed by the most experienced whalemen that it is by this part the
 young whale seizes the nipple and performs the act of sucking, and
 which is doubtless the mode of its doing so.
swimming.—notwithstanding his enormous size, we find that the sperm
 whale has the power of moving through the water with the greatest
 ease, and with considerable velocity. when undisturbed, he passes
 tranquilly along, just below the surface of the water, at the rate
 of about two to four miles per hour, which progress he effects by
 a gentle oblique motion from side to side
  of the “flukes.” when
 proceeding at his common rate, his body lies horizontally, his “hump”
 projecting above the surface, with the water a little disturbed
 around it, and more or less according to his velocity. this disturbed
 water is called by whalemen “white water,” and from the greater or
 less quantity of it an experienced whaleman can judge very accurately
 of the rate at which the whale is going from the distance of three or
 four miles.
 in this mode of swimming the whale is able to attain a velocity of
 about eight or nine miles per hour; but when desirous of proceeding
 at a more rapid rate, the action of the tail is materially altered.
 instead of being moved laterally and obliquely, it strikes the water
 with the broad flat surface of the flukes in a direct manner, upward
 and downward, and each time the blow is made with the inferior
 surface the head of the whale sinks down to the depth of eight or
 ten feet, but when the blow is reversed it rises out of the water,
 presenting then to it only the sharp, cutwater-like inferior portion.
 the blow with the upper surface of the flukes appears to be by far
 the most powerful, and as, at the same time, the resistance of the
 broad anterior surface of the head is removed, it is the principal
 means of progression. this mode of swimming with the head alternately
 in and out of the water is called by whalemen “going head out;” and
 in this way the whale can attain a speed of ten or fifteen miles an
 hour, and this latter is believed to be his greatest velocity.
 the tail is thus seen to be the great means of progression, and the
 fins are not much used for that purpose; but occasionally, when
 suddenly disturbed, the whale has the power of sinking suddenly and
 directly downward in the horizontal position, which he effects by
 striking upward with the fins and tail.
breathing.—all the cetacea, as is well known, are warmblooded
 animals, and possess lungs, and, consequently, require a frequent
 intercourse with atmospheric air, and for this purpose it is
 necessary that they should rise to the surface of the water at
 certain intervals. the majority of this class of animals do not
 appear to perform this function with any regularity, and it is
 in this respect that the sperm whale is remarkably distinguished
 among the cetacea; and it is from his peculiar mode of “blowing”
 that he is recognized, even at a great distance, by experienced
 whalemen. when at the surface for the purposes of respiration the
 whale generally remains still, but occasionally continues making a
 gentle progress during the whole of his breathing-time. if the water
 is moderately smooth, the first part of the whale observable is a
 dark-colored pyramidal mass, projecting two or three feet out of the
 water, which is called the “hump.”
 at very regular intervals of time, the nose, or “noddle-end,”
 emerges at a distance of from forty to fifty feet from the hump in
 the full-grown male. from the extremity of the nose the spout is
 thrown up, which, when seen from a distance, appears thick, low, and
 bushy, and of a white color. it is formed of the expired air, which
 is forcibly ejected from the spout-hole, acquiring its white color
 from the minute particles of water previously
  lodged in the chink or
 fissure of the nostril, and also from the condensation of the aqueous
 vapor thrown off by the lungs.
 the spout is projected from the spout-hole at an angle of about
 forty-five degrees, in a slow and continuous manner, for the space
 of about three seconds of time. if the weather is fine and clear,
 and there is a gentle breeze at the time, it may be seen from the
 masthead of a moderate-sized vessel at the distance of five or six
 miles. the spout of the sperm whale differs much from that of other
 large cetacea, in which it is mostly double, and projected thin,
 and like a sudden jet; and as in those animals the spout-holes
 are situated nearly on the top of the head, it is thrown up to a
 considerable height in almost a perpendicular direction. when,
 however, a sperm whale is “gallied” or alarmed, the spout is thrown
 up much higher and with great rapidity, and consequently differs much
 from its usual appearance. the regularity with which every action
 connected with its breathing is performed by the sperm whale is very
 remarkable. the length of time he remains at the surface, the number
 of spouts or expirations made at one time, the intervals between the
 spouts, the time he remains invisible “in the depth of the ocean
 buried,” are all, when the animal is undisturbed, as regular in
 succession and duration as it is possible to imagine.
 in different individuals the times consumed in performing these
 several acts vary, but in each they are minutely regular, and this
 well-known regularity is of much benefit to the whaleman; for, when
 he has once noticed the periods of any particular sperm whale which
 is not alarmed, he knows to a moment when to expect it again at the
 surface, and how long it will remain there.
 immediately after each spout the nose sinks beneath the water,
 scarcely a second intervening for the act of
  inspiration, which
 must consequently be performed very quickly, the air rushing into
 the chest with astonishing velocity. there is, however, no sound
 caused by the expiration or spout; in this respect, also, differing
 from other whales, for the “fin-back” whale and some others have
 their inspirations accompanied by a loud sound, as of air forcibly
 drawn into a small orifice. this sound is called by whalemen the
 “drawback,” and when heard at night near the ship, convinces the
 listening watch of the species to which it belongs. in a large “bull”
 sperm whale, the time consumed in making one inspiration and one
 expiration, or the space from the termination of one spout to that of
 another, is ten seconds, during six of which the nostril is beneath
 the surface of the water, the inspiration occupying one, and the
 expiration three seconds; and at each breathing-time the whale makes
 from sixty to seventy inspirations, and remains, therefore, at the
 surface of the water eleven or twelve minutes. at the termination
 of this breathing-time, or, as whalemen say, when he has had his
 “spoutings out,” the head sinks slowly, the “small,” or the part
 between the hump and flukes, appears above the surface of the water,
 curved with the convexity upward; the flukes are then lifted high
 into the air, and the animal, having assumed a straight position,
 descends perpendicularly to an unknown depth. the act is performed
 with regularity and slowness, and is called by whalemen “turning
 flukes;” an act, too, which is always noticed by those at masthead,
 who call loudly, when they disappear below the surface, “t-h-e-r-e
 goes flukes!” the whale continues thus hidden beneath the surface
 from sixty to seventy minutes; some will remain an hour and twenty
 minutes. if we take into consideration the quantity of time that the
 full-grown sperm whale consumes in respiration, and also the time
 he takes in searching for food and performing other acts below the
 surface of the ocean, we
 should find that a seventh of the time of
 this huge animal is consumed in the function of respiration.
 the females being found generally in large numbers and in close
 company, it is difficult to fix the attention upon one individual,
 so as to ascertain precisely the time consumed below the surface.
 however, as all in one school generally rise at the same time, it may
 be observed that they remain below the water about twenty minutes.
 they make from thirty-five to forty expirations during the period
 they are at the surface, which is about five minutes, and they thus
 consume about a fifth of their time in respiration, a proportion
 considerably greater than that of the adult males.
 when disturbed or alarmed, this regularity in breathing appears
 to be no longer observed. for instance: when a “bull,” which,
 when undisturbed, remains at the surface until he has made fifty
 expirations, is alarmed by the approach of a boat, he immediately
 plunges beneath the surface, although he may not have performed more
 than half the usual number of his expirations. he will soon rise
 again not far distant and finish his full number of respirations; and
 in this case, also, he generally sinks without having assumed the
 perpendicular position before described. on the contrary, he sinks
 suddenly in the horizontal position, and with remarkable rapidity,
 leaving a sort of vortex in the place where his huge body lately
 floated.
 when urging his rapid course through the ocean in that mode of
 swimming which is called “going head out,” the spout is thrown out
 every time the head is raised above the surface, and under these
 circumstances of violent muscular exertion, as would be expected, the
 respiration is much more hurried than usual.
other actions of the sperm whale.—when in a state of alarm, or
 gamboling in sport on the surface of the ocean, the sperm whale
 has many curious modes of acting. it is difficult to conceive
 any object in nature calculated to cause alarm to this leviathan;
 notwithstanding which, he is remarkably timid, and is readily alarmed
 at the approach of a boat.
 when seriously alarmed, he is said by whalemen to be “gallied,”
 and in this state he performs many actions very different from his
 usual mode, as has been mentioned in speaking of his swimming and
 breathing, and many also which he is never observed to perform under
 any other circumstances. one of them is what is called “sweeping,”
 which consists in moving the tail from side to side on the surface
 of the water, as if feeling for the boat, or any other object that
 may be within reach. the whale has also an extraordinary manner of
 rolling over and over on the surface, and this he does when “fastened
 to” from a boat. at times they place themselves in a perpendicular
 posture, with the head only above water, presenting, in this
 position, a most extraordinary appearance. when seen from a distance
 they resemble large black rocks rising out of the midst of the ocean.
 this posture they seem to assume for the purpose of surveying more
 accurately or more easily the surrounding expanse. a species of
 whale, called by whalemen “blackfish,” is most frequently in the
 habit of assuming this position.
 the eyes of the sperm whale, being placed in the widest part of the
 head, of course afford the animal an extensive field of vision, and
 he appears to view objects very readily that are placed laterally in
 a direct line with the eye, and when they are placed at some distance
 before him. his common manner of looking at a boat or a ship is to
 turn over on his side, so as to cause the rays from the object to
 strike directly upon the retina.
 now, when alarmed, and consequently anxious to take as rapid a glance
 as possible on all sides, he can much more readily do so when in the
 above-described
 perpendicular position. occasionally, when lying at
 the surface, the whale appears to amuse itself by violently beating
 the water with its tail. this act is called “lop-tailing,” and the
 water lashed in this way into foam is termed “white water,” and by it
 the whale is often recognized from a great distance.
 but one of the most curious and surprising of the actions of the
 sperm whale is that of leaping completely out of the water, or of
 “breaching,” as whalemen term it. the way in which he performs this
 extraordinary motion appears to be by descending to a certain depth
 below the surface, and then making some powerful strokes with his
 tail, which are frequently and rapidly repeated, and thus convey a
 great degree of velocity to his body before he reaches the surface,
 when he darts completely out. when just emerged and at its greatest
 elevation, his body forms with the surface of the water an angle of
 about forty-five degrees, the flukes lying parallel with the surface
 in falling. the animal rolls his body slightly, so that he always
 falls on his side, and seldom breaches more than twice or thrice at
 a time. in very clear weather, on the japan ground, we have seen the
 breach of a large whale at a distance of sixteen miles; but, as a
 general thing, eight or ten miles is the distance that a breach may
 be discovered from masthead.
 it is probable that the sperm whale often resorts to this action of
 breaching for the purpose of ridding itself of various animals which
 infest its skin, such as large “sucking-fish,” and other animals
 which resemble crabs. of the former of the parasites, some fix
 themselves so closely to this convenient carrier that they sometimes
 adhere to the skin of the whale for several hours after its death,
 and then suffer themselves to be forced off by the hands of the
 whalemen. it is not improbable, also, that some of these actions may
 be resorted to in the whale endeavoring to avoid the assaults of
 the swordfish, by which they are sometimes attacked. there is also
 an animal called a “killer,” which, in company with the swordfish,
 attack the whale. the latter will goad him from below, while the
 former leaps out of the water and falls upon him from above, the
 attack thus intimidating the whale, and giving the swordfish an
 opportunity to inflict its wounds.
herding.—the sperm whale is a gregarious animal, and the herds
 formed by it are of two kinds; the one consisting of females, the
 other of young bulls not fully grown.
 these herds are called by whalemen “schools,” and occasionally
 consist of great numbers. with each school of females are always
 from one to three large males, the lords of the herd. the males are
 said to be extremely jealous of intrusion by strangers, and to fight
 fiercely to
 maintain their rights. the full-grown males, or “large
 whales,” almost always go alone in search of food, and, when they are
 seen in company, are supposed to be migrating from one feeding-ground
 to another. the large whale is generally very incautious, and if
 alone, he is without difficulty attacked and easily killed, as he
 frequently, after receiving the first blow from the harpoon, appears
 hardly to feel it, but continues lying like a “log of wood” on the
 water before he rallies or makes any attempt to escape from his
 enemies.
 large whales are sometimes, but rarely, met with remarkably cunning
 and full of courage, when they will commit dreadful havoc with
 their jaws and tail. the jaw and head, however, appear to be their
 principal offensive weapons.
 the female breeds at all seasons, producing but one at a time, except
 in a few instances, in which two are produced. her time of gestation
 is unknown, but is supposed to be about ten months. their young,
 when first born, are about twelve or fourteen feet in length, and
 five or six in girth. the females are much smaller than the males,
 being considered not more than one fourth the size of the adult large
 whale. they are very remarkable for attachment to their young, which
 they may frequently be seen urging and assisting to escape from
 danger with the most unceasing care and fondness. they are also not
 less remarkable for their strong feeling of attachment to each other;
 and this is carried to so great an extent, that, should one female of
 a herd be attacked and wounded, her faithful companions will remain
 around her to the last moment, or until they are wounded themselves.
 this act of remaining by a wounded companion is called by whalemen
 “bringing to,” and whole schools have been destroyed by dexterous
 management, when several ships have been in company, wholly from
 these whales possessing this remarkable
  disposition. the attachment
 appears reciprocal on the part of the young whales, which have been
 seen about the ship for hours after their parents have been killed.
 the young males or “young bulls” go in large schools, but differ
 remarkably from the females in disposition, inasmuch as they make an
 immediate and rapid retreat upon one of their number being struck,
 who is left to take care of himself. they are also very cunning and
 cautious, keeping at all times a good look-out for danger. it is
 consequently necessary for the whaleman to be extremely cautious in
 his mode of approaching them, so as, if possible, to escape being
 seen or heard, for they have some mode of communication one to
 another, through a whole school, in an incredibly short space of
 time. they are consequently much more troublesome to attack, and
 more dangerous and difficult to kill, great dexterity and dispatch
 being necessary to give them no time to recover from the pain and
 fright caused by the first blow. when about three fourths grown, or
 sometimes only half, they separate from each other and go singly in
 search of food.
 all sperm whales, both large and small, have some method of
 communication with each other by which they become apprised of
 danger, and this they do, although the distance may be very
 considerable between them, sometimes amounting to six, seven, eight,
 or even ten miles. the method by which these communications are
 carried on remains a curious secret.
 nature of sperm whales’ food.—“sepia octopus.”—nautilus.
 it has been before stated that the food of the sperm whale consists
 almost wholly of an animal of the cuttle-fish kind, called by
 whalemen “squid,” and by naturalists “sepia octopus;” and at times,
 when he is near the shore, he feeds upon small fish, which are
 denominated “rock cod,” and which sometimes approach the size of a
 moderate salmon.
 but the instances in which fish of this description have been
 ejected from the stomach of the sperm whale are but rare, while
 every day’s experience proves that its common food consists of that
 division of molluscous animals which naturalists have denominated
 “cephalopoda,” and of which the “sepia octopus,” or “sea squid,”
 appears to be the most common.
 a few words on the natural history of this highly organized and
 remarkable animal can not fail to be interesting to the reader, as
 it has excited the attention of naturalists for many ages, from the
 remarkable nature of its formation and peculiar habits.
 endowed with all the five organs of sense, it is second to no
 inhabitant of the mighty waters in the complete elaboration of its
 organs, which has constantly rendered it a great object of attention
 to the anatomist and physiologist.
 dr. roget, in his bridgewater treatise, under the head of
 “cephalopoda,” states that “we now arrive at a highly interesting
 family of mollusca, denominated cephalopoda, and distinguished
 above all the preceding orders by being endowed with a much more
 elaborate organization
 and a far wider range of faculties. the
 cephalopoda have been so named from the position of certain organs
 of progressive motion which are situated on the head, and, like
 the tentacula of the polypus, surround the opening of the mouth.
 these feet, or arms, or tentacula, if we choose to call them so,
 are long, slender, and flexible processes, exceedingly irritable
 and contractile in every part, and provided with numerous muscles,
 which are capable of moving or twisting them in all directions with
 extraordinary quickness and precision. they are thus capable of being
 employed as instruments not only of progressive motion, but also of
 prehension. for this purpose they are, in many species, peculiarly
 well adapted, because, being perfectly flexible as well as highly
 muscular, they twine with ease round any object of any shape, and
 grasp it with prodigious force. in addition to these properties,
 they derive a remarkable power of adhesion to the surfaces of bodies
 from their being furnished with numerous suckers all along their
 inner sides. each of these suckers is usually supported on a narrow
 neck or pedicle, and strengthened at its circumference by a ring
 of cartilage. their internal mechanism is more artificial than the
 simple construction already described; for when the surface of the
 disk is fully expanded, it is formed of a great number of small,
 slender pieces, resembling teeth, closely set together, and extending
 from the inner margin of the cartilaginous rings in the form of
 converging radii to within a short distance of the centre, where they
 leave a certain aperture.
 “in the flattened state of the sucker, this aperture is filled by
 the projecting part of a softer substance, which forms an interior
 portion, capable of being detached from the flat circle of the
 teeth when the sucker is in action, and of leaving an intervening
 cavity. it is evident that by this mechanism, which combines the
 properties of an
 accurate valve with an extensive cavity for
 producing rarefaction, or the tendency to vacuum, the power of
 adhesion is considerably augmented. so great is the force with which
 the tentacula of the cuttle-fish adhere to bodies by means of this
 apparatus, that, while their muscular fibres continue contracted, it
 is easier to tear away the substance of the limb than to release it
 from its attachment. even in the dead animal we have found that the
 suckers retain considerable powers of adhesion to any smooth surface
 to which they may be applied.
 “the octopus, which was the animal denominated polypus by
 aristotle, has eight arms of equal length, and contains in its
 interior two very small rudimentary shells, formed by the inner
 surface of the mantle. this shell becomes much more distinct in the
 loligo, where it is cartilaginous, and shaped like the blade of a
 sword. the internal shell of the common sepia is large and broad,
 and composed wholly of the carbonate of lime; it is well known by
 the name of cuttle-fish bone. its structure is extremely curious,
 and deserves particular attention, as establishing the universality
 of the principle which regulates the formation of shells, whether
 external or internal, and from which structures differing much in
 their outward appearance may result. it is composed of an immense
 number of thin calcareous plates, arranged parallel to one another,
 and connected by thousands of minute hollow pillars of the same
 calcareous material, passing perpendicularly between the adjacent
 surfaces. this shell is not adherent to any internal part of the
 animal which has produced it, but is inclosed in a capsule, and
 appears like a foreign body impacted in the midst of organs with
 which, at first sight, it appears to have no relation. it no doubt
 is of use in giving mechanical support to the soft substance of the
 body, and especially to the surrounding muscular flesh; and this
 probably contributes to the high energy which the animal displays
  in
 all its movements. it has been regarded as an internal skeleton, but
 it certainly has no pretensions to such a designation; for, although
 enveloped by the mantle, it is still formed by that organ, and the
 material of which it is composed still carbonate of lime. on both
 these accounts it must be considered as a true shell, and classed
 among the productions of the integuments. it differs, indeed, from
 bony structures, which are composed of a different kind of material,
 and formed on principles of growth totally dissimilar. besides
 tentacula, the sepia is also provided with a pair of fleshy fins,
 extending along the two sides of the body. the loligo has similar
 organs of a smaller size, and situated only at the extremity of the
 body which is opposite to the head. they have been regarded as the
 rudiments of true fins, which are organs developed in fishes, and
 which are supported by slender bones; but no structure of this kind
 exists in the fins of the cephalopoda. in swimming, the organs
 principally employed by cuttle-fish for giving an effective impulse
 to the water are the tentacula. these they employ as oars, striking
 with them from behind forward, so that their effort is to propel the
 hinder part of the body, which is thus made to advance foremost,
 the head following in the rear. they also use these organs as feet
 for moving along the bottom of the sea. in their progress under
 these circumstances, the head is always turned downward and the body
 upward, so that the animal may be considered as literally walking on
 its head!
 “the necessity of this position for the feet arises probably from
 the close investment of the mantle over the body; for, although the
 mantle leaves an aperture in the neck for the entrance of water to
 the respiratory organs, yet in other respects it forms a sack, closed
 in every part except where the head, neck, and accompanying tentacula
 protrude.
 “in the calamary, as well as the common sepia, two
  of the arms
 are much longer than the rest, and terminate in a thick cylindrical
 portion, covered with numerous suckers, which may not inaptly be
 compared to a hand. these processes are employed by cuttle-fish
 as anchors, for the purpose of fixing themselves firmly to rocks
 during violent agitations of the sea; and accordingly we find that
 it is only the extremities of these bony tentacula that are provided
 with suckers, while the short ones have them also along their whole
 length. the other genera of cephalopodous mollusca are, like
 the sepia, provided with tentacula attached to the head. they
 comprehend animals differing exceedingly in size, some being very
 large, but a great number very minute, and even microscopic.”
 other animals of this kind inhabit shells, one of which is the
 nautilus, which, says roget, “possesses a shell exceedingly thin
 and almost pellucid; probably for the sake of lightness, for it is
 intended to be used as a boat. for the purpose of enabling the animal
 to avail itself of the impulses of the air while it is thus floating
 on the water, nature has furnished it with a thin membrane, which she
 has attached to two of the tentacula, so that it can be spread out
 like a sail to catch the light winds which waft the animal forward
 on its course. while its diminutive bark is thus scudding over the
 surface of the deep, the assiduous navigator does not neglect to
 apply its tentacula as oars on either side, to direct as well as to
 accelerate its motion. no sooner does the breeze freshen and the sea
 become ruffled than it hastens to take down its sail, and, quickly
 drawing its tentacula within its shell, renders itself specifically
 heavier than the water, and sinks immediately into more tranquil
 regions beneath the surface.”
 sir william jardine, in speaking of the food of the sperm
 whale,[]
 ventures to suggest to those who may
  have frequent opportunities of
 observing whether this whale may not also frequently resort to the
 medusæ, and minute fish which in so remarkable a manner supply food
 to some of the smaller, as well as the other genera of the gigantic
 whales. that there is an abundant supply of this sustenance, both in
 the antarctic ocean and the more smiling latitudes of the southern
 seas, can easily be proved by a reference to lesson’s statements,
 and also to the journal of captain colnett, who, when near the
 southern point of america, observes: “during this forenoon we
 passed several fields of spawn, which caused the water to bear the
 appearance of barley covering the surface of a bank.”
 arbigny also remarks that “there are immense tracts off the coast
 of brazil filled with small creatures so numerous as to impart a
 red color to the sea.” “statements of this sort,” observes sir
 william, “could easily be multiplied; and hence we can not but
 suppose that this kind of food, which is ascertained to afford such
 rich nourishment to the other great cetacea, may very possibly be
 appropriated by the sperm whale to the same purpose.”
 this is an unaccountable error on the part of the compiler of the
 naturalists’ library. the apparent banks above mentioned, and
 which we have ourselves frequently seen in various parts of the
 ocean, are certainly formed by myriads of medusæ and other small
 animals, which form the sustenance of the balæna mysticetus, or
 right whale’s food, which consists of animals of the shrimp kind, and
 other minute creatures, which are closely congregated and swarm in
 those animated “banks,” but of which the sperm whale never partakes;
 as it is not “very possible,” but quite impossible that he could do
 so, however inclined he might be, on account of the organization of
 his feeding apparatus, which may be readily seen when its form is
 referred to.
 the sepia octopus, or “sea squid,” sometimes reaches an enormous
 size. in the philosophical transactions for  (), after
 having given an interesting description of a specimen sent for
 examination, the editor states that “it can, by spreading its arms
 abroad like a net, so fetter and entangle the prey they inclose
 when they are drawn together as to render it incapable of exerting
 its strength; for, however feeble these branches or arms may be
 singly, their power united becomes surprising; and we are assured
 nature is so kind to these animals that if, in a struggle, any of
 their arms are broken off, after some time they will grow again.
 it is evident,” he continues, “from what has been said, that the
 sea polypus or octopus must be terrible to the inhabitants of the
 waters in proportion to its size, for the close embraces of its arms
 and adhesion of its suckers must render the efforts of its prey
 ineffectual either for resistance or escape, unless it be endowed
 with an extraordinary degree of strength.”
 a gigantic cephalopoda was discovered by drs. bank and solander, in
 captain cook’s first voyage, floating dead upon the sea, surrounded
 by birds, who were feeding on its remains. from the parts of this
 specimen which are still preserved in the hunterian collection, and
 which have always excited the attention of naturalists, it must have
 measured at least six feet from the end of the tail to the end of the
 tentacles.
 but this last we must imagine a mere pigmy when we consider the
 enormous dimensions of the one spoken of by doctor
 swediaus,[]
 whose tentacula or limbs measured twenty-seven feet in length. but let the
 doctor speak for himself: “one of the gentlemen,” says he, “who was
 so kind as to communicate to me his observations on this subject
 (ambergris), also, ten years ago, caught a sperm whale that had in
 its mouth a tentaculum of the sepia octopodia nearly twenty-seven
 feet 
 long! this did not appear its whole length, for one end was
 corroded by digestion, so that, in its natural state, it may have
 been a great deal longer. when we consider the enormous bulk of the
 tentacula here spoken of, we shall cease to wonder at the common
 saying of the fishermen, that the cuttle-fish is the largest fish of
 the ocean.”
 in todd’s cyclopedia of anatomy (), treating of cephalopoda,
 in an admirable paper by mr. owen, it states that “the natives of
 the polynesian islands, who dive for shell-fish, have a well-founded
 dread and abhorrence of these formidable cephalopods, and one
 can not but feel surprised that their fears should have, perhaps,
 exaggerated their dimensions and destructive attributes.”
 the same learned writer, after having beautifully described another
 animal of this order, observes: “let the reader picture to himself
 the projecting margin of the horny hook developed into a long,
 curved, sharp-pointed claw, and these weapons clustered at the
 expanded terminations of the arms, and arranged in a double alternate
 series along the whole internal surface, and he will have some idea
 of the formidable nature of the carnivorous onychotenthis.”
 this species of cephalopoda is thus armed with those kind of teeth
 at the termination of the tentacles in order to secure the agile,
 slippery, and mucous-clad fishes on which it preys; and there is an
 instance recorded in the works of a celebrated author on excursions
 in the mediterranean, by which we perceive that these terrible
 creatures sometimes prey upon men. the author says: “in those shallow
 waters are caught great quantities of fish, by forming curved lines
 or palisades some way out to sea with palm branches, by which the
 fish that come up with the high water are retained when it recedes.
 the horrid polypus, which is, however, greedily eaten, abounds, and
 some are of enormous size. they prove, at times, highly dangerous to
 bathers.
 “an instance of this occurred a few years since. a sardinian captain,
 bathing at jerbah, felt one of his feet grasped by one of these
 animals; on this, with his other foot he tried to disengage himself,
 but this limb was immediately seized by another of the monster’s
 arms; he then endeavored to free himself with his hands, but these
 also were firmly grasped by the polypus, and the poor man was shortly
 after found drowned, with all his limbs strongly bound together by
 the arms and legs of the fish; and it is extraordinary, that where
 this happened the water is scarcely four feet in depth.”
 other species of these surprising animals, as the calamaries,
 or “flying squid,” as they are termed by seamen, have the power
 of propelling themselves through the atmosphere. “there is good
 reason for believing,” says mr. owen, “that some of the small,
 slender-bodied subulate species of this genus are enabled to strike
 the water with such force as to raise themselves above the surface,
 and dart, like the flying-fish, for a short distance through the
 air.” we have seen very frequently, both in the north and south
 pacifc, tens of thousands of these animals dart simultaneously
 out of the water when pursued by albicore or dolphins, and propel
 themselves, head first, in a horizontal direction, for eighty or a
 hundred yards, assisting their progression probably by a rotary or
 screwing motion of their arms or tentacles, which they have the
 power of thus moving with singular velocity. this species also, as
 well as the large onychotenthis, we are led to believe, often
 serves the sperm whale for food. we have seen, on several occasions,
 very large limbs of the latter species of squid floating on the
 surface of the ocean, appearing as if bitten off by some animal,
 most probably by the sperm whale; for, when these remains have been
 seen, we always looked out most anxiously for those animals, and have
 seldom been disappointed in seeing them within a few hours afterward.
 naturalists’ library, vol. vi, p. .
 philosophical transactions, vol. lxxiii., p. .
 close of the first “season” on japan.—making passage to the
 group.—“land ho!”.—“breathing-places for sailors.”—henderville’s
 island.—unpleasant prospect.—narrow escape from the breakers.—a large
 whale.—an ugly customer.—ocean island dick.—ocean island.—“some
 pumpkins.”—bound for strong’s island.—calms.—“blow, ye gentle
 breezes.”—at our “hotel” once more.—hospitality of the natives.—a
 diabolical scheme.—anger of the king.—narrow escape of all hands from
 poisoning.—wilds and the queen.—a sudden awakening.—wild boar.—join
 in the chase.—brave men.—the boar presented in great state to the
 king.—bravery of the “white man.”—“hog not dog.”—at sea again.
 at the close of our first “season” on japan, we found ourselves with
 two hundred and fifty barrels more of oil than when we came on to the
 ground, and we felt greater encouragement, though we were yet very
 poorly off, being nearly two years from home, with but five hundred
 and fifty barrels. however, the weather admonished us that we must
 be leaving those regions; and accordingly, on the th of september,
 we pointed the “emily’s” head to the southward, and, crowding on the
 “kites,” we were soon in pleasant weather, making passage to our old
 ground, the group.
 on the morning of thursday, september th, we were aroused by the
 soul-cheering cry of “land ho!” in a moment all hands were in the
 rigging to catch a glimpse of the land. all strained their eyes with
 eager excitement to once more view a green spot. we had now been
 cruising nearly five months, and during that time we had seen nothing
 that resembled land, and but two ships. sailing in the midst of the
 vast north pacific, and cruising week after week, month after month,
 nothing new, nothing to change the monotony so usual to shipboard,
 all at once rose to our view a
 beautiful island densely covered with
 dark green foliage, the tall cocoanut-trees nodding a welcome as they
 waved their sweeping branches to and fro; and as we drew near to the
 land, the neat huts of the natives peering through the leafy opening,
 with the white sand-beach, a delightful clear atmosphere, with a fine
 breeze, the old ship standing on in majesty, all combined to make it
 a scene refreshing to behold—one of beauty and loveliness. truly have
 these islands been denominated “breathing-places for sailors.” after
 beating about, enduring gales and storms, and meeting with no living
 beings upon the trackless ocean, to be ushered into the presence of
 one of these lovely “sea-girt isles” fills the beholder with the most
 joyous feelings, and convinces him that he is yet in the land of
 the living. we found ourselves, almost unconsciously we might say,
 offering our thanks and praises to the giver of all good for his
 protecting power through the dangers and storms of our voyage thus
 far, and trusting that we should ere long be restored to those we so
 dearly loved.
 but we were now to cruise for a few months among these islands. on
 tuesday, september st, we were in sight of henderville’s island.
 at sunset, being about eight miles distant from the land, the wind
 died away, leaving every thing calm, the surface of the water
 unruffled, not a breath of air stirring, and the sails idly hanging
 or flapping themselves to and fro. the current was rapidly setting
 us in-shore. about eight o’clock we lowered a boat, and found we
 were drifting toward the reef at the rate of two miles per hour. the
 lights of the native fishermen along the reefs were plainly visible,
 and the roar of the breakers came to our ears in thunder tones, that
 sent a thrill through every heart, sounding like a death-knell, or
 the roaring of some monster anxious for his prey. that land which
 had appeared so beautiful to us but a few days previous was
  now
 hateful to our sight, and oh! how we longed for “plenty of sea-room”
 again. that island might truly be a “breathing-place” for us, but
 we feared it would be our last “breathing-place,” for we well knew
 the disposition of its natives, and were well aware that, should our
 ship be lost, there was no mercy to be expected from those rapacious
 savages. serious thoughts for once filled the mind of every man on
 board: the visions of those happy homes far away—were we never to
 visit those homes again? the memories of the many happy days spent
 with friends—were we never again to enjoy them? after battling the
 elements thus far, after passing through so many dangers, were we
 thus to perish—to be thus massacred by a horde of merciless savages,
 and no one, perhaps, to tell our friends when and how we died? oh!
 it was horrible to think of, and caused a shudder of anguish to pass
 through our every frame. and yet nothing but the interposition of a
 kind and merciful providence could avert this fate. slowly but surely
 were we drifting into those fatal breakers, and one hour more, one
 short hour, we felt must decide our fate. oh, for a breeze! in vain
 we look for it; in vain we wished for it. all was calm and unruffled.
 as a last resort, the boats were ordered out, and all hands sprang
 into them as they never sprang before, and commenced towing the ship.
 for four long hours did those noble men work at the oars, a battle
 between life and death, each seemingly striving for the mastery. we
 were just able, by this constant tugging at the oars, “to hold our
 own,” to stem the current. about one o’clock in the morning a breeze
 sprang up, and never, never was wind so welcomed. all hands gave
 one simultaneous shout, “we are saved!” and returned to the ship
 with joyous hearts. we could not but thank our heavenly father for
 thus preserving us from the horrible fate that at one time seemed so
 certainly to await us.
 glad indeed were we to be delivered from this fate, and we now
 directed our course toward ocean island. on the morning of thursday,
 september th, at daylight, the welcome shout was heard, “there she
 blows! a large whale!” instantly the boats were down, and all hands
 gave chase. we discovered the whale had been fastened to by some
 other ship, as he had two irons in him, with a long line trailing
 behind. the larboard, or mate’s, boat soon fastened; the whale
 sounding heavily, a signal was made for “more line,” and the bow
 boat ran down, and passed to them their line; the whale continued
 to sound, taking out nearly eight hundred fathom ( feet), until
 the irons drew. in a short time the whale made his appearance; the
 boats again renewed the chase. after some considerable manœuvring and
 provoking dodging on the part of the whale, the waist-boat fastened.
 away he went again, railroad speed, and after treating the boat’s
 crew to a ride that caused them to exert every muscle to hold their
 hair on, the irons again “came home.”
 this only served to increase the excitement, and again the several
 boats gave chase with redoubled energy and ardor. about sunset
 the captain’s boat drew near; he stood in the head of the boat,
 determined to make the old fellow show the “red flag.” he was now
 close on; all were looking with breathless anxiety. they neared him,
 and the captain darted; the second iron followed the first in an
 instant, and he shouted “we are fast!” and turned round to roll up
 the sail of the boat. the old man was the spryest man in the ship,
 and before he could roll up the sail (which usually occupies about a
 minute), the last flake of line went out of the boat, and away went
 the old veteran with four hundred fathom ( feet) of our line and
 two harpoons. this was the last chance, it being near sunset, and
 they gave up the chase, at the same time respecting the intelligence
 and
 sagacity of the whale in not allowing himself to become a prey
 to the frail boats. he probably felt himself insulted by being
 pestered with such small trash, as well as the idea of being melted
 up for grease.
 the men came on board hungry, thirsty, and tired, having pulled and
 worked from  a.m. to  p.m., with but a couple of cakes of hard
 bread and about a quart of water each to refresh themselves with
 through the day. the weather was intensely hot; they were exposed
 to the equatorial sun, which was directly over them; and yet they
 thought of none of these things till they came on board with no
 whale. thus ended the chase of the largest whale we had yet seen, and
 which our boys christened “ocean island dick.” the captain asserted
 that for the many years he had followed the sea (about thirty), he
 had never seen so large a whale as this one. never mind; he has got
 the ship’s mark, in the shape of two irons, that will be apt to
 trouble him some before he rids himself of them.
 saturday, september th, we were at ocean island. the king himself,
 with quite a number of natives, came off, bringing with them nothing
 but pumpkins to trade. one of the boys remarked that he “supposed
 they considered themselves ‘some pumpkins!’” they were of an
 excellent quality, but were, in reality, our crooked-neck squash.
 they raise them in great quantities, and it is the principal article
 of trade with the ships. this island is certainly the most beautiful
 one of the group, the land being moderately high, and presenting a
 very even surface.
 on leaving here we shaped our course again for strong’s island, which
 we saw on wednesday, october th. as we neared the land the wind
 died away, leaving us becalmed, which continued for four days and
 nights. how provoking it was to lie there, about sixteen or eighteen
 miles from the land, during all this time,
  and feel ourselves thus
 imprisoned! during the day-time the surface of the water would
 scarce be disturbed by a ripple, and presented the appearance of
 a vast mirror, with a green islet by the way of decoration. after
 having been shut up in the ship for six long and weary months
 without setting foot on shore, to be thus kept in sight of a green
 “breathing-place” for four days and nights, and feel that you could
 not reach it so long as the calm continued, was tantalizing; it was
 not strange that we wished for a strong breeze, one that would put us
 into the harbor in two or three hours.
 at length our wishes were gratified; and on sunday morning, october
 th, we again dropped anchor in our old resting-place. in the
 afternoon we went on shore, and, on arriving at our “hotel,” found
 zegrah and his wife, who gave us a hearty welcome, having been
 expecting us. in the evening they gave a feast in honor of our
 arrival.
 the next two or three days we spent as usual, rambling over the
 island, through canals and over walls—through swamps and ditches in
 search of adventure. as we have before observed, we found the natives
 very kind and hospitable, always welcoming us in a hearty manner;
 and, from their actions, we should judge they were really glad to see
 us again. wherever we visited, they spread before us the numerous
 fruits of the island, urging us to eat, and insisting that we should
 drink a shell of carva with them. we can never forget their kind,
 simple-hearted hospitality, and we have often looked back upon our
 visits there as green spots in the desert of life, refreshing and
 cheering.
 since the death of mr. smith, whenever we had been at this island,
 canker would never come near the ship. this we thought strange, as
 the first time we were there he was on board nearly every day. still,
 he appeared very kind to any of the ship’s company when they called
 upon him, making them presents of fruit, etc., as if wishing to
 reinstate himself in their good graces.
 on thursday, october th, the king came off to the ship to dinner.
 on sitting down at the table, he happened to cast his eye upon a dish
 of greens, which had been sent to the ship by canker, and cooked
 by the steward. he instantly took the dish, and then went upon
 deck, examined them minutely, and threw them all overboard. he then
 inquired if there were any more on board, and on being answered that
 a large quantity had been cooked for the men, he ordered them to be
 thrown overboard immediately. he then asked, “who been makey send
 all the same on board?” on being told “canker,” his anger scarcely
 knew bounds. he raved and appeared so excited we feared he would do
 himself some injury. after a little while he became more calm, and
 said, “captain, you look out that canker; he too much bad man; he
 no good. i no like speak too much; he my son.” it was evident there
 was a struggle going on in the heart of the good old king. he loved
 his son notwithstanding his faults, and to thus have evidence of his
 bloodthirstiness angered him, and it was some time before he fully
 recovered himself.
 it was, indeed, a diabolical scheme of this canker’s. some one of the
 crew had injudiciously told him, in jest, that “a large man-of-war
 was on its way to the island to inquire into the death of mr. smith,
 and that, if the captain or any of the crew should tell them he had
 poisoned mr. s., the man-of-war would hang him.” this he believed,
 and, feeling his guilt, he determined to remove all evidence of it
 by putting the whole ship’s company to death by poison. he knew we
 were all fond of greens, and he chose a day, also, on which none
 would be on shore, all hands taking dinner on board that day. but,
 through the interposition of the almighty, he was
  prevented from
 accomplishing his dark and bloody designs. how much had we to thank
 our heavenly father for, and how many times did he preserve our lives
 from threatened dangers, seen and unseen, during those five eventful
 years of our life!
 one evening during our stay, one of our men, by the name of wilds,
 whom we shipped on our first visit to this island, had some little
 disturbance with her strong’s island majesty, the queen. wilds had
 always been a great favorite with her, and was privileged to do and
 say as he pleased about the house. he had lived with the king while
 on the island. this evening he came in with his mats and pillow
 rolled up under his arm, and commenced joking and teasing the queen;
 finally, starting to leave, he asked her if he could leave them there
 until he returned for them. on being answered in the affirmative, he
 threw the bundle at her in a playful manner, which happened to hit
 her rather solid, and knocked her down. she screamed, of course (what
 woman would not?), and imagined herself nearly killed. poor wilds at
 first knew not what to do or say; finally he undertook to apologize,
 but she would not listen to a word, and ordered him to leave.
 this little incident shows what a trifling circumstance will break
 the friendship of some of these natives, and turn them to as bitter
 enemies as they were former friends, as in the case of mr. s. and
 canker. wilds received orders from the queen not to come to the
 palace again, as she did not like the idea of allowing her royal
 person to be a target for a common sailor to fire his bundles at. the
 king, however, when he heard of it, laughed at it as a good joke, and
 treated wilds with as much friendship as formerly.
 we were now all ready for sea again—wood and water all on board.
 thinking, however, that we must have one more ramble before leaving,
 on saturday, october
 th, we started, in company with several of
 our shipmates, for a stroll among the mountains. during our walk we
 came to a fine spring running into a large stone basin. the weather
 being excessively hot, we concluded to lie down in this cool, shady
 place, and rest. while reclining on these beautiful mossy banks,
 spinning yarns of homes far away, and of happy days, carrying
 ourselves, in imagination, to those homes and pleasures, we were
 very suddenly and unceremoniously aroused from our easy positions by
 a rushing sound, accompanied by a hoarse roar. it can be imagined
 that we did not occupy many moments in regaining our feet, and we
 had scarcely done so ere a large wild boar rushed past with great
 velocity, deigning not even to bestow a passing glance upon us, the
 spectators of his race, whose hair stood on end, but kept on his
 course until he was lost in the thicket.
 some natives, headed by sekane, the chief soon made their appearance,
 and stated that they had started the boar from his den by wounding
 him, and asked us to join in the chase. this we consented to do, as
 we were anxious to view the sport; but, not exactly understanding
 the hooks and crooks of wild-boar hunting, took good care to keep
 well in the rear, and our eyes about us. it was certainly amusing;
 the slightest noise would cause our company to start for some
 tree, and on finding that it was merely a false alarm, would look
 immensely foolish. the natives now wished us to guard a pass that
 we had arrived at while they went after him. as soon as the natives
 were all out of sight, we took our stations in small trees, where we
 were sure that we should be out of reach of the boar’s tushes. after
 waiting some time, we heard a shouting but a short distance from us.
 each now instinctively shouted “he is coming,” and tried to ascend
 still higher. we were relieved from our fears, however, by seeing
 the squad of
 natives approaching, with the wild boar lashed in such
 a manner that he could not escape. he was carried by means of poles
 run through the lashings of his feet by four natives. they felt very
 proud of their booty, and exclaimed, “king have big feast now!” he
 was captured by means of a lasso thrown over his head by one of the
 natives. sekane now wished us to form a grand procession and march to
 the king’s house, where the boar would be delivered to and received
 by the king in great style, “all the same ’meriky fashion,” as they
 termed it. we accordingly did so; and on our arrival, the natives,
 who had gathered in great numbers, commenced shouting, until we could
 hardly “hear ourselves think.” the animal was then presented to the
 king by sekane, who made a speech, which was very intelligible to us,
 as we could not understand a word of it, and replied to by the king
 in the same manner. we were informed, however, by cæsar that the king
 praised highly the natives who had captured him, and that he spoke
 highly of the bravery and assistance the white men had rendered, as
 sekane had given him a glowing description of our assistance. this,
 of course, restored our confidence in our own courage, which had
 somewhat fallen.
 the animal was immediately slaughtered, and preparations were made
 for a “big feast,” to which the white men were all invited, and those
 of us who had so materially assisted in its capture were assigned
 posts of honor by the side of sekane, who was the “lion of the day.”
 we now began to think that we had some courage, and many of the boys
 expressed themselves as ready to proceed on another “wild boar hunt,”
 provided—the natives would go ahead. the feast passed off with great
 eclat, and all hands enjoyed it much, dining this time on veritable
 “hog,” and not “dog.”
 but we were now ready for the “blue waters” again, and we must not
 loiter too long amid the pleasant
 scenes of strong’s island. on
 monday, october th, we weighed anchor and proceeded to sea. the
 king and captain h. accompanied us outside the passage, when we took
 leave of them, and, with a fair wind, shaped our course once more for
 the group. we had been treated with such uniform kindness by most of
 the natives the many times that we had visited this island, and by
 such marked respect by the king and chiefs, that the remembrance of
 the happy hours we had there spent, and the pleasant and agreeable
 scenes we had met, as well as the information we had gained, still
 clings to us, and furnishes many an agreeable moment for reflection
 and pleasure.
 blackfish.—ship “phocion.”—ship “ganges.”—bark “belle.”—“chips”
 in prison.—friday’s departure.—sorrowful leave-taking.—ship
 “bengal.”—ship “lion.”—henderville’s island once more.—dick
 simpson.—ship “john and elizabeth.”—another new year.—“music
 by the band.”—variations.—an “amateur” concert.—bark
 “alfred tyler.”—wreck of the “ontario.”—ocean island
 again.—freshwater cavern.—superstitions.—beachcombers.—rascally
 operations.—convicts.—taboo.—natives.—climate.—houses.—religious
 belief.—sharp practice.—characteristics.—whaling.—pleasant
 island.—disturbance with the natives.—ship “mohawk.”—pitcairn’s
 island.—mutiny of the “bounty’s” crew.—death of mrs. p.—“to my
 husband.”—massacre at covill’s island.—whaling again.—a few stray
 thoughts upon that subject.—heavy gale.—a “gemman ob color.”—his
 splendid dress.—passage to guam.
 we were again at our old business of cruising and whaling, but with
 poor success. on friday, october st, we captured three blackfish.
 these are a species of whale yielding from one to five barrels of
 oil, of an inferior quality, and almost black, from which color the
 fish seems to have derived its name.
 monday, november d, we spoke the “phocion,” of new bedford, captain
 nichols, and the day following the “ganges,” of nantucket, cutting in
 a sperm whale, which assured us that others were fortunate if we were
 not, and consoling ourselves that our turn would soon come.
 nothing of any interest transpired for a month from this time,
 except occasionally lowering for whales and the capture of two,
 until wednesday, december d, when we again spoke the bark “belle,”
 just from sydney. from them we learned that our carpenter, alias
 “chips,” who, it will be recollected, deserted at pitt’s island,
 and left in the “belle,” had been arrested in sydney for stealing a
 quadrant and sextant from a ship there, and thrown into prison. we
 were now to lose one of our best men, though a kanaka. for some
 time past it was evident that friday had been growing homesick, and
 he often told us, “i like go see my land.” the captain, being willing
 to gratify him, and it being uncertain when we should again visit his
 “land,” consented to his taking passage in the “belle,” which vessel
 was going there immediately. friday was overjoyed at this prospect;
 his chest was brought upon deck, ready to be lowered into the other
 ship’s boat. but now came the parting with his shipmates. this was
 hard for poor friday, for all loved him, though he had a dark skin.
 he had been so kind to all on board—so ever ready and willing to do
 all in his power to serve others’ interests—so quick to learn, and
 so grateful for any kindness shown, that all hands, from captain to
 cook, loved and respected him. many little presents had been bestowed
 upon him as tokens of remembrance, and his heart almost failed him as
 he looked around upon those he was leaving behind; the tears gushed
 from his eyes; but, summoning resolution to his aid, he sprang into
 the boat awaiting him, and sadly waving his hand to us, was soon
 out of sight. we can truly say that we have parted with many white
 acquaintances with less sorrow than we did with friday, the pitt’s
 island kanaka.
 on tuesday, december th, we spoke the “bengal,” of new london, an
 arctic whaler, who reported quite a number of whalers lost in the
 arctic the previous season by the ice. a short time after we spoke
 the “lion,” of providence, captain nichols, a brother of the master
 of the “phocion,” whom we saw a few days previous.
 the morning of saturday, december th, broke with very squally,
 thick weather, and we came very near running down henderville’s
 island, or running well on it. it appeared almost that we were fated
 to be cast away on this hated place. the “lion” was on our weather
 beam, and was running in the same direction. as the squall, which was
 a severe one, passed off, and the weather became clear, we discovered
 breakers just ahead. we had “tacked” ship very quick a number of
 times during the voyage, but never, we venture to say, did the
 “emily” go about quicker than then. the “lion,” being to windward,
 had more room; she also went about, and we left those parts just as
 fast as the breeze would drive us.
 while trading at simpson’s island, on monday, december th, a chief
 came alongside in a canoe, and wished to “see the elephant”—in other
 words, cast his lot with us. he was partly induced to do so by seeing
 on board an old shipmate, for it seems he had been one cruise in
 the “planter.” the necessary bargain was soon made, and the captain
 bestowed upon him the name of dick simpson. dick turned to his
 canoe, and ordered the natives to go ashore. they appeared loth to
 part with him thus, but after some very, to us, unintelligible jargon
 and extraordinary flourishes on the part of dick, they left, with
 sorrowful countenances.
 the next day we spoke the “john and elizabeth,” of new london,
 captain chappel. we were now speaking ships day after day, and
 nearly all of them later from home than we were. from most of them
 we obtained papers, and many of the crew obtained letters. it was
 truly pleasant to us to come so frequently in contact with ships from
 our own native land, separated from it, as we were, by the diameter
 of the earth—vessels that bore aloft the same stars and stripes
 that we had so often beheld waving proudly at home—vessels that
 contained
 americans, our countrymen; and, although we might not
 be participants in the mighty events which were transpiring in our
 native land, yet we could hear of them even in that distant clime.
 these incidents truly served as bright spots in the storm-beaten
 mariner’s existence.
 and now we come to another new-year. thursday, january st, —,
 has come. another page has been written in the history of man. the
 thought came to us on this morning, how many hearts at home have
 been made desolate, during the past year, by the loss of near and
 dear friends? how many have been called from this vale of tears to
 meet their god? have we profited by the lessons which our
 heavenly father has endeavored to impress upon us? to us will come,
 before another new-year shall roll around, the words, “this year thou
 shalt die.”
 all hands this day held a sort of jubilee, “going in,” as far as our
 limited means would allow. all appeared to think of but one thing,
 “we are one year nearer home.” no work was done except attending
 to the sailing of the ship; all hands regaled themselves on roast
 chicken, sea pie, plum duff, etc. (which did not amount to much—etc.,
 we mean), for dinner.
 the sailor is proverbial for his love of music. we were gamming with
 the “phocion” on wednesday, january th, and in the evening the cook
 of the “phocion” came on board, bringing with him his violin. he was
 the blackest man we ever saw—so black that we actually believe
 charcoal would make a white mark on him. he was not only cook on
 board the “p.,” but was also the “band.” he was asked down into
 the cabin to entertain his listeners with his melodious strains,
 and there requested to play “hail columbia;” and whether it was
 because we were so long absent from the land of yankee doodle, or
 whether we had no appreciation of music,
  we know not, yet we could
 discern no track or trace of “hail columbia,” as we were wont to
 hear it in times past. not relishing it, we requested him to play
 “yankee doodle,” with the “variations.” he commenced, and before
 the first strain was ended the dogs left the cabin for the deck on
 the full run, howling, with their paws to their ears; the crockery
 in the steward’s room seemed to catch the infection, and danced
 about merrily; the officers, who had retired for their watch below,
 growled; the din increasing as the darkey worked into the merits
 of the tune, all tended to create admirable confusion, until we
 had faint ideas of being spectators and listeners in pandemonium.
 the noise increased; the darkey sawed away more lustily than ever;
 the captain’s wife cried out that she was half crazy, until some
 person, who had “no soul for music,” threw a large sea-boot with
 such unerring aim and force, that, striking the “band” full in the
 countenance, fairly drove his nose in, as it was already as flat as
 possible; the claret flew, and the darkey, muttering something about
 not appreciating music, pocketed the insult and started forward for
 the forecastle.
 here the concert again commenced, with all the “variations.” the men
 joined in, some singing, some drumming on tin-pans, some dancing, the
 kanakas yelling, and the old darkey “coming down” with a vengeance.
 as these melodious sounds reached the deck, we really imagined
 ourselves in bedlam; at all events, we could not but wish the fiddler
 there with a hearty good-will.
 tuesday, january th, we spoke the bark “alfred tyler,” of
 edgartown, captain luce, who reported that a few days previous he
 had lost a boat and boat’s crew by desertion. they had supplied
 themselves with provisions and every thing necessary, and it was
 supposed had steered for sydenham’s island. captain luce, immediately
 disguising his vessel by paint, and transforming
  her into a ship,
 was in pursuit of the deserters, and felt confident that he should
 yet capture them.
 on monday, february d, spoke the “hector” again, who reported the
 “ontario,” of new bedford, ashore on the reef at pitt’s island, and
 rapidly going to pieces at last accounts. she had on board twenty-two
 hundred barrels whale oil, which was mostly stove or drifted about.
 the “phocion,” very fortunately being in the neighborhood at the
 time of the accident, rendered them all the assistance in her power.
 all hands were saved. the “p.” also picked up four or five hundred
 barrels of oil, which, in addition to that already obtained, filled
 her, and she started for home, the captain of the wrecked ontario
 taking passage. it was very fortunate that the ship went ashore at
 this island, as the natives are kind and generous, and rendered
 all the assistance in their power to get her off the reef, and
 in obtaining several valuable articles from the ship, which they
 delivered to their rightful owners. had she been wrecked on some of
 the southward islands, she would have been instantly thronged with
 natives, who would have plundered her of every thing they could carry
 off, if they did not massacre the entire crew.
 the captain and all hands having a desire for more of the ocean
 island “pumpkins,” and being in the immediate vicinity, we steered
 for ocean island, arriving there on wednesday, february th. quite a
 number of canoes came off to trade, but the captain, not obtaining a
 sufficient quantity, sent a boat on shore to obtain a boat-load, if
 possible.
 on this island there is but one place where the natives can procure
 fresh water, and that is a large cavern some distance below the
 surface of the earth. by reason of a superstitious belief, no one but
 women are allowed to descend this cavern; hence the females bring all
 the water that is required by the natives in cocoanut-shells,
  as
 they have no utensils of a larger description. at some seasons of the
 year the water is very low, and the king places all on an allowance
 of so much per day. at such times many suffer from the want of it. we
 remember that at one time of visiting this island, it being in the
 dry season, the natives came off in swarms to get water to drink, and
 so numerous were they that the captain was obliged to compel them
 to desist, as we had barely sufficient to last until the end of the
 cruise.
 there were several white men living on shore here at this time,
 of the class known as “beachcombers.” from their appearance we
 should judge them to be of the worst class of society—strong-built,
 able-bodied men, living here an indolent, lazy life; nothing to
 do, their victuals brought to them by the females, and swilling a
 sort of rum made from the cocoanut. the natives, believing by their
 protestations that they can accomplish any thing, appear to favor
 them, and each chief has a “beachcomber” to do his trading on the
 ship. yet they resort to all manner of deceit, both with natives
 and with any ship’s company that will allow them to come on board.
 whenever a ship heaves in sight, they represent to the natives that
 the captain is either a brother or cousin of theirs, and promise
 great things. when they come on board, they generally go about
 begging among the men, spinning a most pitiful yarn, and, at the same
 time, taking good care not to take any thing out of their reach, but
 still reaching very far if occasion requires. if they can find
 a disaffected person among the ship’s company, they “button-hole”
 him at once, and persuade him, if possible, to desert, telling him
 how easily he can live on shore; that they will take charge of and
 hide him, so that neither the captain nor natives can find him; and
 represent that they have unbounded influence with their chief, who
 is always the highest on the island. if they succeed in persuading
 the man to desert, they will
 promise to carry many little articles
 ashore for him, with some clothing, as, they say, “you would be
 suspected if they should see you with a bundle of clothes, but if
 they see me with them they will readily suppose i have bought them.”
 after getting all they can, they persuade the man to hide in the
 bottom of a canoe alongside, throw a mat over him, and the natives,
 who understand the game that is being played, paddle off to the
 shore. presently the man is missed. the captain goes ashore, and
 offers a reward of ten or twenty pounds of tobacco and some pipes
 for the recovery of the deserter. the poor miserable judas then goes
 to the captain, and informs him that he has discovered the runaway’s
 hiding-place, and takes him immediately to the place where he has put
 the man himself, and reveals him to the captain, who orders him to
 the boat. the poor fellow, not daring to resist, with a feeling of
 shame, and his head hung down, proceeds to the boat; the captain pays
 the reward to the villain, who chuckles to think how nicely he has
 deceived and betrayed both parties.
 we have often wondered why it is that masters of vessels, who well
 know the foregoing remarks to be true, will allow these miserable
 pests and outcasts to come on board their ships. they are nearly
 all escaped convicts from the penal colonies of sydney and norfolk
 island, and the worst class of those convicts. they contaminate all
 with whom they come in contact; and no person, having the slightest
 regard for himself, or possessed of the smallest degree of ambition
 or honesty, would for a moment consent to reside on one of these
 islands, living in the manner these beachcombers generally do.
 they are constantly instilling some mischief into the heads of the
 natives, and teaching them treachery and deceit. many times, we
 are sorry to say, has great injustice been done to the shipwrecked
 or invalid mariner by classing him with these people, but no one
 despises a beachcomber more than a true sailor.
 the taboo is also exercised at this island; per example: when their
 products are very scarce, the king places the taboo upon all trade,
 thus forbidding them to take off any thing to ships; but should a
 ship arrive and wish to trade, the taboo may be broken by the captain
 coming ashore and paying the king a certain amount of tobacco. as
 soon as the taboo is off, canoes go in great numbers. the appearance
 of three ships at any one time also breaks the taboo.
 the natives here also live in a state of great subjection. the
 principal authority is vested in a king; the chiefs rank next,
 each chief having authority over a particular tribe, who are held
 more as slaves than as free men. the climate is warm, and of an
 even temperature, the island being forty-eight miles south of the
 equator. they enjoy alternately the sea-breeze and land-breeze, the
 thermometer ranging from seventy-five to eighty degrees.
 the inhabitants are strong, robust-looking, and wear no dress of any
 description. the houses are similar to those on strong’s island,
 built of bamboo, very large and comfortable, but not kept over and
 above neat. their ideas of good and bad are similar to those held
 by the natives of the windward islands of the group; they have
 their evil spirits, or “jentsh,” who, they believe, occupy the deep
 cavern; but, as females are considered harmless, none but they can
 descend the cavern and live. they are most expert thieves, and their
 transactions in this line would shame a london pickpocket. as a
 specimen: we bought some beautiful shells from one of these gentry at
 a reasonable price, and very carefully, as we supposed, knowing their
 weakness for taking things, hid them. presently the same native
 we had purchased of came up from his canoe alongside with another
 assortment, which he offered us. we bought them, at the same time
 remarking the great resemblance they bore to the ones we had just
 purchased, and proceeded to stow them away. on arriving at the place,
 lo and behold! the shells were gone, and, on examining closely, we
 found that we had purchased the same shells twice. the rascal had
 watched where we put them, informed another native, who had slyly
 taken them, lowered them to the former one alongside, who then
 paddled around the other side of the ship, and came on board with
 “more shell,” as he said. we were completely sold as well as the
 shells, and, feeling somewhat indignant, procured a good-sized billet
 of wood, and proceeded to look for the canoe. but the rascal was too
 sharp for us again; anticipating punishment, doubtless, he wisely
 jumped into his canoe and paddled for the shore, leaving us to gaze
 after him, and laughing probably at the fine trick he had played us.
 this practice was universal; some of the men bought fowls twice, some
 mats, and other articles. we came to the conclusion that the example
 of the rascally beachcombers had not been without its influence upon
 these natives.
 we were now having very good success in whaling, having taken
 about one hundred and fifty barrels since leaving port. on friday,
 february th, we saw whales, and lowered all the boats. each boat
 soon fastened to a separate whale. the one to which the bow boat
 fastened appeared inclined to show fight. after running a short
 distance, he would turn and rush with open jaws for the boat, but
 the crew were rather too quick for him, and would dodge the enraged
 monster. getting tired of this play, he finally sounded. all hands
 were now watching to see where he would “break water,” and at the
 same time hauling in slack line. presently they were all startled by
 the appearance of a huge jaw, well filled with teeth, coming through
 the bottom of the boat. one of the crew, who sat immediately over the
 spot, was thrown into the air in the shape of a spread eagle, and
 came down into the water not hurt, but badly frightened. the boat
 instantly filled, as a large portion of her bottom was gone, treating
 the whole crew to a ducking. the whale, appearing perfectly satisfied
 with what had been done, left for parts unknown, with the ship’s mark
 clinging to him. out of the general conflict we secured two whales,
 which we took alongside, and soon had their jackets off and into
 casks.
 from here we proceeded to pleasant island, and sighted it on
 thursday, february th. the captain struck a bargain with one of the
 chiefs for five thousand old cocoanuts and twenty-five large hogs,
 for which he was to pay in muskets, tobacco, etc. on arriving at
 the ship with the hogs and cocoanuts, they were found to be wanting
 both in quality and quantity. the captain refused to receive them
 unless the chief was willing to receive pay in proportion to what he
 had brought. this the copper-colored rascal refused to do, and
 demanded payment for the whole amount agreed to be furnished; but
 the captain was firm, and distinctly told him and his natives that he
 would pay them for no more than they had brought. at this they became
 greatly enraged, and the captain ordered them to take their property
 and leave. this they refused to do, declaring they would not go until
 they had received pay for every thing they had agreed to bring. we
 now apprehended some disturbance; the natives were getting excited;
 we knew them to be the worst and most sanguinary tribe on the island;
 the captain was becoming angry, and we anticipated quite a little
 time. as they appeared determined not to go, the captain ordered
 hogs, natives, and cocoanuts all pitched overboard, and we commenced
 with the cocoanuts first, throwing them into the water; the hogs
 soon followed, and the natives, anxious to save their property, went
 of their own accord, gladly saving us from a personal encounter, in
 which we felt that we would have fared the worse.
 the next day we spoke the “mohawk,” of nantucket, captain swain. the
 wife of captain s. being with him, and being an old friend of mrs.
 e., our captain’s lady, they enjoyed a very pleasant visit together.
 the “mohawk” was recently from pitcairn’s island, well known as the
 residence of the descendants of the “bounty’s” mutineers. we presume
 that the circumstances of this mutiny may be known to some of our
 readers, but we shall take the liberty of relating it, as related
 to us by one who lived upon the island. in , the “bounty” was
 sent from england to otaheite to procure plants of the bread-fruit
 to introduce into the west indies. after leaving otaheite, the crew,
 or a majority of them, headed by mr. christian, the mate, mutinied.
 they placed the captain, who had the reputation of being a tyrant,
 with some others, in an open
 boat, gave them provisions and water,
 and cast them adrift. the mutineers, after cruising about some time,
 made pitcairn’s island. here they resolved to form a settlement,
 and, proceeding back to otaheite, procured females, whom they took
 with them, and then went on shore, taking all that was valuable
 from the ship. after doing this they burned her. at first they had
 much trouble, and murders were committed; but finally, through the
 influence of one john adams, the remainder became christianized. he
 had taken ashore with him a bible and prayer-book. much attention
 was paid to educating their children in the tenets of the christian
 religion, and before his death mr. a. had the pleasure of seeing the
 colony well established, and the people prosperous and happy. at his
 death he resigned his charge into the hands of one john moffet, an
 enlightened christian man who visited the island, and, being struck
 with the simplicity and religious character of the inhabitants,
 became so favorably impressed that he decided to remain there. “at
 this time,” said our informant, “he lives there, administers the
 simple code of laws framed for their government by mr. adams, and,
 although a very aged man, is the umpire in all disputes, reads
 service every sabbath, and is regarded as a loving father by all.”
 we also learned of the death of mrs. p., wife of captain p., at this
 island. the deceased had resided on nantucket, where she was esteemed
 by all who knew her as one of those kind ministering spirits who
 soothe the distressed, comfort the mourner, and alleviate the wants
 of the poor as far as lies in their power; in short, one of those
 few persons who are universally beloved by all. her health being
 very poor, it was thought a sea-voyage would be beneficial to her;
 accordingly, she accompanied her husband, who was master of a whaler.
 after some months, perceiving the health of his wife to
  be failing,
 he steered for pitcairn’s island. arriving there, she went on shore
 in excellent spirits; and, after remaining some days, captain p.,
 finding that she rapidly regained her health, took an affectionate
 leave for a short cruise. as soon as the excitement connected with
 coming on shore had subsided, she commenced failing again, and in
 a short time her soul took its flight to that better and brighter
 world, where “all is joy, and peace, and love,” to receive the happy
 reward which is promised to those who love god; leaving as a
 legacy the following lines, written while on her death-bed, her form
 racked with pain, but her soul calm and clear as a summer’s morn:
“farewell, my husband; the cold hand of death,
so long extended, now arrests my breath;
i feel the imperious mandate, and comply,
for not to-day have i just learned to die.
my days of suffering and my nights of pain,
i thank my god, have not been sent in vain;
my faith is strong; in jesus i confide—
i know that i shall live, for he hath died.
yes, my dear husband; though this wasted form
must mingle with the dust and feed the worm,
yet when a few short years at most are o’er,
then shall we meet, i trust, to part no more.
then moderate your grief; and though your tears
may fall, as memory calls to mind past years,
yet ever in your breast this hope retain,
‘my transient loss is her eternal gain.’
that you have loved me with unfailing love,
our wedded life most ever loudly prove;
in health or sickness, ever still the same—
to please, to soothe, and comfort, all your aim.
that you will mourn my loss i feel assured,
but let that loss with patience be endured.
and now to god, my father and my friend,
to jesus, on whose merits i depend,
i would commend thee while yet my strength remain—
farewell, beloved, until we meet again.”
 her body was attended to its final resting-place with great
 solemnity. the wild winds chant their mournful requiem over her
 grave, accompanied by the never-ceasing roar of old ocean, as she
 dashes against the rocky shores of this lovely pacific isle.
 we learned farther from the “mohawk” that the natives of covill’s
 island (an island just to the northward of pitt’s island) had taken
 a california schooner, and massacred the passengers and crew. it was
 supposed that there were female passengers on board, as the natives
 were in possession of sundry articles of ladies’ apparel. in trading
 with some vessel, they gave california gold pieces for little or no
 tobacco, showing that they place no intrinsic value upon gold or
 silver. these natives attempted to take the “lion” while she was
 trading there, but did not succeed.
 whenever two whalemen are in company, and whales are raised by either
 ship, the boats from both vessels lower, and all oil thus taken by
 either is shared in common. on monday, march th, while in company
 with the “mohawk,” whales were raised, and down went eight boats
 in hot pursuit, each boat seemingly determined on being first boat
 fast. it was blowing quite fresh at the time, and quite a heavy sea
 running. the waist-boat from our ship was the first one to fasten,
 and no sooner had they done so than the gentleman whale knocked the
 boat into quite a number of pieces, and spilled them out, leaving
 them “lying around loose.” the larboard boat, happening to be near,
 took the line and held on to the whale. one of the “mohawk’s” boats
 picked up the scattered crew of the stove boat, and brought them
 on board. the larboard boat was flying through the water at about
 ten knots, “dead to windward,” against a heavy head sea, which flew
 over and against her bows with uncommon force. she appeared actually
 plowing through it, the water forming a high bank of surf each side.
 the boat soon lost sight of the ship, and they were obliged to cut
 the line and return, the crew completely saturated with salt water
 and exhausted by their labors. during this time the bow boat had
 killed a sixty-barrel whale, which was soon alongside and cut in.
 although ancient and modern historians may abound in descriptions
 of man’s daring by “flood and field,” and the many accidents and
 hairbreadth escapes which accompany his voluntary exposure to a
 multitude of dangers, surely the recital of his doings in the chase
 and capture of that leviathan of the deep, the sperm whale, can be
 second to none in the interest it must excite in every contemplative
 mind. it is not in the field, jungle, or thick forest that these
 hardy adventurers seek their prey, upon man’s natural element, where,
 should any untoward accident occur, assistance of some kind can be
 readily obtained; but on the vast ocean, at times thousands of miles
 distant from any habitable land, where they are not only exposed to
 the dangers which beset them in their adventures with these monsters
 of the deep, but to others still more terrible, in which the dreaded
 typhoon forms no inconsiderable part; or when, near lands distant and
 barbarous, dangerous reefs, sunken rocks, and relentless savages may
 surround them on every side, requiring all the moral and physical
 energy of which our nature is possessed to escape the manifold
 dangers which beset them, but which the whaleman looks upon without
 dread, passing among them in his gallant bark, and bearing off in
 triumph the valuable giant of the ocean.
 even in these latitudes, the equatorial, we often experience heavy,
 and sometimes terrible gales of wind. on wednesday, march th,
 having just cleared our decks from the last “fare of oil,” a heavy
 gale set in from the westward, which continued for four days,
 with scarcely a moment’s interruption. the “mohawk” lost
  some of
 her sails, and had her bow boat swept off the cranes. we lost our
 foretopsail and mainsail, which were literally blown into ribbons.
 the weather was very thick, the rain descending in torrents,
 accompanied with heavy thunder and lightning. on sunday, the th,
 the gale broke, and the clouds lifting, disclosed to our view, but
 a short distance to windward, hall’s island, which we had drifted
 past. the sun, making his appearance once more, gladdened the hearts
 of all, and for the first time in four days we took an observation,
 and found that we were in long. ° ´ e., having been drifted by
 the current from long. ° e., with but ten miles difference in
 latitude, being about two hundred and sixteen miles to the eastward
 of the spot where we took the gale. we very narrowly escaped going
 ashore the previous night, although unconscious of it at the time.
 the weather was very thick, and it would have been impossible to have
 seen land any distance; but, by the safe guidance of an ever-merciful
 providence, the two ships were swept through a passage between knox’s
 and hall’s islands not more than ten or twelve miles in width, and
 dangerous to pass through in broad daylight. the first intimation
 that we were any where in the neighborhood of land was when hall’s
 island broke upon our astonished vision to windward, and then did we
 see the narrow escape we had met with.
 leaving hall’s island astern, with clear and pleasant weather once
 more, the two ships proceeded in company to ocean island, where we
 arrived on monday, march d. each vessel sent a boat on shore,
 and procured about three hundred pumpkins. while on shore, our
 attention was called to an odd figure we saw approaching us, which we
 discovered to be a native fantastically decorated. it proved to be
 a man who had formerly sailed in our ship when the present captain
 was on his first voyage as master of her. he had been to “’merick,”
 where, as he informed us, he procured the suit of clothes which he
 then wore. it consisted of pants which would have buttoned twice
 round him, but about six inches too short; in lieu of suspenders,
 they were held up by a piece of spun-yarn passing over his shoulder,
 and again made fast. his shirt was of calico, of the largest figure
 and most gaudy colors, with a collar that nearly eclipsed his head,
 and a cravat of calico, with colors “to match.” his shoes were
 about fourteen inches in length, and both lefts; his vest, which
 was intended to be white, had probably been made for a boy, as it
 was about a foot too short; his coat of blue broadcloth, with large
 brass buttons, a “swallow-tail” cut, with the waist between his
 shoulders, the sleeves lacking some inches in length, and the collar
 nearly reaching to the top of his head, upon which was a very tall,
 bell-crowned hat, with a very narrow rim. this whole walking machine
 was surmounted by a huge umbrella. it is probable that some yankee
 had given the poor fellow this suit while he was in “’merick,” and
 he appeared to feel very grand and proud, but complained that it
 was very hot. he informed the captain that he had returned to the
 island a rich man, as he had a whole keg of tobacco, besides some
 pipes, beads, calico, etc.; also, his complete suit, of which no
 other native on the island could boast. the king kept very close to
 the great man, wishing to be considered as his nearest friend, and
 took quite a fancy to his dress; but of no use; the native felt his
 superiority over the “niggers,” as he termed them, and scorned even
 the friendship of the king.
 after obtaining a sufficient quantity of pumpkins we returned to the
 ship, and both vessels took their departure for guam, preparatory to
 a season on japan.
 island of rota.—appearance.—streets and
 houses.—inhabitants.—governor.—guam.—umata
 bay.—procuring water.—marisa.—its appearance.—port
 of apia.—fort.—liberty.—a splendid
 ride.—boarding-houses.—police.—reflections.—inhabitants.—choppers.—a
 cowardly murder.—bombardment of the palace.—attend
 mass.—toddy.—streets.—houses.—palace.—calaboose.—cock-fighting.—seminary.—insurrection
 of prisoners.—females.—take a
 stroll.—ruins.—reservoir.—tobacco.—betel nut.—captain
 anderson.—rebellion.—jollification.—a novel mode of choosing
 a governor.—congratulations.—parade.—aguadente.—caroline
 islanders.—last day on shore.—arguing the point.—disarming the
 guard.—“where is my musket?”—visit to the fort.—strange doings.—ready
 for sea.
 with a strong breeze and all sail out, we were not long in reaching
 the ladrone islands. tuesday, april th, at daylight, saw the
 island of rota, bearing west half north, distant thirty miles. in
 the afternoon, in company with a boat from the “mohawk,” we went
 on shore and procured a few hogs, yams, and fruit. this island is
 one of the most magnificent in appearance from the sea that we have
 yet seen. the land is moderately high, and thickly covered with
 evergreen foliage, with an occasional opening, showing the marks of
 cultivation. the town is built on a level spot of ground, with great
 regularity and neatness; the houses are all whitewashed or painted,
 and the streets kept clean. the inhabitants are very courteous and
 friendly, and evince quite a degree of civilization. they have a
 fine-looking church here, roman catholic, of course, which is built
 of stone, and looks much better on the outside than the inside. the
 governor received the captain, dressed in full uniform. he is a tall,
 noble-looking spaniard, but the
 dress appeared as if it were made
 for some more bulky personage; perhaps he wore it ex-officio. one
 of the boys exclaimed, on seeing him, “the old governor’s clothes set
 like a purser’s shirt on a handspike.” his palace, as they term it,
 is a very comfortable-looking stone building, the calaboose adjoining
 it.
 the next morning we were close in to the island of guam. we took a
 pilot and proceeded to umata bay, where we dropped anchor about three
 p.m. umata bay is the watering-place for all whalers who refit at
 guam, as it is the only point on the island where fresh water can be
 readily obtained. it is called a bay, but it is merely a roadstead,
 as ships anchoring here are exposed to the sea in all directions
 except the eastward.
 both ships’ companies were at it next morning rafting water, and made
 the old hills resound to the chorus of the merry song as they bent
 back to the tugging oar.
 we took the opportunity of visiting the town of marisa, situated
 three miles below umata bay, and found a very pretty village. the
 houses are all on one street, which is very long. one peculiarity
 we could not but notice: the street was swept very clean, and we
 observed many spaniards of both sexes engaged in sweeping it,
 probably paying the penalty of breaking some law. the church here is
 a fine edifice, and contains two large bells, which ring out merrily
 for vespers. although the governor has his permanent residence at
 guam, yet he occasionally leaves the “heat and turmoil of city
 life,” and, taking his family for a visit to the “country,” spends
 a week or so in this village, where he has a large palace. after
 rambling around to our entire satisfaction, and spending the day
 very pleasantly, we returned with a fine breeze, the boat fairly
 flying through the water. we felt quite fatigued in consequence of
 our jaunt, but, after a refreshing rest, awoke next morning ready for
 another day’s tramp.
 we improved the day in visiting the town of umata bay, and a short
 ramble in the mountains back. the village differed but little from
 that of marisa: the same long street, swept clean; the same white
 houses; and, were it not for the absence of the palace and the
 difference in the country adjoining, one would almost imagine himself
 in the same village.
 at two p.m. on saturday, april th, we took on board the last of
 five hundred barrels of water, hove up the anchor with a will, and
 steered for the port of apia. we arrived here the next morning,
 where we cast anchor. this is the anchorage, and the only safe one,
 for ships refitting at guam, and is situated seven miles from the
 town or village of guam, which is the capital of the group. the port
 of apia is a fine bay, situated on the west side of the island,
 protected from the sea by a reef running across, with an entrance
 of about half a mile in width. this island, like nearly all in the
 pacific, is surrounded by a coral reef. in the centre of the bay is a
 small island, on which is a fine-looking fort, with five or six guns
 mounted for the protection of the commerce of the island. we found
 several ships lying at anchor here, from some of which we obtained
 quite late news from home.
 it is customary for ships that refit here to allow their men to go on
 shore and remain a week or ten days at a time, as the distance is so
 great—seven miles from town—that one day’s liberty at a time would be
 worth but little. accordingly, on monday, april th, the starboard
 watch were given a week’s liberty, while the other watch remained
 on board to paint ship. on landing, what was our surprise to see a
 large number of cows standing near, and, to our astonishment, we were
 informed that they were there for our accommodation, if we chose. for
 the sum of fifty cents we could enjoy a fine horseback ride on a cow
 “up to town.” as there were
 men from four ships going in company
 (nearly sixty of us), we all entered into the spirit of the affair,
 and each man selected his “horned beast” and mounted.
 and now ensued a scene that beggars description. leather thongs
 were made fast to the horns for the rider to hold on by, and the
 spaniard, who led off on a noble animal, seeing all was ready,
 shouted “arriva!” and away he went on the full run, the others
 following; the men having no saddles, some were rolling from side to
 side, some had seated themselves “wrong-end first,” and all, instead
 of hanging on to the thongs, reach forward, and, grasping the horns,
 hang on like grim death; the cows, with their heads stretched
 forward to the utmost, their bells jingling, each one bellowing and
 snorting, and their riders, instead of sitting upright, stretched
 in a horizontal position, their legs extended, and yelling like so
 many wild indians; the old spaniard shouting and singing in spanish,
 and the whole cavalcade upon the full run—all this produced one of
 the wildest scenes imaginable. as the procession entered the town,
 spaniards of both sexes, men, women, and children, rushed to the
 street, shouting and laughing at the “americanos.” the old spaniard
 kept on, and, after having made the circuit of the town, brought up
 at the “grand plaza” in front of the governor’s palace, the poor
 riders being almost insensible from the continual and deafening din
 that surrounded them.
 they halted here, and all hands joyfully dismounted; the spaniards
 crowded around to congratulate them on their good riding, but,
 paying no attention to them, they “vamosed” in search of a
 boarding-house. by the laws of the island, every white man or
 foreigner must have a boarding-house, and be within doors at eight
 p.m. this is necessary, that good order may be preserved in the
 night-time, and tends to prevent many disgraceful scenes that would
 otherwise occur.
 the police here are very vigilant. every person who keeps a
 boarding-house is compelled to report the names of his boarders,
 and about eight p.m. the captain of the police goes around to see
 if all are in. if any are absent from their respective houses, they
 are found and marched home; and should they be saucy, or show any
 belligerent spirit, off they go to the calaboose. this also tends to
 prevent desertions, as the governor allows no white man to remain on
 the island unless sick. there are a few old residents here who are
 exceptions, they being citizens.
 loving an early morning walk, five a.m. the next day after our
 arrival on shore found us “up and dressed,” and out. it was truly a
 lovely morning, the sun shining brightly, birds singing sweetly, and
 the church bells ringing merrily. as we walked along the banks of
 a quiet stream, how did these sounds bring up in our minds similar
 scenes at home—our own peaceful stream, the feathery songsters,
 and the old church bells. but the roar of the surf dashing over
 the breakers reminded us that many, many miles of “deep blue sea”
 separated us from our homes, and that many days must pass ere we
 could again live over those happy days, and our present musings be
 realized.
 the inhabitants of this island are of the malay race, intermixed with
 the spaniards. they are generally very kind and hospitable to the
 stranger, often inviting him to their houses, and setting before him
 refreshments, fruits, etc.; but if offended, they are revengeful to
 a sanguinary degree. many of them carry short, thick swords, called
 “choppers,” by their sides, which they use for clearing their small
 farms and other purposes. with these choppers they frequently commit
 horrible outrages, inflicting, in the heat of passion, terrible
 wounds upon each other, or upon any one who may chance to give them
 cause for affront, fancied or real.
 it was at this island that captain stevens, master of an english
 whaler, was murdered a few years since, in a cowardly and brutal
 manner. he was set upon by a gang of desperadoes, under direction
 of the then governor, with whom captain s. had had some difficulty.
 the miscreants stole into his room and took his pistols, which were
 lying on the table, and, on going out to ascertain who had committed
 the theft, he was attacked and fairly cut to pieces, the wretches
 not desisting until they had murdered him. it is reported that the
 governor was punished by his own government and removed from the
 island.
 an amusing incident occurred a few years ago, illustrating the
 bravery of the governor and the army. the master of an american
 whaler, being ready for sea, and some of his men being imprisoned
 in the calaboose for some trifling breach of the laws, went to the
 governor and demanded his men, stating that he was ready for sea, and
 should sail at four p.m. his excellency replied that he could not
 have them unless he paid the fine imposed, which was a very large
 amount. the captain, thinking, from the large amount imposed for so
 slight a breach committed, it a mere plan to extort money from him,
 replied that he would pay no money to the governor, whereupon the
 latter replied that “he could not have his men.” the captain took his
 leave, saying that if the men were not on board at four p.m., he,
 the governor, must suffer the consequences. he now proceeded to his
 ship, weighed anchor, left the harbor, and at four p.m. was opposite
 the town. when within about a quarter of a mile of the shore, and
 directly opposite the palace, he hauled aback his main-yard, ran up
 the stars and stripes, and commenced to bombard the palace with one
 six-pounder, which was all the cannon he had on board. almost within
 range of the palace, and situated at the water’s edge, was a stone
 fort with several
 guns mounted. the brave commander did not see fit
 to return the fire, when he might have blown the ship to atoms. after
 half a dozen shots had been fired, a flag of truce was seen on the
 fort. he ceased firing, and a boat was soon seen approaching the ship
 containing his men and a file of soldiers, the commandant of whom
 gave him the compliments of the governor, who, he said, had sent his
 men, and requested him to cease firing, as one shot had taken effect
 in the palace, and actually lodged in his private room. the captain
 took his men and departed. the governor still preserves the ball,
 and frequently exhibits it to visitors as the one the yankee skipper
 fired at him.
 we had received an invitation to attend mass with some of our
 spanish friends, and, arousing ourselves at four a.m. on wednesday,
 april th, we proceeded to the church. it is a fine-looking stone
 building, very large and massive, with a chime of bells in its tower.
 on entering, we found it well lighted, and filled with spaniards of
 both sexes. it is beautifully furnished inside, many of the ornaments
 and holy vessels being of gold and silver. the services were solemn
 and impressive, and, although they worshiped in a different manner
 from us, yet we could not but feel a devotional sentiment within
 us as we listened to the beautiful chant, and witnessed the devout
 worshipers at their devotions. it seemed to bring us nearer to the
 land of christianity, accustomed as we had been, for months past, to
 attend no place of public worship.
 on arriving at our boarding-house after mass, we found some delicious
 “toddy” awaiting us. this, when fresh from the tree, is a palatable
 and pleasant drink, and is highly beneficial to a person coming
 ashore after a long cruise on salt water, and living mostly on salt
 provisions. it is procured by a person called a “toddy-cutter,” who
 ascends to the top of a cocoanut-tree in the
  shade of the evening,
 and cuts a number of notches at the root of one of the limbs, hanging
 a long piece of bamboo underneath, which in the morning is found
 filled with the delicious beverage. after collecting his several
 bamboo vessels, he proceeds to distribute them at the different
 boarding-houses, supplying all who may wish with this excellent
 beverage. it is needless to say that the “toddy-cutter” was very
 liberally patronized while so many seamen were on shore. there are no
 intoxicating qualities in the toddy, no more than in a glass of soda
 or lemonade.
 the streets of guam are very wide and straight, and are kept clean.
 the houses are built compactly of wood and stone; those built of
 wood, which comprise the greater number, are elevated on frame-work
 and posts four or five feet above the ground. they are mostly of one
 story, painted white, and are neat and orderly in appearance. the
 stone houses are built in a substantial manner, and look very solid
 and comfortable. the governor’s palace is a long stone building of
 two stories, with nothing remarkable about it to indicate it as the
 palace of the governor of the great island of guam. the west end
 of it joins the calaboose, which is a solid stone building of one
 story, and they are both guarded by sentries. immediately in front of
 both buildings is the “grand plaza,” in the centre of which is the
 cock-pit.
 the inhabitants here delight in the cruel exhibition of
 cock-fighting, and manifest great interest in the combats. not being
 satisfied with seeing these noble fowls destroy each other with the
 weapons which nature has given them, they place on them steel spurs
 shaped similar to a scythe, which are made very sharp. armed with
 these destructive weapons, the contest is soon decided, as the first
 blow frequently kills the unlucky bird. these exhibitions always take
 place on the sabbath, as that is their grand gala day. at the time
 appointed
 the arena is opened, a ring made, and no person allowed
 inside the rope but the judges and owners of the cocks. the space
 around is completely thronged with old, middle-aged and young men,
 who enter into this cruel sport with the greatest animation. even
 the governor is always present, witnessing the combats, and betting
 as freely as any one. the fowls are large, noble-looking animals,
 of the malay breed, and upon two being brought into the ring, the
 betting commences with great excitement, from a rial to a dollar,
 and more, according to the wealth of the parties. one spaniard holds
 up his finger, and shouts out the name of the fowl he chooses to bet
 on; another, seeing him, raises his in the same manner, and names
 his favorite; and so on around the ring. the signal is given, and
 the cocks, being let loose, fly at each other, and, as we before
 remarked, the combat is soon terminated. those who have lost now
 pay over the stakes, and two more fowls are entered. this continues
 through the greater portion of the afternoon, and it is surprising to
 see the large quantity of noble-looking fowls slain.
 on the east side of the plaza is a fine-looking stone building used
 as a seminary, which is supported by the church, for the purpose of
 educating those who can not afford to attend private schools, and of
 protecting and educating the orphan. this institution is the pride of
 the island, and may well be considered as such, for it is productive
 of great and lasting benefit. the scholars manifest much interest in
 their studies, and their behavior and accomplishments would compare
 favorably with many similar institutions in our own land, where the
 opportunities of a good education are so general.
 a few months since the prisoners confined in the calaboose, about one
 hundred in number, attempted to take the palace. their plans were all
 laid; a part were to attack in front, the remainder in the rear. the
 object
 was to obtain possession of the arms and ammunition contained
 in the palace, and then to make an attempt to capture the island.
 the plot was discovered, however, just in time to frustrate it; and,
 after some severe fighting, during which about twenty-five were
 killed, the remainder were secured, and sent to manilla for trial,
 and were there hung.
 while walking through the town one evening, we heard the sound of
 music issuing from a building near by. on presenting ourselves at the
 door, we were invited in, and found the room filled with females,
 with but one or two exceptions. it was the hour of vespers. at one
 end of the room was the image of the virgin mary and the crucifixion.
 those chanting were on their knees, with their hands crossed on
 their breasts, the very picture of humility and meekness. as their
 sweet voices mingled in the beautiful chant of “ave, sanctissima,”
 we could not but be struck with the solemnity and sublimity of the
 scene. if woman be all she is represented to be, lively, charming,
 and angelic, she is certainly more than this when engaged in offering
 devotion to almighty god, and imploring the aid of the
 divine savior. the females of guam are remarkably fair-looking:
 keen black eyes, long, flowing black hair, smooth complexion, and
 possessed of a robust and well-rounded form; their step light and
 elastic, and very graceful in their movements. one of these dark-eyed
 beauties in the attitude of prayer, her hands beseechingly clasped,
 her loose hair flowing luxuriantly around her well-rounded shoulders,
 and her countenance expressive of meekness and innocence, would form
 a model for the chisel of a powers.
 after vespers we passed a very pleasant evening with these lively,
 chatting beauties, from whom we learned much of interest in regard to
 the island; and we must confess to a slight feeling of regret when we
 heard the
 bells peal forth the hour of eight, compelling us to say
 to them “adios.”
 the next day we had planned for a stroll in the country round, and
 before  a.m. were on our way, with two spanish lads about eighteen
 years of age as guides. we passed several farms on our route, and,
 from appearances, we should judge the occupants to be well skilled in
 agriculture. about five miles northeast of the town we came to the
 ruins of a large stone building, which, our guides informed us, were
 the remains of a monastery, and built, as they said, “very many year
 ago.” on examining an arch or gateway, we found the keystone marked
 . the stones appeared regularly hewn and well fitted. it would
 seem from this that the art of masonry was understood here more than
 two hundred years ago, as this building must have been erected under
 the supervision of a master mason, well-skilled in the use of the
 square, level, plumb, and trowel.
 near this pile of ruins is a large stone reservoir, about thirty
 feet in length, twenty-five in width, and thirty to forty in depth.
 at this time it had about three feet depth of water in it. this
 reservoir was probably built at the same time as the monastery, as
 our guide said, on asking him when it was built, “tiempo casa dios”
 (at the time of the building of the house of god).
 after walking some distance farther, nothing of interest presenting
 itself, we set out on our return. when within about one mile of town,
 we noticed several large sheds filled with tobacco, which is grown
 here in large quantities. the inhabitants, however, do not understand
 manufacturing it otherwise than into cigars. all smoke here—men,
 women, and children; and we must confess that it detracts somewhat
 from the beauty of a young lady to see her promenading the street
 with a huge cigar in her mouth, puffing away most lustily; but this
 spectacle is so common here that one soon becomes accustomed to it.
 the betel-nut is chewed by “all hands,” giving a reddish cast to the
 teeth, of which they all seem very proud. the young ladrone beauty
 prides herself as much on the bright-red appearance of her teeth as
 the american ladies do on the pearly whiteness of theirs.
 on arriving at our boarding-house we found ourselves covered with
 mud, and possessed of alarming appetites. it is useless to add that
 we did ample justice to the fine dish of curried chickens, with all
 the “fixins to match,” which was set before us.
 not forgetting our old friend, captain anderson, we called upon him
 next day, friday, april th, and learned some very interesting and
 amusing facts connected with the history of the island, one of which
 we will relate as he gave it to us: some years ago captain a. and
 a few more english residents contrived a plan to make themselves
 possessors of the island. they secretly worked, step by step, at
 the same time insinuating themselves into the good graces of the
 governor. their plans worked to a charm, and, when they were fully
 matured, they quietly took possession of the palace, the governor
 having been made, as captain. a. expressed it, “as drunk as a boiled
 owl.” as they now had possession of all the arms and ammunition, it
 was an easy matter to subdue the natives, which they did in short
 order, without loss of life on either side, covering themselves with
 glory. as a matter of course, the new lords and masters must have a
 glorious jollification over the affair, and at the same time agree on
 a governor. this latter, however, proved no easy task, as all were
 equally anxious to “serve their country” in being chief dignitary of
 the island. after consulting and debating some hours, and finding
 they were no nearer a decision than at first, they decided to have
 a spree, and whoever should remain sober the longest, and see the
 others all laid out, should be the honorable governor. accordingly,
 at it
 they went; bottle after bottle disappeared; one by one they
 voluntarily relinquished their seats and quietly rolled under the
 table. after a short time no one remained in his seat but captain
 a., and he, feeling elated at his success, drank a few bumpers to
 “captain anderson, the future governor of the distinguished island
 of guam.” but, as he said, “he was born under an unlucky star.” so
 it proved, as the bumpers he drank to his own good health keeled him
 over, and he took his place among his comrades.
 the spaniards, who had been watching these proceedings with no small
 degree of interest, seeing how matters stood, and the would-be
 governors gloriously drunk, very adroitly bound them hand and foot.
 the dethroned governor was, of course, immediately reinstated, and
 the next day these noble spirits were arraigned for trial. being
 convicted of treason, they were sentenced to be placed on a raft,
 taken out to sea, and then cast loose, leaving them at the mercy of
 the winds and waves. this was accordingly done; and, after drifting
 about several days, they were safely landed on the island of tinian
 (one of the group.) here they resided some time; finally, expressing
 their sorrow for what they had done, the governor pardoned them,
 and permitted them to make guam their future residence, on swearing
 allegiance to the government and promising to be true and loyal
 citizens.
 the week was now closed which had been given to one watch from each
 ship for liberty. accordingly, they returned to their respective
 ships, and the other watches came on shore—about the same number of
 men. they arrived in due form and procession; and, as we could now
 look on and witness the performance, we enjoyed the scene with a
 hearty good-will. as soon as they dismounted, we were among the first
 to offer our congratulations on their grand and imposing entrée.
 how natural for men, on finding themselves taken in and done for, to
 watch and enjoy seeing others victimized. thus it was in this case;
 all would speak highly of their merry ride, particularly when in the
 presence of the uninitiated.
 as we before remarked, sunday is the grand gala day of the
 inhabitants here. among other things, we witnessed a parade
 and review of the army stationed here by the governor,
 numbering, officers, high privates and all, twenty-five. they
 do duty as policemen as well as soldiers. they were not a very
 formidable-looking body of men; some were dressed in white, and some
 in blue, with fancifully decorated cloth caps. a portion of them
 were armed with muskets, the remainder with spears. however, they
 performed their evolutions very well, although we do not believe
 their commander ever studied scott’s tactics.
 at the close of the morning service every one appeared preparing for
 the afternoon sports. at an early hour the space around the cock-pit
 was crowded with young and old, anxiously awaiting the sport, as they
 term it, to commence. at two o’clock the fighting began between two
 noble-looking fowls. the betting ran high, but the battle was soon
 decided by one of the cocks receiving a home-thrust that pierced his
 heart. the fighting now continued in this manner until about thirty
 were slain. in the evening nearly every house was thrown open to
 receive calls from “americanos” and others, who were entertained with
 music and refreshments.
 a kind of liquor called “aguadente” is distilled here, very
 intoxicating in its qualities, yet the effects are not as bad as are
 those of the poisonous liquors sold in this country. we expected to
 see the “americanos” nearly all drunk on this day, as we knew it
 would circulate pretty freely; but to their credit be it said, not
 one of
 them became intoxicated. they all seemed to shun it, whether
 it was because it was the sabbath, or for what reason we know not,
 but “all hands” continued sober through the day.
 the following morning, on strolling along the beach, we found several
 “caroline island” canoes had arrived during the night. these canoes
 are about forty feet in length and six feet beam, quite deep, and
 will carry from fifteen to twenty tons. they are provided with an
 extensive outrigger to prevent their capsizing, and carry a large
 mat sail. when under full sail in a strong breeze, being very sharp
 in their construction, they skim along over the water with amazing
 velocity. the natives are large, robust fellows, with no clothing
 but the tappa, or a fine mat worn across the shoulders in the
 form of a scarf. each canoe carries one family, and they appear to
 live in a very peaceable and happy manner on board their diminutive
 craft. their island homes are about four degrees to the southward.
 on inquiring of them through a spaniard, as interpreter, how they
 found the island, they replied, pointing upward, “stars by night, sun
 by day.” their cargo consists of hats, mats, and shells. in return,
 they take tobacco, pipes, calico, and aguadente. these canoes ply
 regularly between the caroline islands and guam.
 the time had now come for all hands to return on board. another week
 had flown, and we must leave the land for the water again. but the
 boys wished to have a “grand time” before leaving, and the last day
 each one appeared to be determined to make the most of. long manuel,
 our portugee, appeared very much troubled by the width of the
 various streets he was attempting to explore, while our kanakas were
 singing their native songs with considerable mirth and high-larity.
 in the evening they all assembled for a dance at one boarding-house
 at an early hour. they had secured
 the services of four spaniards
 as fiddlers, and on their arrival at it they went. eight o’clock
 came, and with it also came the chief of police, ordering them to
 cease dancing, stop their noise, and disperse. on hearing this, tom
 w., the ship’s wag, who had “imbibed” pretty freely, proceeded to
 “argue the point” with the policeman, who could understand but little
 english. he continued to lay it down in a very emphatic manner,
 using language that seemed to completely nonplus the spaniard, who
 would occasionally refer to the boarding-house landlord, and inquire
 what the man was talking so earnestly about. the landlord, who well
 understood what was up, replied that tom was praising the island and
 their rules and regulations. this the spaniard believed, as tom would
 occasionally introduce into his speech the words “bueno espaniolo”
 (excellent spaniards), and end it by inviting him to drink. this part
 the policeman could understand without any difficulty, and, after
 having drunk several times, he became as merry as the rest, and,
 finding he could do nothing with them, departed.
 in a short time a file of soldiers made their appearance. the
 sergeant, who could neither speak english nor understand it, informed
 the landlord that he must disperse the sailors and shut up his house.
 the landlord, however, shut the door in his face, and told tom what
 was going on, who, instantly seizing a bottle, ran out and offered it
 to the officer; but of no avail; he was not to be bribed in so easy a
 manner. tom now turned his attention to the soldiers, and passed the
 bottle so freely among them that the sergeant ordered them to cease
 drinking. however, another bottle was soon produced, and a more merry
 lot of soldiers was never seen. in vain the officer endeavored to put
 a stop to the proceedings; they were now all in the house, and had
 entered into the spirit of the evening; and while all hands,
  sailors
 and soldiers, were dancing, tom very carefully took all their muskets
 and hid them in a quiet place.
 thus matters moved along, the noise and fun increasing, until
 the hour of twelve, at which time the guard were to return to
 head-quarters, make their report, and be relieved. as the bell tolled
 forth the hour, they seemed to regain possession of their senses;
 visions of the guard-house floated across their minds, and they well
 knew it was their doom unless they immediately departed. but now
 all was confusion: “where is my musket?” was the general cry; but
 no muskets were to be found. they raved and swore, but all to no
 purpose; no one could tell what had become of them. on hearing the
 sound of the first relief bell, they rushed for the door pell-mell,
 and found their officer had already taken his departure. they waited
 no longer, but ran down the streets at full speed. as soon as
 they were out of sight, tom took the muskets, carried them to the
 river, and, wading to a considerable depth, safely deposited the
 “government arms,” and then returned to the house, where the dance
 was kept up without farther interruption.
 the next morning all hands took leave of the goodly city of guam, and
 returned to their respective ships.
 one evening before our departure a delegation from each ship in port
 visited the fort near the anchorage. we found it a solid piece of
 masonry, mounting six guns of eighteen pounds calibre. it is entirely
 surrounded by water, and guarded by a few soldiers. about  a.m. the
 several delegations returned, and at daylight a small army was seen
 approaching. wondering what could be the cause of this, we were all
 on the qui vive for news. we soon learned that they had come to
 retake the fort! it appears that the whalemen had gone for a lark,
 and had driven the soldiers ashore from the fort, taken possession
 of it, unshipped the guns, and turned
 things around to their own
 liking—spilling things generally. the conquering army approached
 the premises very cautiously, and, after considerable manœuvring,
 entered, but found the premises vacant, thus obtaining a great and
 bloodless victory. no doubt they considered it a great achievement,
 and had it proclaimed as such among their countrymen.
 every thing being now “shipshape and bristol fashion,” we took our
 departure for the japan ground, determined to give battle to the
 sperm whale this season as we had never before done, knowing that
 every whale that we now captured shortened our voyage materially.
 bailey’s island.—turtle.—whaling.—ship “james allen.”—water-spouts.—a
 heavy gale.—monotony.—a swimming adventure.—ship “atkins
 adams.”—spanish jack again.—tow-line tea.—captain’s stump
 speech.—a large whale.—bark “antelope.”—strange incident.—passage
 to the group.—pitt’s island.—bark “smyrna.”—a rummy set.—ship
 “susan.”—fearful tragedy.—passage to strong’s island.—ship
 “atlantic.”—ship “charles w. morgan.”—“at home” once more.—rev.
 mr. snow.—characteristic meanness.—rotumah dance.—feast and
 dance.—sickness of mr. l.—divine service on board.—new zealand
 native.—farewell to strong’s island.
 nothing of interest transpired on the passage, unless we may speak
 of continued boisterous weather, until wednesday, may th, when we
 sighted bailey’s island, one of the bonin group. here we sent a boat
 on shore, and procured a load of sweet potatoes, watermelons, green
 corn, etc., and about twenty large turtle, which abound here in great
 numbers. we need not say that “turtle soup” soon became no luxury
 with us.
 we cruised around these islands about a month, taking two large
 whales in the mean time, which cheered us considerably, although we
 were far from doing as well as we had expected. the usual course of
 japan whalemen is to cruise in the vicinity of the bonin islands
 during the month of may and the early part of june, and then work
 gradually to the eastward until the close of the season in september,
 when they are compelled to leave from the severity of the weather.
 on wednesday, june d, we saw another whaleman from “yankee land,”
 the “james allen,” captain newcomb, of new bedford. he bore down to
 us with the ever-beautiful “stars and stripes” waving proudly from
 the mizzen-peak, and passed our stern in gallant style. we had a
 very interesting gam with them, although hard at work putting the
 dollars in our ship’s hold in the shape of sperm oil.
 the next day we saw several large water-spouts, which are very common
 in these latitudes. they passed some distance from us, and we were
 very careful to give them a wide berth, as several ships had lately
 suffered from them, having their spars and rigging severely injured.
 these latitudes are also very often visited by fearful hurricanes,
 called “typhoons.” on the th of june we experienced the “tail-end”
 of one, as seamen call it. as we had received warning from the
 barometer, sail was taken in, and every thing secured in a
 substantial manner. the violence of the wind seemed to sweep every
 thing before it, forcing the old ship almost on her beam ends. the
 sea appeared like moving mountains; occasionally it would dash
 against her sides, giving her a shock that would cause her to tremble
 in every part. the heavy and labored rolling of the ship—the creaking
 of the timbers—the wind shrieking through the rigging—clouds of
 spray flying with almost the rapidity of lightning—clashing of the
 backstays—dashing of the waves, intermingled with the hoarse shouting
 of the sailors, made night hideous, and rendered the scene altogether
 indescribable. all longed for morning, and when daylight appeared
 a most awful yet grand sight presented itself. the gale was still
 howling in all its fury; a lull for a few moments would ensue, then
 heavy and sudden blasts would follow in quick succession, striking
 the ship with such force as to make every plank in her shake and
 tremble. she would plunge headlong into an immense abyss, and then
 rise rapidly to the top of a mountain wave, showing a fearful chasm
 on either side, which threatened to ingulf her and finish the scene.
 every thing conspired to render our situation an awful one; and yet
 it was a grand, glorious sight. at noon the gale broke, and its fury
 soon abated, leaving us once more with pleasant weather.
 we recollect reading, during our wanderings, in a newspaper which we
 procured from the states, in some ship, a letter written by some
 european tourist, in which he complained sadly of the “monotony of a
 voyage across the atlantic,” which occupied ten long weary days. we
 thought, at the time, we would like very much to have the writer take
 one cruise in a whaler of seven or eight months, where he would
 see nothing but blue water for six of those months. we hardly think
 he would complain of the “monotony of a voyage across the atlantic”
 again. we were now cruising where, day after day, week after week,
 nothing but blue water was visible around us; the same dull round of
 duties; not even a brother whaleman hove in sight with whom we could
 enjoy a friendly gam. to add to all this, we could see no whales;
 the captain and all hands were getting discouraged, and feared we
 should have to leave the ground in september with but little more oil
 than when we came upon it. at last the captain appeared to wake up,
 and offered a bounty of twenty dollars to the man who should first
 raise a whale.
 at length a laughable incident occurred, which served to enliven our
 dull life somewhat, and keep us from sinking entirely into a state
 of nonentity. several of the crew, one calm day, were out on the
 jib-boom, endeavoring to hook some fish which were around the ship
 in great numbers, that they might indulge in the luxury of a mess
 of fresh fish for dinner. one of the number, in hauling up a large
 albicore, lost his hat overboard. spanish jack being on deck, sang
 out,
“what you give me get your hat?”
“two heads of tobacco,” shouted the man.
 in a moment jack was overboard, and in a few seconds had the hat.
 placing it on his head, he started for the ship. although it was
 nearly calm, yet the ship was going slowly through the water, and the
 breeze happened to be freshening. at every stroke jack would make
 he would lose the hat off, and, stopping to pick it up, he found he
 was losing ground. he now tried a new experiment—throwing it ahead
 of him, and then swimming to it; then throwing it again, and so on;
 but even this would not work, as every time he would throw the hat
 he would go under himself, and come up snorting and blowing like
 a porpoise. the darkey now began to be frightened. he was all the
 time losing ground; the ship was leaving him astern; and the captain
 finally sang out to him, “never mind the hat; come aboard!” but to
 no purpose; jack stuck to the hat, fearing he should lose the reward
 if he did not get it. at last, however, after repeated threats from
 the captain, he was under the necessity of abandoning it, and struck
 out boldly for the ship, shouting, “santa maria! santa maria! madre
 de dios!” at every stroke. a rope was thrown him, but he was so
 exhausted he could not hold fast of it; finally one of the ship’s
 company went down the side and made it fast round his body. jack was
 now hauled in on deck more frightened than hurt, and as pale as
 possible for a darkey to be. on recovering so as to speak, his first
 words were for the promised reward of tobacco, which were given him,
 although he had not recovered the hat. all hands had a hearty laugh
 over this incident, and it seemed to infuse new spirits into every
 one.
 thursday, july th, we spoke the ship “atkins adams,” a vessel that
 left guam in company with us. she had taken but forty barrels since
 coming upon the ground.
 at length, on saturday, july th, at daylight, was
  once more heard
 the welcome cry, “t-h-e-r-e she b-l-o-w-s!” in the shortest possible
 space of time four boats were down and gave chase. the boat-steerer
 of the waist-boat darted and missed his aim. this “gallied” the
 whale, and off he went at railroad speed, the boats returning to
 the ship. about nine a.m., however, the chase was renewed, and, by
 skillful management, the bow-boat fastened both irons solid. as the
 whale was sounding, spanish jack, who was one of the crew, from
 some unknown cause became badly frightened, and managed to throw
 his paddle into the line-tub. of course the line, which was running
 out with great rapidity, became foul, and carried the paddle to the
 loggerhead, which frightened jack still more, and his next move was
 to jump into the tub himself. the boat-steerer, seeing how matters
 stood, as quick as thought seized the boat-hatchet and cut the line,
 which alone saved jack and all hands from certain death. away went
 the whale; and, after reflecting upon their situation a moment,
 the crew commenced berating poor jack for his carelessness in thus
 endangering his and their lives, and losing them the whale. as all
 hopes of capturing him were now at an end, the boats returned to the
 ship.
 on learning the particulars, the captain administered to jack a
 slight dose of tow-line tea to prevent any serious consequences
 arising from his late carelessness. he did not relish the medicine
 much, but was obliged to take it, nevertheless. it was really
 provoking; we had been cruising so long without seeing whales, and
 when we did see them under such favorable circumstances, to lose them
 from such carelessness was not only provoking, but discouraging.
 the old man, after giving jack his medicine, proceeded to make a
 stump speech to all hands, to the effect that “they were now some
 thirty-three months from home, with only about seven hundred
 barrels of oil; that the voyage was rapidly drawing to a close; it
 would soon be time for the ‘emily morgan’ to be ‘homeward-bound;’
 yet, if they went on at this rate, what would they go home with? a
 broken voyage; nothing coming to them, and their time worse than
 thrown away. he hoped the crew would wake up and take some interest
 in the voyage. if they were only determined to succeed, succeed they
 would, and they would soon be in ‘yankee land’ with a good voyage.”
 at the close of this speech three hearty cheers were given; the men
 went forward in excellent spirits, threatening the sperm whales on
 japan with complete annihilation.
 an opportunity soon presented itself; and proved they were in
 earnest. on tuesday, july th, we raised a “lone” whale, and in less
 than an hour from the time he was first seen he was lying alongside
 the ship, dead. on cutting him in, we found him an old veteran
 covered with scars, and two harpoons in him marked “s. m. n.” by
 this we knew he had been struck by the “milton,” who was cruising on
 the ground. the following day, while cutting in the whale, a sail
 hove in sight to windward. some hints were thrown out by the captain
 that this was the “milton;” on hearing which, “all hands” struck up
 a lively tune, and the windlass went round cheerily; blanket-piece
 after blanket-piece came in on deck, and, just as the last piece
 swung in clear of the plankshire, the stranger rounded our stern.
 instead of the “milton” she proved to be the “antelope,” of newport,
 captain potter. had it been the former vessel, and any part of the
 whale remaining in the water, the self-constituted laws of whalemen
 would have compelled us to have given up the whole of the whale,
 and this accounted for the hurry we were in to secure the fish ere
 the stranger came down to us. the result
  proved our fears to be
 groundless; nevertheless, the blubber was all on deck, and no one
 regretted it.
 a few days after this we again spoke the “atkins adams,” and found
 that she was about leaving the ground. on inquiring the cause of this
 resolve, captain fish said “that he had seen whales but twice since
 he had been on the ground, and both times they had steam-engines
 inside them, and were going like lightning, bound for the ‘emily
 morgan.’” our skipper encouraged him to remain a while longer,
 telling him what success we had had, and that the best of the season
 was yet to come. the following morning, while in company with them,
 we raised a whale off our lee beam which had the appearance of having
 been wounded. seeing us manœuvring, they ran down, but before they
 reached us we had a dead whale alongside. without exchanging a word
 with us, they continued on their course to the southward, no doubt
 disheartened, and determined to try their luck elsewhere.
 we must now mention a very strange incident, and one that but very
 seldom occurs among whalemen. on cutting in this whale, we found
 two irons in it marked “s. e. m.” it being our own ship’s mark, and
 the irons belonging to the bow-boat, and recognized as such by all
 hands, proved conclusively that it was the same whale which had got
 our friend jack into a scrape, and which we had lost nineteen days
 previous, and about  miles to the westward of where we were then
 cruising.
 such instances are very rare. the only one we ever heard was that of
 the ship “john and edward.” while on her outward-bound passage in the
 atlantic she struck a large sperm whale, and was compelled to cut
 from him. she was absent three years, and on her home passage, off
 the coast of peru, in the pacific, captured the same whale. the irons
 had a peculiar mark, such
 as no other ship carried, and from this
 they knew the whale. nothing but the head of the harpoon and about a
 foot of the shank remained, the other part having rusted off. this
 proves conclusively that sperm whales do migrate from one ocean to
 the other via cape horn, notwithstanding several learned authors
 have asserted to the contrary.
 on the th of september we pointed the ship’s head to the southward
 with cheerful hearts. this was the best cruise we had yet made,
 having taken about four hundred barrels of oil. the next season on
 japan was to be our last; from thence we were “homeward-bound.”
 although it was a long time ahead, yet we felt that every day made it
 one the less, and every mile of blue water plowed was one the less.
 just before reaching the group we lowered and captured a twenty-five
 barrel whale: this helped to cheer us along our way very much.
 monday, october th, we made pitt’s island; sent a boat ashore,
 and found the bark “s.,” of new bedford, at anchor. the crew of
 this vessel, including the captain and officers, with ten or twelve
 beachcombers, were engaged in making cocoanut rum, and all hands,
 natives included, were as drunk as rum could make them.
 the following day we spoke the “susan,” of nantucket, captain smith.
 from this vessel we learned that during the past season a fearful
 tragedy had been enacted at the group. twenty-five beachcombers
 residing on henderville’s and woodell’s islands, which are separated
 by a channel of only a few miles, were murdered by the natives. it
 appears, from what we could learn, that they had some difficulty with
 the natives—attempting to do as they pleased—threatening to take the
 islands, etc. they had also succeeded in effecting a division among
 the natives, one party espousing their cause, the other opposed to
 them. some of the more cunning,
 however, saw through the whole
 plot, and called a private council of both parties. after much
 deliberation, it was resolved to put to death all the white men,
 which was accordingly done. this removed the cause of their quarrels,
 and they lived at peace again.
 we were now steering for strong’s island, with fine breezes,
 beautiful weather, and cheerful hearts. sunday, october th, we
 spoke the “atlantic,” of nantucket, captain coleman.
 at daylight on tuesday, the th, we were within a few miles of the
 land. saw a ship coming out, which proved to be the “charles w.
 morgan,” of new bedford, captain sampson, bound home. paper, pens,
 and ink were now in great demand, and, as we wrote a few lines to the
 dear ones at home, the thought that in one year more we too would
 be “homeward-bound,” cheered us, and caused us to fancy almost that
 the time had arrived. but no, not yet could we sing “huzza, we’re
 homeward bound!”
 at noon we came to anchor in our old resting-place. all hands
 hastened ashore to see our old friends and exchange greetings. we
 received a hearty welcome from zegrah and his wife, who remarked to
 us that we all belonged to strong’s island, we had been there so
 much. we learned that rev. mr. snow, an american missionary, with
 his wife, had taken up his residence here; also that captain hussey
 had left the island as master of the whaling brig “wm. penn,” of san
 francisco.
 on visiting among the natives, we discovered a feeling of antipathy
 to mr. snow had arisen among them. we soon ascertained the cause
 to be what we had at first anticipated. a miserable beachcomber
 had been telling them that “if the king allowed the missionary to
 remain, in a short time he would become possessor of the island; that
 they would have to give every thing
 they obtained to him,” etc. we
 were surprised that such reports should be so circulated among the
 natives, as not the least cause had arisen for them, and could only
 account for it from the fact that it was characteristic of the class.
 what made the matter still worse was that, when mr. snow came to the
 island, he found this fellow friendless and homeless; his means of
 subsistence all gone, and begging from house to house. taking pity
 upon him, he invited him to take up his abode at his house. here he
 found excellent fare, and nothing to do but to eat, drink, and sleep;
 and, although mr. s. was very much occupied in making improvements
 upon his dwelling and land attached, yet he was the last one to offer
 him any assistance, but, on the contrary, was repaying his kindness
 by endeavoring to prejudice the natives against him.
 several natives from the island of rotumah were residing on strong’s
 island at this time. we attended one of their dances, given by them
 in honor of our ship’s company. their singing and dancing excelled
 any thing of the kind we had yet witnessed. they moved in exact time
 with the music, and went through the exercises with great precision.
 during all their dances they use the musket, which they handle with
 the greatest expertness. the war-dance, in particular, was one of
 wild and thrilling movements; their hair long, and standing in
 all directions from their head, even to the perpendicular; their
 bodies tattooed and besmeared with cocoanut oil, with nothing but a
 tappa about the loins and a musket by the side, they looked really
 frightful and war-like. the dance is performed by forming in two
 lines, and as they sing they perform their evolutions of advancing,
 discovering and attacking the enemy, wheeling to load their pieces,
 fronting again, the front rank dropping upon one knee to allow those
 in the rear to fire over them, while both lines fire in the direction
 of the
 supposed enemy, and retreat to reload. after performing these
 evolutions several times, they appear to come off victorious, and
 start off into a noisy song and dance. we remained until quite a late
 hour witnessing their performances, and, after all hands had given
 them three hearty cheers, the assemblage dispersed very peaceably.
 we returned to our quarters very much pleased with our evening’s
 entertainment, wishing it were in our power to place the band in
 barnum’s hands.
 we also attended, a few days after this, a feast and dance given
 by king george, at which a large wild hog was served up, and every
 thing “got up” in grand style. to this feast the rotumah kanakers
 were invited, and in the evening they again entertained us with
 their dances. the king and chiefs appeared highly pleased with their
 performances, continually exclaiming “very good fashion, that dance.”
 our second officer, mr. l., had been sick for a number of months, yet
 he possessed such remarkable energy and perseverance that he would
 not succumb to it, but did his duty regularly up to the time of our
 arriving in port; and even then he appeared to feel that when we
 once more got to sea he should recover; but we all felt and thought
 differently. we could see that he was wasting away, little by little,
 and we felt that his days were numbered—that he would never see his
 home again.
 on sunday, october st, divine service was performed on board by
 rev. mr. snow. for three long years we had not listened to such
 sounds as came to our ears on that day. it was, to say the least,
 a pleasing sight to see the weather-beaten tar with a hymn-book in
 his hand, and to hear all unite in singing the praises of god. the
 sermon was very plain, yet forcible, reminding us of the short tenure
 of our lives, and admonishing all to prepare for death. the feeling
 manner in which mr.
 s. spoke of death on shipboard brought tears to
 the eyes of many, as we had not forgotten such a scene among our own
 small company. king george and the royal family were on board, and
 appeared to listen to the exercises with a great deal of interest;
 and when they were concluded, he wished to know of us what the good
 man had been talking about so long. his majesty appeared to have
 taken quite an interest in the missionary. he gave him a large piece
 of good land, built him a nice substantial house, and assisted him
 all in his power. he was also building a house for himself in the
 same vicinity.
 in conversation with mr. snow, he informed us that it was his
 intention to take the children in charge, teach them the english
 language, and endeavor to bring them up in the right way. he, of
 course, anticipated trials and difficulties in his efforts. he did
 not intend to interfere with any of the old customs of the natives,
 but show to the rising generation the folly of these customs, that
 when they came upon the stage of action they would abolish their
 heathenish rites. we wished him god speed, for we believed him to be
 a true christian—one who was actuated by no selfish motive, but by
 a desire to “do his master’s will.” we felt, too, that great praise
 was due to his excellent lady, who had voluntarily surrendered the
 comforts and luxuries of a home among enlightened people to spend her
 life on one of the heathen islands of the vast pacific, to add her
 mite toward civilizing and christianizing the poor native. “verily
 they will receive their reward.”
 we found on shore a native of the new zealand islands, who had
 been left here sick. we visited him several times, once or twice
 in company with mr. snow. he was very sick, and did not expect to
 recover. the “good missionary,” as he called mr. s., was doing all
 in his power to alleviate his sufferings, nursing him with
  all the
 love and sympathy of a brother; and mrs. s. often visited the poor
 man. he expressed to mr. snow his confidence and belief in a dying
 savior, trusting in his love and merits; and we doubt not that when
 his spirit took its flight, it went to those mansions above, where
 the poor new zealander is welcomed by christ and his angels as warmly
 as the favored christian of american lands.
 the time had now arrived when we were to bid adieu to strong’s island
 and its pleasures, some of us forever. need we say that we had become
 somewhat attached to our friends here, who had ever treated us with
 such kindness? never shall we forget them; and in future years, when
 memory shall recall former happy scenes and pleasures enjoyed while
 roving, strong’s island and its simple, kind-hearted natives will
 stand forth bold and prominent.
“isle of beauty, fare thee well!”
 success of the “mohawk.”—ship “napoleon.”—whaling.—bound to the
 southward.—sickness and death of mr. l.—ship “roscoe.”—pleasant
 island.—massacre of the “inga’s” crew.—narrow escape.—ship
 “hannibal.”—christmas and new-year.—ship “william tell.”—ship
 “john wells.”—violent death of captain hussey.—bound for hong
 kong.—h. b. m.’s brig “serpent.”—island of rota.—wild boar.—a
 general stampede.—“all hands and the cook.”—man the victor.—heavy
 gales.—gad’s rock.—formosa.—bashee islands.
 on friday, november th, soon after leaving strong’s island, we
 gammed with the “mohawk,” our old friends, and learned that they had
 taken eight hundred barrels of oil the previous season on japan. we
 could not but envy them, as we were one year from home when they
 sailed. but we felt that if we could but see the whales, we would
 soon add to the one thousand barrels we had in our hold.
 a few days afterward, at ocean island, we spoke the ship “napoleon,”
 of new bedford. the following day we raised whales, and, determined
 to give them battle, lowered four boats. in less than two hours we
 had three alongside, and at sundown “started the works” with merry
 hearts. a few more such lowerings would point the old ship’s head
 homeward.
 but for the present we must steer for a southern port. our second
 officer, mr. lowe, had been failing in health for many months, and
 our captain determined to make sydney, new south wales, that medical
 advice and treatment might be procured for him. accordingly, about
 the st of december, we left the group, bound for sydney. but a short
 time elapsed, however, ere we saw that it was of no use; mr. l.
 could not live more than a
 day or two at the farthest. on saturday,
 december th, he appeared sinking very fast. at his own request we
 placed him in an arm-chair, that he might, as he said, breathe more
 freely. with great calmness he described his feelings and symptoms,
 “gradually growing more chilly, and losing his life by degrees,”
 as he said. at about  p.m. he departed without a struggle. never
 did we witness the death-scene where the sufferer was so perfectly
 composed and resigned. so quietly did his spirit take its flight that
 it appeared as if he had fallen asleep. sail was at once reduced, the
 body laid out, wrapped in a sheet, covered by the american ensign,
 and placed on the quarter-deck.
 the next day, no work, no masthead, no noise; a melancholy stillness
 pervaded the whole ship. all on board appeared to realize the
 dispensation that had a second time visited us. we had lost a
 shipmate that was kind and obliging; an officer that was prompt in
 the discharge of his duties; a thorough sailor, and a kind, good
 man—one that was beloved by all his shipmates. at  p.m. all hands
 were called to perform a mournful duty—bury their friend and brother.
 our national flag was mournfully waving at half-mast, all sail in,
 and the ship hove-to. the body was placed upon a plank, with weights
 attached to its feet. the services were commenced by the captain, who
 read the one hundred and seventh psalm, delivered a few excellent
 remarks, followed by a prayer; and as he repeated the solemn words of
 the service, “we commit this body to the deep,” the plank was raised,
 and the body was soon fathoms beneath the “dark blue wave.”
“but when the last great trump shall thrill the grave,
and earth’s unnumbered myriads reappear,
he, too, shall hear the summons ’neath the wave
that now, in silence wraps his sunless bier.
and coming forth, in trembling reverence bowed,
unfold the tongueless secrets of his shroud.”
 as the necessity for our making a southern port no longer existed,
 we turned our attention to sperm whales, one of which we captured a
 few days subsequent to the burial of mr. l. on monday, december th,
 we spoke the “roscoe,” of new bedford, captain hayden, who, being an
 old chum of our captain, sailed in company with us for several days.
 this event proved very fortunate for us, as the sequel will show; and
 afterward, in meditating upon our narrow escape, we could but think
 that a divine providence was continually watching over and guarding
 us.
 in company with the “roscoe,” we made pleasant island on wednesday,
 december th. about  a.m., when two or three miles from the land,
 the “roscoe” about half a mile ahead of us, we perceived her suddenly
 heave-to and hoist her ensign half-mast, and union down. this we
 knew to be a signal of distress, and, fearing they were having some
 difficulty with the natives and needed our immediate assistance, we
 cracked on all sail and shortly rounded her stern. captain hayden
 informed us that the brig “inga,” of new bedford, captain barnes, had
 been taken here a few days previous by the natives, and all of the
 crew massacred save two; at the same time bidding us beware of the
 “copper-skinned rascals,” as he termed them. but his warning came too
 late, for already were our decks crowded with them. we had noticed,
 as something remarkable, that, after the “roscoe” had hoisted her
 signal of distress, all the canoes left her and made for our ship.
 not suspecting any danger, we had allowed them to come on board
 to the number of about four hundred. we were now in a position of
 extreme danger. as we afterward learned, it was their fixed intention
 to take our ship the first opportunity, as they owed us an old grudge
 for throwing their hogs and cocoanuts overboard when on a previous
 visit to them. that opportunity
 now presented itself. we must
 confess that things began to wear rather an unpleasant appearance,
 and we felt satisfied that nothing hardly short of a miracle could
 save us. seeing and knowing our situation, captain hayden promptly
 came on board, himself and boat’s crew well armed, bringing with
 him a white man who had resided on the island many years, and who
 possessed much influence over the natives. it appears he succeeded
 in reaching the “roscoe” prior to any of the natives, and informed
 captain h. of the taking of the “inga;” consequently, no natives were
 allowed to come on board, and they all pulled for our ship. this
 white man now informed our captain that he had better get all his
 weapons of defense in order, lead his muskets, etc., and take them
 into his cabin, “for,” said he, “these natives are determined to take
 your ship, if possible; they only await the arrival of one of their
 chiefs, who fancies you insulted him, and who has sworn to kill you
 with his own hands, to commence their murderous attack. i have some
 influence with them, and if i can keep them quiet, and get them away
 before he comes, i will do so; but if he comes to the ship, nothing
 can save you.”
 the reader may rest assured that this news did not tend to allay our
 fears in the least, yet each one seemed determined to sell his life
 as dearly as possible. no undue excitement was exhibited; each one
 was calm, cool, collected, for we knew the first symptom of fear
 betrayed would be the signal for the work of destruction to commence.
 quietly were all the muskets loaded, and our harpoons, lances,
 boat-hatchets, and other weapons made ready, so that they could be
 seized should occasion require. fifteen or twenty minutes of the
 most intense anxiety to all hands passed, each one hoping something
 would transpire to cause the natives to leave. the ships were headed
 off the land, and sail made; still
 they did not appear inclined to
 leave, but sat in groups around the deck, intently watching every
 movement that was made, and earnestly conversing with each other,
 eying the cutting-spades which hung over the quarter-deck, and
 evidently longing for some one to commence the fracas. at length a
 happy thought suggested itself to one of our men. mounting aloft,
 he remained a few moments at masthead. gazing, with great interest
 apparently, at some object in the far distance, he sang out, with
 a loud, ringing, joyous voice, “sail ho!
a large man-of-war coming down from the windward
 under full sail!”
 this was sufficient. the natives waited not to hear this repeated,
 but clambered over the side in the greatest hurry and confusion. each
 one seemingly endeavored to be first, and in a few moments our decks
 were perfectly free from them. as the last native left the ship,
 one thrilling, deafening hurrah went up from all on board. this was
 caught up on board the “roscoe,” and returned with a hearty “three
 times three.”
 we congratulated ourselves on our narrow escape from these merciless
 savages, and could not but feel thankful to almighty god for his
 providence in thus rescuing us. it would have been but a short battle
 had it commenced. as we have before remarked, the natives of this
 island are very powerful and robust; and their mode of warfare would
 have been to have seized the crew and thrown them overboard, while
 those in the canoes would have held the victims under the surface
 till they were drowned. although the man who sang out “sail ho!” from
 the masthead did not expect to see one when he started to go aloft,
 yet he did see a sail, which soon came down to us; and, although not
 a man-of-war, yet we were none the less pleased to see her. it proved
 to be the whale-ship “hannibal,” of new london, captain lester.
 we related to him all the circumstances connected with our late
 adventures, and he congratulated us heartily upon our narrow escape.
 the circumstances connected with the taking of the “inga” were,
 as nearly as we could learn, as follows: the vessel was near the
 island, and crowded with natives. while trading with them, captain
 barnes, whether wisely or not we can not say, kept a cutlass in his
 hand; and, during the transaction of some petty trade, had some high
 words with a notorious chief; who, fancying himself insulted, seized
 the cutlass, cut captain b. through the body, and then tossed him
 overboard. this was the signal for a general massacre. after killing
 all but one white man and a native of the sandwich islands, whom
 they took prisoners, they rifled the ship of all they considered
 valuable, and then attempted to run her ashore. not succeeding very
 well themselves, they ordered their prisoners to work the brig to
 the land, or they would kill them. this they secretly determined not
 to do; and, bracing the head-yards one way and the after-yards in a
 contrary direction, caused the brig to remain in nearly a stationary
 condition. this puzzled them exceedingly; and, fearing a ship might
 heave in sight, they determined to scuttle her. accordingly, a chief
 commenced cutting a hole in her side with an axe, which he let fall
 overboard after a few strokes. they then determined to set her on
 fire, which they did, and left for the shore. she probably burned to
 the water’s edge, as she was never heard from afterward.
 we learned that the two prisoners were kept in close confinement on
 shore, yet kindly treated. we never learned what became of them,
 yet we trust they were released from the grasp of these murderous
 villains, as several ships visited the island after having heard of
 the destruction of the brig, and we know that no whaling captain
 would leave a thing undone to rescue them.
 we took from pleasant island two men, one a native of the azores, or
 western islands, and the other a new yorker. these men begged the
 captain to take them with him, as they were afraid to remain on the
 island since the late massacre.
 christmas-day came round in due season, and, although it did not
 bring us roast turkey, yet it did sperm whales. we captured two fine
 ones on that day; and, as we finished stowing them down in the hold,
 new-year’s-day came upon us, bringing “more of the same sort,” which
 proved very acceptable.
 on tuesday, january th, we spoke the “william tell,” of sag harbor,
 captain taber, who reported that the “mohawk” had visited pleasant
 island, and purchased several articles belonging to the ill-fated
 “inga.” the natives had taken the chronometer apart, and were wearing
 the wheels and other parts of it around their necks as ornaments.
 they also reported that, had we been alone at the time of our late
 visit to pleasant island, we would certainly have lost our ship and
 our lives; nothing prevented it but our being in company with the
 “roscoe.” when we heard this, we could but feel that
“there is a divinity that shapes our ends,
rough hew them how we will.”
 the following day we spoke the “john wells,” of new bedford, captain
 cross. he reported that a mutiny had occurred on board the “william
 penn,” by which captain hussey had been murdered by a kanaka. the
 murder was committed about  a.m. captain h. was in the vicinity of
 some of the islands of the group, and, while engaged in looking over
 the “weather rail” for land, a kanaka boat-steerer seized a spade
 and darted it through him, killing him almost instantly. the body
 was immediately thrown overboard, and the gang (seven or eight of
 the crew), led by the kanaka, commenced
  their murderous work. they
 killed the steward and cook, severely wounded the mate and second
 mate, and then, seemingly actuated by some merciful freak, stopped
 their bloody performances, and promised to leave the vessel quietly
 if the officers would allow them to take what they wanted. this
 request was readily granted, as the peaceable portion of the crew and
 officers were but too willing to have them leave. they accordingly
 took a boat, and steered for sydenham’s island, where the ringleader
 belonged. the kanaka took with him a large sum of money belonging to
 captain hussey, and he had not been on shore twenty-four hours ere he
 was shot by a beachcomber to obtain possession of it. thus we see the
 scoundrel met with his deserts.
 captain hussey also met with the same fate that he consigned one of
 his own crew to. he murdered his fellow-man in cold blood, and he, in
 his turn, died a violent death.
 the reader must not think, from reading these scenes of violence and
 murder, that they were continually occurring in this part of our
 globe. on the contrary, the natives there are generally well-disposed
 and peaceable; but at this time the islands were thronged with
 miserable beachcombers—men whose only object and desire appeared to
 be blood and plunder. the majority of them were escaped convicts from
 new south wales, and a more bloodthirsty set of villains never went
 unhung.
 we were now nearly forty months from home, and we found it necessary
 to prolong the voyage another season. to do this, however, we must
 have more provisions (bread, meat, and flour) than we now had on
 board. these could be obtained more advantageously at hong kong
 than at any other port, and our captain accordingly determined to
 steer for that port. on sunday, january th, spoke her majesty’s
 brig of war “serpent,” s. w. hammett, acting commander. captain
 inquired very particularly concerning the late transactions at
 pleasant island. on taking his leave, he expressed his determination
 to proceed to the group, visit all the islands, and rid them of the
 rascally beachcombers that infested them.
 we touched at the island of rota, one of the ladrones, on tuesday,
 january th, and procured a quantity of fruit, hogs, etc. among the
 animals was a ferocious wild boar, which the natives had captured
 on the mountains. he was securely fastened when brought on board,
 but, as no one knew he was wild, the thongs were cut, and he was set
 at liberty. this was no sooner done than he made a rush at some of
 the men, who fled in double-quick time. turning, he played the same
 game on another group, until he had complete possession of the deck,
 all hands taking to their heels, clambering into the rigging, on to
 the rail, water-butt, and any place that was the most convenient,
 without stopping to ask questions. here was a fix—a wild boar
 had succeeded in taking the ship! his swinish majesty appeared to
 enjoy the fun hugely, going about the decks making such observations
 as suited him best, and driving the other porkers around at his
 pleasure. once, however, he over-shot his mark. the cook, ensconced
 in his galley, with both doors closed, felt secure, and would
 occasionally push one of them ajar and take a look. porkey finally
 discovered this move, and, thinking it an unwarrantable intrusion
 upon his rights, raised his bristles, showed his teeth, and made for
 the old doctor. seeing him coming, the old darkey seized a dipper of
 scalding-water from his copper, and, as mr. hog approached within
 proper distance, bristling for the fight, gave it to him between
 the eyes. this was too much for his lordship, and a mode of warfare
 which he least expected. he did not pay the doctor a second visit
 alive. a number of plans were now devised for his capture—among the
 rest, that of lassoing him. portuguese manuel, who knew
  all about managing
 wild hogs, as he said, volunteered to go down upon deck and
 slip a running bowline over his head. no sooner, however, did his
 feet touch the deck, than the boar, seemingly mistrusting his evil
 designs, rushed after him. away went manuel, yelling for dear life,
 with the boar close at his heels. he finally succeeded in mounting
 the rail, and, thinking the boar still in close pursuit, kept on
 ascending the rigging with all possible speed, until the mate cried
 out, and asked him “where he was going?” on hearing this, manuel
 looked about him, and, seeing the boar still on deck, descended to
 the rail, his hair erect, countenance pale (for a portuguese)—in
 fact, frightened out of his wits. the crew, scattered about on the
 rail and in the rigging, presented a truly laughable sight: one or
 two with their countenances exhibiting the strongest emotions of
 fear; others with their faces expanded by a broad grin; some cursing
 the spaniards for bringing off a “wild boar;” others looking at it as
 an excellent joke, and laughing heartily at the whole affair. after
 some time spent in manœuvring, a bowline was slipped over his head,
 when he was soon choked down, dispatched, and placed in the hands of
 the cook.
 about the st of february we experienced a very heavy gale. we were
 obliged to take our boats in on deck, heave-to, and secure things
 generally. the steward, not having taken this precaution in regard
 to his crockery, etc., found it suddenly coming through the pantry
 door as the ship gave a sudden lurch. the floor was finely strewed
 with broken dishes, tea, coffee, molasses, and sundry other articles,
 gloriously mixed in one heterogeneous mass.
 on sunday, february th, we sighted gad’s rock; also the southern
 point of the island of formosa. the next morning the northern bashee
 islands were in sight, bearing w.n.w. found our reckoning to be
 latitude ° ´ n., longitude ° ´ e.
 chinese fishermen.—pedro blanca.—preparing for port.—chinese
 pilots.—beating up the passage.—hong kong.—“hail
 columbia.”—the “susquehanna.”—stars and stripes.—chinese
 merchants.—washerwomen.—bumboats.—dick simpson and john
 chinaman.—chinese mode of trading.—sanpan.—a floating
 community.—boston jack.—victoria, its situation, streets,
 etc.—chinese barbers.—fortune-tellers.—policemen.—chinese
 new-year.—a busy time.—firing a salute.—arrival of governor
 bonham.—english barracks.—churches.—hotels.—dog or
 horse?—visit from men-of-war’s-men.—tom and the lieutenant.—commodore
 perry.—midshipmen.—visit to the barracks.—theatre.—fort.—make
 some purchases.—counterfeit money.—tricks of the chinese
 merchants.—females.—gambling.—cut-throats.—short-tailed
 gentlemen.—chinese funeral.—marriages.—education.—ouang
 ouci yuen.—infanticide.—twenty-second of february.—chinese
 artists.—their powers of imitation.—sam shu.—domestic life
 of the chinese.—food.—temple, or joss house.—worship of
 idols.—joss sticks.—tom as a yankee naval officer.—chinese
 men-of-war.—pirates.—chinese theatre.—masonic temple.—the
 bethel.—chinaman and his shoes.—the arrest, trial, and
 acquittal.—departure for sea.
 wednesday, february th, brought us in close proximity to the land
 of the celestials, as the numerous fishing-junks bore testimony.
 the same day we sighted pedro blanca, which is an island lying near
 hong kong. at  a.m. commenced bending the cables, and making
 other preparations for coming to an anchor. as we neared the land
 we saw great numbers of pilot-boats steering for us, one of which
 soon reached us; the pilot came on board, with his long tail, or
 queu, hanging behind him, and presenting a comical contrast to
 an old yankee “hard-a-lee.” he wanted the moderate sum of forty
 dollars for taking us into port. captain ewer was not so easily
 gulled as that, and soon gave the old
 fellow to understand that if
 he wished to pilot us in for twenty dollars he could do so, and if
 not he could leave immediately. this brought him to his senses, and
 he very quickly accepted the offer, as numerous other pilot-boats
 were in sight, and he knew that he would be underbid if they had an
 opportunity to do so.
 the next day found us beating up through the lee passage. at  p.m.
 the wind died away, and the tide commencing to set out, we dropped
 anchor. at  p.m. we weighed anchor, and with a fine breeze beat
 up to the anchorage. at  p.m. we “brought up” in the harbor of
 victoria, hong kong.
 we were aroused from our slumbers the following morning by the
 familiar strains of “hail columbia,” and our first thought was that
 we were again at home. but this pleasant illusion was soon dispelled;
 for, going on deck, we found that the music proceeded from the steam
 frigate susquehanna, which was lying close to. what joyous feelings
 did we experience while listening to that soul-stirring air, and
 beholding our national flag, the glorious “stars and stripes,”
 floating proudly from the mizzen-peak of such a grand and stately
 vessel! we could but feel a great national pride to see our beloved
 country so nobly represented in a foreign clime. on looking about
 us, we saw the united states sloops of war plymouth, portsmouth, and
 saratoga; also the supply store-ship, together forming quite a fleet.
 nothing is so cheering to the rover, while in foreign lands, as to
 see familiar faces, persons speaking the same tongue and claiming
 the same land of birth, “the land of the free and the home of the
 brave.” a feeling of patriotism naturally animated us as we beheld
 our country’s floating batteries, “the right arm of our defense,” and
 for a moment we forgot that there was any country but “happy, free
 america!” the harbor was well filled by merchantmen from nearly all
 nations; also we observed several
 english naval vessels in port, as
 this is one of their rendezvous. among the shipping the “stars and
 stripes” were conspicuous, and we could but notice that they floated
 from more than half the vessels in port.
 before  a.m. the deck of our vessel was crowded with chinamen of all
 descriptions. in one corner might be seen the tailor spreading out
 his fancy clothing; then the shoemaker with his shoes, taking the
 measures of such of the crew as might want. in another part of the
 ship might be seen a complete variety store, with all descriptions
 of lacquered ware, artificial flowers, silk handkerchiefs, etc., all
 selling for a mere song. washerwomen running about, engaging the
 washing while the ship remains in port; bumboats alongside with fruit
 and confectionery; carpenters, riggers, sail-makers, blacksmiths,
 etc., each with recommends, looking after and soliciting employment.
 the decks now presented a comical spectacle. the bald head of the
 chinaman stood out prominent; the honorable tail, neatly dressed,
 the end tipped with ribbon, was conspicuous in all. each was dressed
 according to his calling; the merchant in the finest silks, and the
 common laborer in the coarsest garments. our kanakas had their own
 sport with them, never having seen a chinaman before, and regarded
 them as objects of the greatest curiosity. this was especially the
 case with dick simpson, our king mills’ native. not being satisfied
 with viewing them at a distance, he walked up to one, took hold of
 the long, braided tail of hair, and cried out, laughing heartily,
 “look here! what for all the same? hey? all same big fool. by golly!
 i no been see all same that, my land!” he then laughed till he could
 laugh no more, seemingly splitting his sides. the poor chinaman
 looked at him in perfect amazement, and, not appearing to relish the
 joke, jabbered away in his own language. this appeared to astonish
 dick still more, and he again broke forth: “what this fellow talking
 about? see that! by golly! say, long-tail, what you talk about? you
 no saba noting; more better you go ashore; bimeby me eat you—look
 out!” dick had to stop again to laugh heartily, the chinaman stared
 so earnestly at him.
 by this time the trading had commenced quite briskly, and we
 overheard the following bargain between one of our boys and a
 chinaman. the article was a pair of silk pants, for which the
 merchant wanted the sum of one dollar and fifty cents:
“no you don’t,” says jack; “i’ll give you three quarters of a dollar.”
“no can do; no proper,” said the celestial.
 “well, that’s all i’ll give you; you mustn’t come aboard here to come
 any of your gouge games; if you do, overboard you go.”
 “three quarters no can catch. s’pose one dollar one quarter, very
 good, proper.”
“not a bit of it; three quarters, no more.”
 “you no see; pant very good; no. ; three quarters no can catch
 plofit; s’pose you like one dollar, very good.”
 “three quarters is all i’ll give you; what do you say, old chinaman?
 bear a hand.”
“no; no can do; must catch one dollar.”
 “shiver my timbers! old buggerlugs, if you don’t come to terms pretty
 soon, i’ll treat you to a salt-water bath; three quarters, or away
 you go.”
 “well, s’pose must catch three quarters; no good, no proper;” and
 then, turning to another of the men, said, “s’pose you like catch one
 three quarters, very good, proper.”
 this is a peculiar characteristic of the chinese merchants. they
 charge about twice as much as they expect to get for an article;
 and the only way to trade
 with them is to make them an offer, and
 not vary one cent from it; they will not let a person go without
 purchasing.
 the mate now came along, and started them all for the shore. they
 were very loth to go, but after a while we rid the ship of them. as a
 general thing, they are expert thieves, and will carry off any thing
 they can lay hold of if not very closely watched.
 the captain hired a boat (which is the usual custom), called a
 “sanpan,” to attend on the ship. these boats are manned by a whole
 family, as a general thing, it constituting house and home with them.
 they are generally about thirty feet in length and six in width,
 with two mat sails. they have a sort of cabin for the accommodation
 of passengers, which is amidships, or in the centre of the boat.
 this cabin also serves as parlor, kitchen, sleeping-room, and
 dressing-room for its occupants. the chinaman who owned the “sanpan”
 hired by our captain had a family consisting of himself, wife, wife’s
 sister, and brother. he had also three fine-looking, bright children,
 who appeared perfectly contented on board their floating-home.
 it is a singular fact that the lowest class of chinese are not
 allowed to live on land, but spend most of their lives upon the
 water. when they possess a certain sum of money they are allowed
 a residence upon the land, and not until then; but this sum is so
 large that very few of them ever accumulate it. they are born, live,
 and die upon the water, never going on shore except to purchase
 the necessaries of life. one may see floating markets, shoe-shops,
 tailor-shops, and, in fact, all kinds of mechanical business. we
 noticed some boats, not exceeding ten feet in length, containing a
 family of five or six, with all their “household gods,” etc., on
 board.
 but to return to our own “sanpan.” the captain appeared active and
 intelligent, the females rather good-looking
  and sociable, the crew
 (consisting of one man) lazy and indolent. these first class sanpans
 are hired by ships while lying at anchor for the purpose of conveying
 the ship’s company to and from the shore, doing the ship’s errands,
 bringing off provisions, etc., a kind of “man-of-all-work,” for which
 services they receive from ten to fifteen dollars per month. from
 this amount, say fifteen dollars, a chinaman will save ten, which
 makes it quite a profitable job. it is an excellent plan also for
 the ship concerned, as it obviates the necessity of lowering her own
 boats while in port. they sail like the wind, and are quicker in
 motion than any other boat we ever saw upon the water. one can not
 look about the harbor but he will see them on every hand, gliding
 about with the swiftness of an arrow, yet collisions seldom if ever
 occur. it is surprising to see the ease with which they manage
 them—two coming from opposite directions with great swiftness,
 apparently steering for each other’s bows, yet, at the moment when
 a collision appears inevitable, down goes the helm of one, and they
 shoot past each other free from harm.
 the morning following our arrival a boat came alongside loaded with
 fresh meat, vegetables, etc. the proprietor of the “market” soon made
 his appearance, and introduced himself to the captain as “boston
 jack,” a comprador (one who furnishes ships with fresh provisions).
 he informed captain e. that he was comprador to the american ships
 in port, and wished to engage himself as “comprador to the emily
 morgan.” a bargain was soon struck, and he was duly installed in
 the office. in appearance boston jack is about forty years of age,
 medium height, very quick and active, with a sharp, keen eye, and
 very polite. the bows he bestowed upon all who honored themselves
 by speaking to him would have become the most complete and polished
 french gentleman.
 dr. ball, in his “rambles in eastern asia,” thus speaks of
 him: “about a mile above whampoa we called at ‘boston jack’s’. this
 is a chinaman, an acquaintance that my companions had made in passing
 before. ‘boston jack’ is familiarly known to the european population
 of hong kong as a kind of interpreter and furnisher of provisions
 for vessels, and a commissioner to provide servants, coolies, and to
 make purchases of various chinese articles. he was formerly a pilot,
 and is still connected with that business, furnishing pilots, etc.,
 and is ready to do any kind of business between the foreigners and
 chinese. he is said to be worth a hundred thousand dollars; treated
 us to beer, and gave us some to take on our way. he had much to say
 of his son, who lives in new york, and was very polite, inviting us
 to call again,” etc.
 hong kong is an island, and not, as is the general impression, a
 chinese city. it is a british colony, within a few miles of the
 chinese coast. it was chinese until the treaty after the celebrated
 opium war ceded it to the english. at that time it was inhabited
 only by a few fishermen and pirates. it is an elevation of barren
 mountains, with scarcely any vegetation, and is about twenty-five
 miles in circumference, and eight in diameter. its shores are
 generally bold, and the water deep near the coast. there are,
 however, several spots with declivities sufficiently gradual for the
 location of cities. the english government has taken possession of
 these, and erected fortifications and barracks, where they keep small
 garrisons of troops. victoria is the name of the city, yet it is
 hardly known by any name but hong kong.
 victoria is on the north side of the island, built on the base and
 on the inclination of a conspicuous mountain which overlooks the
 harbor. it extends about two and a half miles along the edge of the
 water, and back on
 the side of the mountain half a mile. it has
 only one principal street, called queen’s road, which is near the
 water, and encircles the island. there are several others parallel
 with it, and from twenty to forty feet one above the other. the
 small cross streets uniting them are steep, and at some places have
 flights of steps by which to ascend and descend. taking the zigzag
 streets in their proper order, the highest houses may be reached
 with a carriage. the houses are generally of two or three stories,
 though many at the outer part of the city, called bungaloes, are of
 one story, and look like cottages. open to the country on the west
 of the city you will see the steep side of the mountains, with only
 here and there a poverty-stricken chinaman’s cabin. the ground is
 covered with rocks, a little grass, and, higher up, with brush. the
 white buildings conspicuous here and there are the police stations.
 following the road to the east, you enter the part of the city known
 as typen-shang, where the lower order of the chinese reside.
 following the road as it winds round and ascends upon higher ground,
 we come to the european part—the central portion of victoria. on
 the left is a row of chinamen’s shops, beyond which, along the edge
 of the harbor, are occasionally the large houses of europeans.
 on the right are blocks of european buildings, rising one above
 another, and as we passed them we could but imagine ourselves once
 more in a civilized land. behind these, a little distance up the
 inclined plane, the mountain rises abruptly, and to the eye nearly
 perpendicular, and terminating in a peak near three thousand feet
 high. a scanty vegetation of grass and brambles there appears, but
 there is little else than rocks, some of which seem to hang by
 nothing, and may eventually, becoming loosened, roll down and cut
 their way through the settlements to the water.
 passing along, we come to the principal business part
  of the city.
 on the right is a hotel, with blocks of houses occupied mostly by
 english and americans, auctioneers, apothecaries, the club-house of
 the merchants, etc., and back, short streets of chinese mechanics.
 continuing along the water toward the east, after a short interval
 we see the military quarters, which inclose within a quarter of a
 mile the showy stone barracks, parade-ground, officers’ residences,
 in elevated positions, the church, and other buildings. half a mile
 farther is another fine block of buildings; then comes the hospital,
 ship-yard, and a large ship-chandlery establishment. thus the town or
 city of victoria is strung out for two or three miles along the shore.
 the population, including chinese, is about twenty-five thousand.
 but a small portion are european. almost every nation is represented
 here, though there are only a few of each. besides the english,
 american, and chinese, we find the french, spanish, portuguese,
 persians, bengalese, javanese, manillamen, german, italian, russian,
 danish, swiss, dutch, belgian, pole, arab, turk, armenian, tartar,
 siamese, african, and south american.
 the streets are filled with chinese, and you continually see the
 traveling barber, carrying his barber-shop with him—cobblers,
 tinkers, pastrymen, men carrying hogs, rabbits, ducks, rats, puppies,
 etc, already cooked; and along the principal streets you find the
 brokers, or money-changers, with piles of cash. these cash are a
 small coin, about one half the size of a cent, of a base metal,
 and a square hole in the centre, twenty-four of which are equal in
 value to one of the cents of united states coin. the fortune-teller
 or conjurer may also be seen, with his charts, covered with
 hieroglyphics, spread before him, and busily engaged in penetrating
 the future for some inquisitive chinaman.
 the police force here is composed mostly of english,
  americans,
 and lascars. they are very effective in preserving order among the
 chinese, and a chinaman stands more in awe of a policeman than any
 thing else in hong kong.
 from the ship the town looks beautiful at night. it was new-year’s
 week with the chinese at this time, and their part of the town
 was brilliantly illuminated every evening. the thousand brilliant
 lamps, with an occasional rocket piercing its way into the clouds
 above, presented to the beholder a scene of beauty scarcely equaled,
 reminding him of old legends of enchanted cities. the evening gun of
 the frigate booms forth, answered from the fort; the bugle call from
 the barracks sounds sweetly on the calm evening air, and as its soft,
 gentle tones strike our ear, we almost forget that we are in the land
 of strangers, and remain musing until we are aroused by the striking
 of the frigate’s bell, and the hoarse cry echoed over the waters of
 “all’s well!”
 the day after our arrival our ship presented rather a busy
 appearance. the cooper, with his gang, was preparing casks for
 water and provisions; others were engaged breaking out the hold and
 restowing oil, and all hands busy about something; outside a gang of
 chinese calkers were busily engaged, and following them were another
 gang with scrapers and brooms, preparing the ship for an extra coat
 of paint.
 the united states sloop of war “plymouth” fired a salute on this day,
 in honor of a visit from the american consul. the report of her heavy
 guns almost deafened us, and caused our kanakas to open wide their
 eyes with astonishment, and exclaim, “i g-o-lly; i never been hear
 all the same that fore!”
 on sunday, february th, the british mail steamer “wildfire”
 arrived, having on board governor bonham, who had been
 home to england on a visit. he
 was received by a salute from the
 men-of-war and the fort, and escorted to his residence by the
 military stationed here. in the eastern part of the town are situated
 the barracks; the buildings, which are of stone, are fine, large,
 and comfortable, and the grounds ample for military evolutions. the
 th regiment of infantry, a company of sappers and miners, and
 one artillery company, were stationed here at this time. they were
 composed of fine, healthy-appearing men, and when on parade presented
 a brilliant appearance.
 we found three churches here—one a fine, large episcopal church,
 built of stone; a roman catholic, and a third a “union” church, as it
 was called, attended by persons of all creeds and denominations.
 there are also several very fine hotels here, the principal of which
 is “brooks’ hotel.” this is generally the head-quarters of the naval
 officers. the house is kept on the european plan, is very commodious,
 and, above all, very neat and clean. their charges are in proportion,
 as they intend their guests shall pay for what they have in good
 round sums.
 while on shore shortly after our arrival, dick simpson, our “group”
 native, saw a man pass on horseback. the poor fellow appeared dumb
 with astonishment; at length he exclaimed, “what for man, he on
 big dog! i g-o-lly; i no been see all same that my place; all the same
 that ’merica?” on being answered in the affirmative his wonder still
 increased, if possible, and it proved a hard task to convince him
 that it was not a dog, but a horse. “yes, he big dog; ’spose me
 no saby; he all the same dog,” he would say. in order to satisfy
 his curiosity, we took him to a horse, and told him to examine for
 himself. after having expressed himself as satisfied, he wished to
 know “where he came from.” we explained this as far as lay in our
 power to do, and after we ceased he chuckled, and told what yarns he
 would
 spin when he arrived at his “land.” “kanaka my place all same
 fool; he no been see nothing!”
 as we were the only sperm whaler in port, we attracted considerable
 attention, especially from the yankee men-of-war’s-men, as they all
 lay in close proximity to us, many of whom paid us visits, some to
 purchase shells, whale’s teeth, and other curiosities, others to
 learn the modus operandi of the capture of the sperm whale. the
 particulars of the chase appeared greatly to interest them, as they
 never before had the opportunity of listening to such narrations, or
 of inspecting the different apparatus for fastening and killing the
 whale, hoisting in the blubber, trying out, etc.
 during one of these visits from the captain and one of the
 lieutenants of the store-ship “supply,” tom w——, of whom we have
 before spoken, being full of the old nick, as usual, “button-holed”
 the lieutenant at once, and proceeded to show him the ship and
 whaling craft. he soon had the officer down in the hold, among the
 greasy oil casks, to show him the manner of stowing down the oil.
 he kept on a straight countenance, and told his guest he supposed
 he wished to see the whole show! the lieutenant did not appear to
 relish the sport, as he had already finely besmeared his coat and
 pants with dirty grease; and on remarking it, tom coolly replied,
 “oh! that is nothing; you should try a voyage whaling; you would not
 mind the grease much!” after piloting him through all the dirtiest
 parts of the ship, he at last brought up in the cook’s galley.
 the mate, who had been entertaining the captain of the “supply,”
 now came in search of the lieutenant, and what was his surprise to
 see him cozily seated in the “galley” with tom, who had him by the
 button-hole, very earnestly explaining how nicely our cooking was
 done, and the excellent virtues of the stove. the mate now came to
 the relief of the pestered officer, and was walking off with him,
 when tom marched after, called him, extended his hand, and bade him
 good-by with much warmth, inviting him very cordially to call again.
 the lieutenant could not refuse his hand, and, returning a slight
 shake, turned away, looking daggers. however, we believe, on learning
 the particulars, being too much a gentleman to show anger, he laughed
 heartily at the joke, and before leaving the ship invited tom to pay
 him a visit. tom thanked him, and promised to avail himself of the
 honor and pleasure.
 on wednesday, february th, sir william bonham, the english
 governor, visited the steam frigate “susquehanna,” and on leaving was
 honored by a salute, the cross of st. george at the fore royal-mast
 head. this vessel is the flag-ship of commodore aulick,
 who was daily expecting the arrival of commodore perry to
 relieve him and take command of the squadron.
 the officers on board the several naval vessels in port appeared very
 courteous and gentlemanly, and possessing a dignity that fully became
 their position. we felt proud of them as american naval officers, and
 willing that our navy and our country should be judged by them. there
 were, however, with them, as with every thing, a few exceptions.
 the lowest class of naval commissioned officers, familiarly known
 as “middies,” appeared altogether too large and nice for even the
 company of the commodore, and would strut about the decks of their
 ship, or the streets of the city, deeming any one who could not sport
 an officer’s uniform entirely beneath their notice. we are glad,
 for the honor of our navy and country, that this class is small, and
 we would that it were less.
 wishing to visit the barracks of the soldiers and see them in their
 every-day life, we embraced the opportunity of an invitation from
 one of the officers, whose acquaintance
 we had previously formed,
 and paid them a visit. we must confess to a surprise in finding the
 excellent order and extreme cleanliness that every where prevailed.
 the rooms were large and well ventilated, and the cots placed in
 rows along the walls. from all appearances, the soldiers must have
 easy times and comfortable quarters. they are compelled to drill one
 hour each day, which usually takes place in the forenoon; from that
 time until  p.m. they are occupied in taking care of and cleaning
 their arms and accoutrements. from that time until  p.m. they are
 at liberty to go where they please. the evening gun is then fired,
 and all are required to be within the gates at half past , at which
 time each room is visited, and those absent after  p.m. are put
 under guard as soon as they return, and are punished according to the
 circumstances of the case.
 for their amusement, a very good theatre is connected with the
 barracks, the actors belonging to the regiment. we learn that this
 is beneficial, inasmuch as it prevents many of them from seeking
 pleasure in the numerous drinking-houses which infest certain
 portions of the city; a pleasure that many of them appeared disposed
 to seek, but which is generally dear bought, as it is sure to be
 followed by a punishment proportionate to the offense.
 near the episcopal church stands the fort, which, from its elevated
 position, commands the town. the battery is immediately on the
 beach, and has a fair sweep at the shipping. the authorities find
 it necessary to keep a strict watch over the chinese population to
 prevent an insurrection. they only lack the courage; their hatred
 of the english is complete, and the will to rise and murder every
 “outside barbarian” in the city is not wanting in them.
 one can scarcely pass through the streets but he is
  saluted with
 the cry of “kum my shop; can sell much too chipp; no wanchee buy sum
 littley ting?” in fact, the chinese portion of hong kong is a perfect
 chatham street. going into a shop one morning, we began looking at
 various articles, the shopkeeper pulling down all his wares to show
 us. after selecting several articles, and inquiring the sum total of
 the bill, we were informed it was fourteen and a half dollars. we
 indignantly turned to leave, when he accosted us with,
“how much can catchee them tings?”
we told him “six dollars.”
“no can do; no can catch plofit, s’pose six dollar.”
 “very good,” we informed him, and again turned to leave, when he
 called to us the second time, and, after some bantering, told us we
 might have them for six dollars. had we not have known the price of
 such articles previous to this, we might have paid him more than we
 did, but we knew they were all jews in trading, and were determined
 not to allow the rascal to cheat us.
 they are great rascals, these chinese merchants. the currency here
 is gold, silver, and copper, and they are very cautious in regard to
 it, being continually on the alert for spurious coin; yet, if they
 have the opportunity, will put off any quantity of it, and then lie
 out of it in the most barefaced, impudent manner imaginable. spanish
 and mexican dollars command a premium of from four to six cents;
 other silver they will not take for its full value. an american half
 dollar passes for but twenty-five cents among them. on receiving a
 piece of money, they inspect it very minutely, and if they discover
 the least flaw or defect in it, they refuse it as bad; or, as they
 say, “chop dollar—no proper;” yet, if they have the opportunity, will
 pass the same kind on the purchaser in giving change. if one of them
 refuse to take such money, it is only necessary to whisper the
  word
 “policeman” in his ear, and all is immediately right.
 a seaman, who had recently come on shore to live from a california
 ship, received a bad dollar from one of these merchants. on
 discovering it, he proceeded to the shop and called for a
 backgammon-board. choosing a beautiful one, finished with rich gilt
 work, he inquired the price. the chinaman said “three dollars.”
 “no, no, john chinaman; s’pose me no saby you? me live too long hong
 kong; me no fool.”
“well, s’pose can catchee two dollar, he very good?”
“no, i give you one dollar; proper.”
“hiyah! how can do! no proper!”
 “s’pose you like one dollar, very good; s’pose you no like, very
 good.”
 “me likey one dollar; two dollar more good; proper; you no see;
 number one, this fellow; alla same ’nother pigeon (merchant) sell
 five dollar.”
“me no give more one dollar; plenty chinaman speak one dollar proper.”
 “hiyah! chinaman bloody liar! no speak good; too much lie. s’pose you
 like catchee one dollar half, proper; s’pose one dollar, no can do.”
“well, s’pose you no like one dollar, me go ’nother shop.”
 “no proper; s’pose you cum my shop, buy plenty, you catchee him one
 dollar.”
“oh, certainly. i shall buy you out before i leave.”
 accordingly, he picked up the board, and threw down the same piece he
 had received from this merchant the day previous. on seeing this the
 chinaman flew into a great passion, and called for his board to be
 returned to him; but it was too late; the purchaser had departed with
 it under his arm. however, he was not to be got rid of so easily;
 after the sailor he went, shouting after him to give up his board.
 the sailor heeded him
 not, but proceeded to his boarding-house,
 threw the board into his chest, closed it, and sat down on the lid.
 presently in came the chinaman in a hot rage, and demanded his
 backgammon-board. upon this the sailor jumped up, seized the chinaman
 by the collar, who commenced turning pale, and, shaking him rather
 roughly, demanded why he gave him “that bad dollar.” the poor fellow
 protested his innocence, denying the charge. this dodge would not
 do; so, shouting to a landlord to bring in a policeman, the chinaman
 darted for the door, and retraced his steps with all possible speed.
 the females are kept under great subjection, being looked upon as
 little better than slaves. they are not allowed to be educated,
 but are kept in ignorance. the higher classes dress very richly,
 wearing many ornaments of gold. in some things we think they show
 much more good sense than our american ladies. fashion, with them,
 does not change every month, yet they all dress in good taste. their
 manner of dressing the hair is decidedly superior to that of our own
 fair countrywomen. on their wrists they wear heavy gold bracelets,
 generally placed there when quite young, and, were it not for their
 small feet, they would make a good appearance. this deformity, for
 we can call it nothing less, causes them to walk as though they were
 crippled. many of them are obliged to use the cane to assist them,
 and they always appear as if it caused them pain to walk. the small
 feet, we were credibly informed, are confined to the aristocracy.
 they appear more like club-feet than natural ones, the ankle and foot
 having both become one. the females are much better-looking than the
 men. we seldom noticed the high cheek-bones, or eyes so wide apart;
 and, moreover, their heads are covered by nature’s covering—fine
 black hair. in complexion they resemble the brunette.
 we noticed one very singular fact. as many times
  as we visited the
 shops of the merchants, we never saw any females in them, not even
 belonging to the merchant’s family, who generally reside in the
 same building. we often wondered at this, so different from our own
 customs; but then we recollected that we were “outside barbarians,”
 and could not, of course, be expected to know what was right. on
 inquiring of “acowo,” a merchant of high standing, the reason of this
 custom, his only answer was, “no proper alla same that pigeon; no
 good.” very satisfactory, truly!
 on sunday the stores and shops of the chinese are kept open as
 usual. they regard no day as a sabbath. gambling is carried on to a
 very great extent among all classes. on entering a shop at almost
 any time, you will see a number of persons engaged in gambling in
 the rear portion of the room. the cards are long, narrow slips of
 pasteboard, with numerous chinese characters or devices inscribed
 upon them. the countenances of the players betrayed all the varieties
 of expression, from that of the fortunate to the unlucky gamester.
 one may behold the happy and contented look of the winner; again may
 be seen the countenance livid, lips compressed, eyes glaring, and the
 whole face betraying the intense excitement of the loser.
 it was unsafe at this time to walk the streets of hong kong at night,
 particularly in typen-shang, or the chinese portion, or among the
 boatmen who congregate on the wharves. although the police were
 extremely vigilant, very frequently was the pedestrian waylaid,
 knocked down, and robbed. the boatmen were not to be trusted, as
 many cases occurred where seamen, returning from the shore to their
 respective ships at night, were either drugged or knocked in the
 head, their pockets rifled, and bodies thrown overboard. an officer
 attached to the steam frigate susquehanna, while returning to the
 ship, was thus treated. his body was stripped of its
  clothing, and
 then thrown overboard, his murderers supposing him dead. however, the
 water revived him, and, being an excellent swimmer, he gained the
 nearest vessel in a weak and nearly exhausted state. another instance
 came to our notice while there. the master of one of the american
 merchantmen in port, while walking through the streets of the chinese
 portion of the town in broad daylight, was seized from behind, and
 his gold watch taken from him. as soon as possible he gave the alarm,
 and the rascal attempted flight. he was soon captured; not, however,
 until, seeing escape impossible, he dashed the watch against a stone
 building, thus destroying it. the punishment for theft, we were
 informed, is cutting off the hair of the culprit. as this is their
 greatest pride, they are disgraced forever when they lose their
 “tails;” and some of them have been known, feeling the disgrace so
 keenly, to proceed to the grave of a recently-interred chinaman, rob
 the dead of its ornamental appendage, and splice or fasten it upon
 their own in such a manner as to escape detection; then remove to
 some place where they were not known. many are seen, however, with
 no tails, and, like the fox in the fable, are shunned even by their
 own companions, who have the same desire for plunder, yet lack the
 courage to carry it out.
 while walking through the streets of the city in search of adventure
 one day, we were startled by a most horrid din, and, looking up,
 saw approaching a band of musicians, blowing and beating their
 instruments for dear life. following this were the bearers of a
 coffin, which was placed upon a bier, the coffin resembling very
 much in shape the trunk of a tree, with the larger or spreading
 part for the head of the deceased, who, we were informed, was the
 “head” of a family. next came the mourners—the wife and children
 of the deceased—dressed in pure white, which is their color for
 mourning. a
 number of the friends of the deceased, with about
 twenty american sailors, “slightly elevated,” brought up the rear.
 the whole procession was going on “a run”—music, mourners, and all
 hands—“running away from josh,” as boston jack informed us. “josh” is
 their evil spirit, and they believe that if they can get the deceased
 into the ground “in a hurry,” josh will not trouble him, especially
 if music is used to frighten him; and we could not but think that
 the “music by the band,” together with the shouts and yells of the
 drunken sailors, was enough to frighten his satanic majesty himself,
 and drive him out of the city. we stood viewing the procession until
 they passed from sight, and then came to the sage conclusion that “it
 takes all kinds of people to form a world.”
 they are very strict in their laws about marriage in one sense, and
 rather loose in another. a chinaman can have but one wife, who, in
 marrying, assumes his name; but he is allowed as many handmaids
 as he chooses to have. thus they avoid polygamy, and still practice
 it. marriage, also, between those bearing the same name is unlawful.
 the grounds of divorce are seven, some of which are rather amusing.
 the first is barrenness; the others are adultery, disobedience to
 the husband’s parents, talkativeness, thieving, ill-temper, and
 inveterate infirmities. any of these, however, may be set aside
 by three circumstances: the wife having mourned for the husband’s
 parents; the family, since marriage, having acquired wealth; and
 the wife having no parent to receive her back. it is, in all cases,
 disreputable for a widow to marry again, and in some instances,
 especially those of a particular rank, it is illegal.
 from the age of ten the females are kept very secluded, and have no
 opportunity of intercourse with the other sex until they are married.
 in fact, they never see their intended until the time of marriage.
 some of
 them, we should judge, would be sadly disappointed when they
 come to look at each other for the first time. all that they know
 of each other before marriage is through their fathers, mothers,
 or aunts, which, we should think, would be rather unsatisfactory.
 yet we are inclined to the belief that they do, by some hook or
 crook, manage sometimes to get a glimpse of each other’s faces
 before marriage, else how could the following lines have come into
 existence, especially the third line of the third verse? it is said
 to be chinese, though we rather incline to the contrary:
“oh, daughter of the great ching-chum,
whose eyes like kasian diamonds glow,
and wilt thou love thy fa-fe-fum,
my sweet, my lovely ho-ang ho?
“the swans their downy plumage lave
where lano’s wandering waters flow;
but can the swans of lano’s wave
compare with thee, my ho-ang ho?
“six moons have traveled through the skies,
and softly gleamed on kifing-o,
since first thy beauty met my eyes,
light of my soul, my ho-ang ho.
“oh! when i clasp thee to my breast,
chang-fee, to whom the nations bow,
shall not be half so truly bless’d
as fa-fe-fum and ho-ang ho!”
 the birth of a son is an occasion of great rejoicing; the family, or
 surname, is first given, and then the “milk name,” which is generally
 some diminutive endearment. a month after the event, the relatives
 and friends jointly send the child a silver plate, on which are
 engraven, “long life, honors, and felicity.” the boys are trained in
 behavior and ceremonies from their earliest childhood; and at four
 or five they commence reading. the importance of general education
 was felt so long since in china, that a work, written before the
 christian era,
 speaks of the ancient system of instruction, which
 required that every town and village, down to only a few families,
 should have a common school. the wealthy chinese employ private
 teachers, and others send their sons to day-schools, which are so
 well attended that the fees paid by each boy are extremely small. in
 large towns evening schools are held, that those who are compelled to
 labor through the day may not be without the advantages of education.
 a chinese school is a great curiosity to an american. they all study
 aloud, and it appears to cause no confusion with either teachers or
 scholars, though it would in a yankee school. but their appearance
 is the greatest curiosity. such a set of bald heads with young
 bodies, their only hair a braided queue hanging down the back—such
 young faces in the dress of old men, in frocks, leggins, and large
 shoes, with boys’ motions and actions, and the medley of voices—such
 a variety of grotesque sounds and tones, is a very novel sight, and
 would make a laughable picture; but it would be necessary to produce
 the sounds to give a correct idea of a chinese school.
 of all the objects of the care of the chinese, there are none to
 which they so religiously attend as the tombs of their ancestors,
 for they believe that any neglect is sure to be followed by worldly
 misfortune. it is here that they manifest a religious zeal which is
 hardly shown toward their gods. their ceremonies connected with the
 treatment of the dead are of a striking character. aside from the
 burial service, of which we have already spoken, there are others
 commanded by their ritual to be performed. the original and strict
 period of mourning is for a parent three years, but this is commonly
 reduced in practice to twenty-seven months. full three years must
 elapse from the death of a parent before a child can marry.
 a pleasing anecdote in relation to filial piety is related of a youth
 named ouang-ouci-yuen. having lost his mother, who was all that
 was dear to him, he passed the three years of mourning in a hut,
 employing himself in his retirement composing verses in honor of his
 parent. these are quoted by the chinese as models of sentiment and
 tenderness. the period of his mourning having elapsed, he returned to
 his former residence, but did not forget his filial affection. his
 mother had always expressed great fears of thunder, and, when it was
 stormy, would request her son not to leave her. therefore, as soon as
 he heard a storm coming on, he would hasten to his mother’s grave,
 saying softly to her, “i am here, mother.”
 the disposal of parental property by will is restricted to the legal
 heirs. the eldest son has a double portion, or, more correctly
 speaking, the property may be said to descend to the eldest son in
 trust for all the younger brothers. over them he has considerable
 authority. they generally live together, and club their shares, by
 which means families in this over-peopled country are more easily
 supported than they otherwise would be. the constant exhortations in
 the “book of sacred edicts” point to this usage, and the necessity
 for it, as they relate to the preservation of union and concord among
 kindred and their families.
 we are informed that the crime of infanticide prevails here to a
 great extent, especially as regards female infants. they consider it
 a great tax to bring them up and support them, as they think they
 receive no particular benefit from so doing. this crime is more
 common among the poorer classes, who, from their poverty, feel unable
 to support them. to male children they appear much attached.
 we were awakened one morning by the heavy guns of the “susquehanna,”
 and at first could not imagine
 the cause. but on gaining the deck
 and looking around we saw all our national vessels with their
 gayest colors flying, and smoke issuing from their sides. we then
 recollected it was the ever-to-be-remembered d of february, the
 anniversary birthday of our dearly-loved washington, the
 best and greatest man that ever lived. with great pride did we
 reflect that, so far from our own dear land even, his name and memory
 were revered, not only by his own countrymen, but by the descendants
 of those who would once have gloried in his defeat and death. the
 english naval vessels also dressed themselves in gay flags, the
 ever-beautiful stars and stripes flying at the foremast head,
 and following our own vessels in a national salute of thirty-one
 guns. determined not to be outdone by foreigners, after all the
 men-of-war in port had ceased firing, the “emily morgan” hoisted the
 stars and stripes at the mizzen peak, and other colors at the fore,
 main, and mizzen trucks, brought her “six-pounder” to the gangway,
 and belched forth. this proceeding created great astonishment
 among the government vessels, who little expected to see a whaler
 saluting the anniversary-day. but why not? we thought, and fired our
 thirty-one guns, ending with a hearty “three times three,” which made
 the old harbor ring again. the band from the “susquehanna” now struck
 up “hail columbia,” which seemed at once to transport us to the home
 of our beloved washington, our own dearly-loved home. the
 house of the american consul was thrown open to visitors, and we
 embraced the opportunity of calling and paying our respects. we there
 met many of our countrymen, who appeared to us like old friends,
 meeting at such a place and on such an occasion.
 while rambling through the city, we called at the rooms of a chinese
 artist, and there saw some beautiful paintings, mostly landscapes.
 the portraits were not as well executed, the majority being mere
 daubs. they
 appear greatly defective in painting the human figure,
 not having correct ideas of proportion, or arrangement of lights
 and shades. some of the paintings representing groups looked really
 ridiculous; but still, if they have a picture to copy, they do it
 very finely.
 their powers of imitation, it is said, are not excelled by any
 people, but they seemingly have no inventive faculties. yet we saw
 some things that would go to contradict this theory; and there is an
 anecdote which was told us by a citizen of hong kong, who vouched
 for its accuracy, that tends rather to disprove it, although the
 idea carried out was not, perhaps, strictly an original one. at
 the close of the celebrated “opium war,” some manufacturers at
 sheffield, england, hearing of the celebrated imitative powers of the
 chinese, sent to hong kong a quantity of the finest cambric needles,
 requesting their agent to ascertain if they could be imitated by
 the chinese. the agent, accordingly, took some of them to a chinese
 cutler, and, telling him what was wanted, left them. in a few days
 the needles were returned, with another package precisely similar,
 except that the needles manufactured by the chinaman all had eyes
 nicely drilled and finished in the points of them! the chinaman
 called the next day after he had sent the package, and requested the
 englishman to send his needles to england, and ascertain if they
 could be imitated. it is needle-ss to say that johnny bull never
 sent john chinaman any more cambric needles to imitate.
 still, if you wish an article made, they must have a copy, and that
 copy will be strictly followed. an anecdote illustrating this is
 related—the truth of which we do not vouch for, however—of an english
 midshipman, who wished half a dozen pairs of pants made, of blue
 cloth. accordingly, he selected his tailor, gave him the order, and
 left a pair as a pattern. it so happened that this pair had a small
 patch on the seat, and was minus
 several buttons; and when the new
 pants came on board, very neatly made, each had a similar patch, and
 the same number of buttons missing—the chinaman charging for the
 extra sewing. as may be supposed, the middy was in a great rage; but
 all the satisfaction he could get was that they were made exactly
 like the pattern left.
 the chinese manufacture a liquor which they call “sam shu,” which
 is very intoxicating, and of which they drink large quantities. it
 often happens that they entice our naval seamen to partake of this
 liquor, and they are as surely robbed as they do partake of it,
 for it is almost always drugged by them for the purpose, that they
 may the easier rob poor jack of his liberty money, or any thing else
 they can carry off. on awaking, finding himself stripped of every
 thing by the rascals, there is no resource for him but to return to
 his ship, which is done. one would think that this treatment once
 would be sufficient; yet it is practiced upon some many times.
 forgetting their former follies, they rush again into the embrace of
 the soul-destroying, maddening cup.
 having a desire to see something of the domestic life of the
 chinese, and possessing a moderate share of what is sometimes termed
 “impudence,” we, in company with two of our shipmates, invited
 ourselves to call upon a chinese family. selecting a house which
 had the appearance of having a wealthy owner, we marched to the
 door, and one of our number rapped. the door was opened by the lady
 of the house, and in we marched. she immediately motioned us to
 seats, looking at us, and evidently wondering to what she owed the
 honor of this visit. the house had a very neat, tidy appearance,
 as had also the hostess, who, though the mother of eight children,
 appeared scarcely thirty years of age. they were boys, all but two,
 and were romping about the
 room, raising “ned” at a great rate. it
 being their dinner-hour, she went about her business, leaving her
 polite visitors to make observations and amuse themselves as they
 pleased. she soon returned, and placed on the centre of the floor
 a large dish of boiled rice, another with vegetables, called the
 children, and seated them on the floor around the “wittles.” after
 passing us some tea, she took her station with the children, placed
 a portion of the rice and vegetables on the plate of each one, gave
 them their “chop-sticks” and told them, as we supposed, to commence.
 and commence they did. these chop-sticks are two round, slim pieces
 of ivory, about eight inches in length, which supply the place of
 both fork and spoon. with the chop-sticks in the right hand and the
 dish in the left, with its edge close to the mouth, the velocity with
 which they “fork” down the rice is certainly surprising. they handle
 these singular sticks with the greatest ease, picking up whatever
 they wish, and conveying it to the mouth.
 the principal food of the chinese consists of rice, vegetables, and
 fruit—eating little or no meat. the tea which our hostess had the
 kindness to pass us was of a most excellent flavor. they drink no tea
 but black, that being their favorite. it is very different from any
 we ever drank in america, having a much better flavor. after thanking
 the lady for her kindness, we took our leave, strolling into the
 “josh house,” or temple of worship.
 this building is of one story, but covers a large area of ground.
 it is very fancifully decorated on the outside; and on each side of
 the entrance is a large sculptured dragon, about twelve or fifteen
 feet in height. on coming to the gateway, we found the entrance paved
 with smoothly-hewn stone, and, ascending a few steps, we entered
 the building. near the centre of the first room stands, or rather
 sits, cross-legged, a great, disagreeable-looking
  bronze idol. it
 is from twenty to thirty feet high; is represented as very fat, with
 an immense belly, and laughing, as if very happy. before him is
 suspended a lantern, and in it a dim red light is burning, which is
 never permitted to go out. on a table-like altar in front josh-sticks
 were smoking. in front of this table is a large metallic urn for
 containing the ashes of the josh-sticks and offerings. before the
 altar, in a line, are three stools, covered with little mats, for
 the worshipers to kneel upon. above, near the roof, is a chinese
 inscription in gilt letters; and each side of a post, extending from
 the roof to the floor, is lined with the same kind of characters.
 on the right were two other gods, facing toward the left, also in a
 sitting posture, the legs being turned out, and the right foot of
 each resting on the back of a tortoise. they were about twenty-five
 or thirty feet high, and eighteen feet in circumference around
 their middle. they were ornamented with bright and various colors,
 and gilded and decorated in a profuse manner, appearing more like
 theatrical characters than gods. many smaller figures of the human
 form are about the feet of the larger ones, as if paying them
 homage. these, also, are richly and handsomely painted, and gilded
 in a similar manner. all the gods have shrines, kneeling-stools,
 and josh-sticks placed before them. the first of these gods, on the
 right of this room, is represented as a black man, with a huge beard,
 wearing a crown, and holding a sword in one hand. this is the god
 of war. the other is the god of music, with a complexion light and
 delicate, animated features, and regularly trimmed mustaches. he is
 playing a guitar, and smaller chinese figures are playing at his feet.
 on the left of the room, facing toward and corresponding with those
 on the right, were two other gods of the same size and style, and
 seated in the same manner as
 those on the opposite side of the hall.
 one of them had in one hand a dragon’s egg, with the young dragon
 just presenting itself, while in its other hand was held, writhing
 about the arm, a serpent which he was crushing. the other god held a
 flag, and had a very self-conceited expression of countenance, as if
 he was a very great character in his own estimation. these are the
 gods of vengeance and justice.
 we passed through a door in the back part of the room into a second
 apartment. this room contains the greatest number of idols, and is
 where the principal religious ceremonies are performed. idols are
 arranged all round the room, and there are several in the centre. as
 you enter the door, three huge gods, twenty-five feet high, appear,
 looking very demurely, with eyes cast downward. two goddesses, one
 on each side, stand facing at right angles. they are all very richly
 dressed—the goddesses particularly so, having crowns on their heads.
 the others have nothing on their heads but a sort of skull-cap,
 without a front-piece. the usual amount of vases, josh-sticks, etc.,
 were standing around, besides various other things, the use of which
 we did not learn. on the left of the altar was a large iron kettle,
 used for a drum; and there was also a hollow instrument, made from
 a peculiar kind of wood, and in the shape of a large sleigh-bell,
 for drumming purposes. back of all these idols is a goddess mounted
 upon an ass, the head of the animal being turned up toward her, as if
 braying. the gods around the outside of this room were in two rows,
 and were about the size of men, of various patterns and designs,
 probably that each worshiper might choose a god for himself.
 while examining matters and things in this room, a female approached,
 and, going to a desk or counter that stood in one part of the room,
 held a short conversation with a priest who stood there. she then
 purchased a
 bunch of fire-crackers (such as young america delights
 in on independence days); then advanced to one of the large idols,
 kneeled down, bowing her head so that it touched the stone floor,
 three times in succession. she then took two sticks or pieces of
 wood, resembling oyster-shells, which she held above her head and
 let fall. this she repeated, bowing her head to the stone floor two
 or three times, taking particular care, however, not to strike the
 floor hard enough to break any of the stones, or her head either.
 appearing not to be satisfied, she arose, her countenance betraying
 great anguish. leaving her angry god, she turned to the goddess, who,
 she thought, would better understand her feelings, being a woman like
 herself, and, with her head bowed again, went through the same forms.
 this time, on arising, she appeared more pleased, and, lighting
 josh-sticks, she again commenced, holding the burning sticks in her
 hand, advancing to the goddess, then receding from it, then bowing to
 the floor, striking the head, etc., besides much more that was about
 as foolish. she then lighted the crackers, and threw them around in
 all directions. at last she took a bamboo box of tablets in her hand,
 shook it till one fell out, with some chinese motto on it, which she
 carried to the priest, who interpreted it, giving her a corresponding
 slip of paper, which, we suppose, after being burned, entitles her to
 some thousands of cash in their spirit-world, or admits her to some
 great honors and privileges. any person, by paying a few cash, can
 shake the box and obtain a similar receipt. after chin-chinning the
 principal god in the room, she departed.
 in all the chinese houses which we visited josh-sticks are kept
 continually burning, to drive away the evil spirits, and keep them
 from harm.
 while a part of the ship’s company were on shore enjoying themselves,
 the remainder, on board ship, were
 continually devising means
 to “kill time.” on one occasion, tom w., our old joker, made his
 appearance on deck, presenting a most comical figure. he had on a
 pair of pants that came within six inches of his ankles, with a
 narrow piece of leather passing around the bottom of his feet for
 straps; a coat with the waist between his shoulders, and the skirts
 trailing the decks; the whole surmounted by a tall, bell-crowned
 hat, with narrow rim. about his neck was suspended a boatswain’s
 whistle. rigged out in this style, he mounted the “hurricane deck,”
 and commenced pacing to and fro with great dignity. on board the
 “susquehanna” they were exercising the men in loosing and furling
 the sails, and every time the whistle of the boatswain sounded on
 board, tom replied, imitating them as nearly as possible, and turning
 “full front” to the frigate, over whose sides were seen sundry heads,
 peering at the whaler to see what could be the matter. to all this,
 however, tom paid no attention, but continued his dignified strut,
 interspersing his walk with all manner of “calls” on his boatswain’s
 whistle. the quarter-master of the frigate now leveled his glass
 at the whaler’s “boatswain,” and took a long squint. perceiving
 this, tom called for his glass, and one of the boys passed him a
 handspike. bringing it to bear, he “squinted” in return at the
 quarter-master; then would take a turn or two fore and aft the
 deck, give a shrill whistle, and again level his “glass.” by this
 time most of the officers of the “susquehanna” were gathered on the
 quarter-deck of that vessel, staring at us, and probably thinking all
 hands drunk or crazy. tom, who knew how far to carry the joke, now
 came down from his elevated position.
 the sails having been loosed to dry during the day, toward evening
 the watch were sent up to furl them. every thing in readiness, tom’s
 whistle sounded, all hands sprang into the rigging, and mounted
 aloft. the
 sail was rolled on the yard at the sound of the whistle;
 the men descended from aloft, and mounted, furled a second, then a
 third sail, and so on through the whole programme: all was done at
 the sound of the boatswain’s whistle. this proceeding “astonished
 the natives;” the officers and crews of the several men-of-war and
 other vessels gazing at the new “wrinkle,” and systematic style of
 performing work on board a yankee sperm whaler!
 notwithstanding the fact that numerous naval vessels belonging to
 the united states, england, and france are nearly all the time on
 this station, yet the coast and canton river swarm with chinese
 pirates. the government of china, also, has an armed junk, mounting
 twelve guns, stationed on the coast, for the ostensible purpose of
 protecting commerce; but it is pretty strongly believed that this
 chinese man-of-war not only winks at the piracies committed, but
 is not backward about running up the black flag herself on certain
 occasions. about the time we arrived at hong kong, a brig bound to
 some part of the east indies was overhauled, before she was clear
 of the bay, by a number of fishing-junks, as they professed to call
 themselves, and, after massacring nearly all the crew, and wounding
 the remainder—leaving them dead, as they supposed—they rifled the
 brig, taking away every thing they found of any value. the next
 morning she was found in this disabled condition by the chinese
 man-of-war, who took her in tow, and brought her into port. one
 of the english men-of-war immediately got under weigh, and, after
 cruising among the various islands a few days, overhauled some of
 the junks and brought them in. the prisoners were immediately taken
 ashore and tried; several were hung, and the remainder imprisoned at
 hard labor for the remainder of their lives.
 we had heard much of the chinese theatre, or sing
  song, as they term
 it, and concluded we would pay it a visit. the building, which is a
 temporary erection, is very large, built of bamboo, and capable of
 containing four or five thousand persons. the gallery is large and
 commodious, it being built for the accommodation of the “fan-qui-loo”
 (foreign devils). the celestials occupy the pit, and, there being no
 seats, they are compelled to stand. to see such a mass of heads, “all
 shaven and shorn,” in one compact space, swaying to and fro, and hear
 the continual buzz of their voices, is really amusing. and then to
 watch them as a policeman goes through the crowd, semi-occasionally
 bringing his short club down upon the bare heads of the chinese,
 just heavy enough to make them sing out “hi-yar-r-h! how can do?
 no proper.” still, they make room for him, not caring to receive a
 second whack. after looking at the crowd below us, and wondering
 where they all came from, until we became somewhat restless, we were
 fairly startled by a most frightful, horrible din. gongs, bells,
 and sundry other equally harmonious instruments were made visible,
 and the “orchestra” were beating and playing them as if each were
 paid according to the amount of noise he made, and was determined
 to win. this horrible music, as they termed it, appeared to
 increase, until we were obliged to stop our ears with our fingers, to
 prevent being entirely deafened. however, it ceased as suddenly as
 it commenced, and the performers made their appearance, dressed in
 the richest chinese style. alter going through a sort of pantomime,
 which lasted about half an hour, a couple of them, who appeared to
 be leaders of the different parties, jabbered away at each other in
 chinese, and finally commenced a regular fight, which soon became
 general, all hands “pitching in” in the most scientific chinese
 manner. fire-crackers were burned, gongs sounded, and other warlike
 demonstrations generally were gone through with, until one of the
 parties, having killed their opponents, now dragged them from the
 stage. this was followed by other scenes equally interesting to those
 who could understand nothing that was said. the performances closed
 by acrobatic feats, which were equal, if not superior, to any we ever
 saw. we can only sum up the whole by saying the crowd was immense,
 the performance nonsensical, and the music horrible.
 the chinese method of erecting stone buildings is very singular; and,
 although it shows the inferiority of the celestials to the “outside
 barbarians,” still it is very ingenious. a perpendicular bamboo wall
 is first built as a guide, and the stones are then laid inside and
 against it till the walls are complete. one would naturally think
 that they could lay the stone wall as perpendicular as they could
 build the bamboo, yet we were assured they could not. we noticed a
 fine building in process of erection—a masonic temple. this building
 was for the use of a lodge working under a charter from england, and
 composed of english and american residents.
 we were rejoiced to learn that a “bethel” had been established
 in hong kong, and we gladly accepted the opportunity given us of
 attending it. it is a floating “bethel,” and seems especially
 adapted to the wants of seamen, who feel much more “at home” there
 than inside brick walls. the chaplain appeared to be an excellent,
 earnest, kind man, devoted to the cause in which he was engaged. we
 were pleased to notice the quiet deportment and strict attention paid
 to the remarks by the seamen in attendance.
 we had now been in hong kong several weeks, and it was time for the
 “old man” to think of deep water again. accordingly, on tuesday,
 february th, we commenced preparations for sea—for our last
 cruise. our provisions, water and all, were on board, and all that
 was wanting was the word, and the anchor would soon be apeak. a
 little incident transpired, however, which served to detain us a
 day longer. several chinese merchants were on board, showing their
 goods and doing their best endeavors to effect sales. they knew,
 from seeing the “blue peter” at the fore, that we were to sail on
 that day, and they were off in great numbers in consequence. among
 the rest were several shoemakers, who appeared determined to sell.
 after a good deal of bargaining and bantering, the chief mate ordered
 all to leave instanter. in collecting their shoes preparatory to
 leaving, one of them discovered, or supposed he discovered, a pair
 missing, for which he had received no pay. this put him in a great
 rage, and he left muttering vengeance on the “’parme whaler,” as he
 termed it. he soon returned, however, accompanied by a policeman,
 who explained what he came for. the chinaman charged one of the
 crew with stealing them, whose chest was immediately searched, but
 no shoes were found. there was now no remedy but the man must go on
 shore before a magistrate. in company with the chief mate, the man
 proceeded to the magistrate’s office, where the chinaman was called
 upon to make his statement. after having sworn him as to the truth of
 it, the prisoner was put upon the witness’ stand and sworn. on
 being asked if he saw the chinaman on board the ship with shoes for
 sale, he answered “yes.”
“did you take any of those shoes unlawfully?” was the next question.
“no, sir,” was the answer.
 “did you see any person take any shoes unlawfully from the
 plaintiff?”
“no, sir.”
 the magistrate now turned to the celestial, and sternly remarked:
 “look here, john chinaman, if you ever come before me again with such
 a story, i will send you
 to the ‘lock-up’ for two years,” and then dismissed the case.
 the following day, march st, we took our anchor from china soil,
 bade adieu to hong kong, and with light hearts made sail for japan.
 the pilot remained with us until the day following, when we took
 leave of him with three hearty cheers, with three more for a “lucky
 cruise.”
 fishing junks.—new companions.—stove boat, yet good luck.—heavy
 gales.—bashee islands.—loo choos.—the “reaper” again.—whaling ship
 “jireh perry.”—ship “alabama.”—“gamming.”—ship “roscoe.”—a cure
 for “bruisers.”—ship “e. l. b. jenney.”—bark “empress.”—ormsby’s
 peak.—bonin islands.—turtles.—peel’s island.—a narrow escape.—bonin
 island inhabitants.—japan expedition.—an old shipmate.—another
 runaway.—fourth of july celebration.—ship “rambler.”—ship
 “hope.”—parting with an old friend.—fishing.—the last lowering.—bound
 for the sandwich islands.—maui and molokai.—lahaina.—anchor
 down.—description of lahaina.—king’s palace.—lahainaluna.—rules and
 regulations.—sports and pastimes.—letters from home.—productions of
 maui.—captain m‘culloch.—sad news.—death of stoddard.—voracity of the
 shark.—kanaka church.—small-pox.
 thursday morning, march d, saw us clear of the land, with no wind,
 and enveloped in a thick fog. at noon the fog commenced rising, and
 as it continued slowly, exposed to our view a swarm of fishing junks.
 this did not create a very pleasant feeling in our midst, as we well
 knew that many of the so-called fishing junks were only pirates in
 disguise. one of them sent a boat with some fish, which we purchased,
 and then sent him off, as we did not like his appearance. it was
 still calm, and all hands were “whistling for a breeze,” which soon
 came, and before evening we were bowling it off at the rate of nine
 knots.
 we had forgotten to mention that while in port we shipped two men,
 an officer and a boat-steerer. the officer, mr. m., was a windy,
 braggadocio fellow, not over-stocked with common sense, whom all
 hands learned soon to hate and despise. the other, davy, the
 boat-steerer, was a frenchman, a very quiet, easy fellow, not at all
 inclined to kill himself with hard work.
 we had been but a few days from port, and while yet in the china sea,
 when the glad cry was heard, “t-h-e-r-e she b-l-o-w-s.” as this was
 our last cruise, it can be easily imagined how “eager for the fray”
 we were. down went the boats, the men following, feeling decidedly
 fishy. the larboard and starboard boats soon fastened, and killed
 their whales with but little trouble; but not so with the bow boat.
 our new officer must needs “show off” his skill, and, after fastening
 to his whale, drove the boat completely on to him, when he turned,
 and commenced very coolly chewing the boat to pieces. this was very
 unfortunate, as the waist boat, which was nearly up to a fourth
 whale, was necessarily obliged to go to the relief of the stove boat.
 the wounded whale fortunately received the harpoon in a vital part,
 and soon “turned up,” so that we got three whales, which was not a
 bad commencement for the cruise.
 we now experienced very heavy gales of wind—what seamen call the
 “tail end” of a typhoon. it came upon us at first unawares, and we
 were near losing all our sails and spars, which would have rendered
 us a complete wreck. for an hour or two the wind would blow with
 tremendous force—it appeared that every thing must give way; and
 then a calm of an hour or two would occur, the sea now rolling and
 pitching in great fury. this weather lasted for two or three days;
 and when pleasant weather again broke upon us, never was it more
 welcome. we now sighted the northern islands of the bashee group, and
 it was with difficulty that we kept clear of them.
 on thursday, march th, we sighted the southernmost island of the
 loo choo group, belonging to the japan government. these islands
 possessed a peculiar interest to us at this time, as commodore perry
 was then on his celebrated expedition to japan, and it was expected
 he would visit the loo choos about this time.
 twice during our voyage had death visited us, and taken from us
 officers and shipmates. again he came, and on this occasion visited
 the forecastle, taking with him one of our roratongo natives. he
 died on monday, april th, of consumption. when he left his native
 island he was troubled with a severe cough, which grew worse rather
 than better, until his condition was one past all hope. while in
 hong kong he was placed in the hospital, and every thing that
 medical skill could do to effect a cure was resorted to, but all
 in vain. the captain endeavored to persuade him to remain there,
 promising to leave him so situated that he would be as comfortable as
 possible while he lived; but this he would not consent to. he said
 he did not wish to remain there and die among strangers, but would
 rather be with those with whom he had lately lived—those who were
 his acquaintances, and among his native friends. every thing that
 could be done by captain, officers, and crew to make his last days
 comfortable and happy, was done. but the time drew near when he was
 to depart. death already stood at his bedside, awaiting the summons
 to convey him over the dark river. calling his kanaka friends about
 him, whose tears flowed fast and full, he gave them sundry messages
 to his parents, brothers, and sisters; told them to say to all he
 died a christian, firm in the faith of a redeeming savior; and that,
 although his body might be buried in the depths of the dark blue sea,
 yet his soul would ascend to that glorious home above, which his
 savior had “prepared for all those who love him.” he exhorted us all,
 in as strong a voice as his weak nature would permit, to prepare for
 death, for death would as surely come to us as to him. requesting his
 native friends to sing, in their language, his favorite “missionary
 hymn,” as he termed it, “oh! that will be joyful, joyful, joyful,”
 etc., he quietly dropped asleep in death.
 what a lesson was here taught us nominal christians by this poor
 native! an inhabitant of an island but a few years since barbarous,
 dying strong in the faith of a blessed immortality beyond the grave.
 if all the missionaries who have left their homes to labor for the
 spread of the gospel among the heathen had accomplished no more,
 through christ, than the salvation of this one native, yet were they
 well repaid. “what shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world
 and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
 soul?”
 at four p.m. all sail was taken in, the ensign half-mast, and again
 were all hands called to “witness burial service.” after the usual
 ceremonies, which were very affecting, the plank was raised, and the
 body committed to the deep.
 reader, when you die, it will be, we trust, in the sabbath calm
 of your hushed chamber; but the poor sailor dies at sea, between
 the narrow decks of his rolling home. the last accents that reach
 your ear will be those of love and affection, such as alone flow
 from a mother’s heart and a sister dear; the last sounds that reach
 the dying sailor’s ear are the hoarse murmur of that wave which
 seems impatient to grasp its victim. you will be buried beneath the
 green tree, where love and grief may go to strew their flowers and
 cherish your virtues; but the poor sailor is hearsed in the dark
 depths of the ocean, there to drift about in its under-currents
 till the great judgment day. alas! for the poor sailor, often the
 child of misfortune, impulse, and error, his brief life fraught with
 privations, hardship, and peril, his grave, at last, the foaming
 deep! though man pity him not, may god, in his great mercy, remember
 his weaknesses and trials, and save him through his son!
 from this time until about the th of april we were very successful,
 obtaining, in three weeks’ time, about
  three hundred barrels of
 oil. this, with the whales we captured in the china sea, increased
 our store nearly four hundred barrels since leaving hong kong. as a
 matter of course, all hands, from captain to cook, were in the best
 possible humor. this was our last cruise, and “every whale counted.”
 we were now steering for the bonin islands, to procure turtle, sweet
 potatoes, watermelons, etc.
 saturday, april th, brought to view a sail on our weather beam, the
 clipper whaler “jireh perry,” of new bedford, captain lawrence. this
 man was a perfect tyrant on board ship, and no crew had ever sailed
 with him from home and returned. it was stated, and pretty generally
 believed, that he had killed no less than three men since he had
 become master of a ship; yet, because he always was fortunate enough
 to obtain large quantities of oil, and mean enough to treat his crew
 so that they would all desert at the last port touched at before
 leaving for home rather than go home in the ship, thereby leaving
 all the profits to the owners, he could obtain a ship of whom he
 liked.
 a few days later we spoke the “alabama,” captain coggeshall, who
 reported that the day before captain l., of the “jireh perry,” had
 shot his cook for some trifling cause.
 on saturday, may st, we “gammed” with our old friends of the
 “mohawk.” probably the reader is unacquainted with the meaning of
 the term “gam,” which is peculiar to whalemen alone. it is simply
 visiting from one ship to another. when two ships meet, one captain
 invites the other to come on board and pass the day. on his arrival
 with a boat’s crew, the chief mate of the vessel that has given
 the invitation returns with a boat’s crew from his own ship to the
 stranger, thus leaving the two captains on one ship, and the two
 mates on the other, and exchanging boat’s crews. the first
  salute
 generally is, “how are you, shipmate? how long are you out? how
 much oil have you got? what part of the states are you from?” but a
 short time elapses before all hands are acquainted; the visitors are
 invited into the forecastle, where some time is spent in spinning
 yarns. after a short general conversation, the song is called for,
 and some one, generally the singer of the ship, leads off, singing
 some love-ditty, pirate, or sailor song, all hands joining in the
 chorus, and making the welkin ring. the song goes round, and he who
 can not sing must spin a yarn; all must contribute to the general
 amusement. the day passes pleasantly away, all labor being suspended
 except the look-out for whales and sailing the ship. these “gams”
 are to the sailor moments of recreation, and serve to create general
 satisfaction among all hands. during these “gams” whales are often
 raised, and the oil secured on the occasion is equally divided
 between the two ships, “be the same more or less.”
 a queer genius was captain hayden, of the “roscoe.” meeting him about
 the st of june, captain ewer invited him on board. on crossing
 the “roscoe’s” stern, we observed that captain h. had his right
 arm in a sling. fears were expressed that he had injured himself
 in some manner. his head also was bound up in a handkerchief.
 coming alongside, the man-rope was swung to him, and he came up the
 ship’s side with one hand, keeping the other in the sling. after
 congratulations had been exchanged, captain e. anxiously inquired
 what was the matter with his arm, “hoping he had not injured it
 severely, or broken any bones.” captain h. replied, his countenance
 as grave as a judge, that “he had been at work very hard during the
 day, and his arm being somewhat tired, he was merely resting it!”
 captain e. replied that he might have suspected some trick of that
 kind, and asked him “what was the matter
 with his head; if that had
 been hard at work also?” he pulled off the handkerchief which bound
 it, and exposed a completely bald head; making the remark that “he
 had not seen a whale for two months, and he had shaved his head, and
 should keep it so, until he took one hundred barrels of oil.” after
 passing a very pleasant day and evening they departed. we now shaped
 our course for the bonin islands.
 it is sometimes the case that disputes arise among the foremast
 hands, and, instead of settling the matter in an amicable manner,
 resort is often had to blows. an instance of this kind occurring
 about this time, and reaching the captain’s ears, the disputants were
 called aft, and each were furnished with a rope, and ordered to flog
 one another until he told them to stop. this novel mode of settling
 the affair they did not relish, yet obey they must, and at it they
 went. after belaboring each other to their hearts’ content, they were
 ordered to cease, and went forward rather ashamed of themselves.
 we saw the “e. l. b. jenny,” of fairhaven, captain marsh, on friday,
 june th. they had taken, a few days previous, a whale which “stowed
 down” upward of one hundred and thirty barrels. such whales are very
 “few and far between.”
 on wednesday, june th, we raised a strange sail to leeward. running
 down to her, we found it to be the bark “empress,” a peruvian
 merchantman, from cumsingmoon, china, to callao, with four hundred
 chinese coolies on board, bound to the mines in peru. this system of
 deception is equaled only by the african slave-trade. the chinese
 (who are generally of the lower classes) are allured, by flattering
 inducements, to go to california, or some other equally rich country,
 where, they are told, they will become rich in a few years, and can
 return to their own country. as soon as they get them on shipboard,
 a guard is stationed over them, with
 orders to shoot down the
 first one that shows any signs of resistance. being kept such close
 prisoners, and on the coarsest food, they are naturally joyous at the
 sight of land, and leave the vessel with glad hearts, only to enter
 the slavery of the peruvian mines. this species of slave-trade is,
 like the african slave-trade in our own land, forbidden by the laws
 of the country, but secretly connived and winked at.
 “ormsby’s peak,” of which we give a sketch taken on shipboard, we saw
 on saturday, june th. it rises about two hundred feet above the
 level of the ocean, and has no shallow shores around it. soundings
 can not be obtained close to the rock. it is one of nature’s great
 curiosities.
 on thursday, june d, we first raised the bonin islands, consisting
 of perry’s group, peel’s and bailey’s islands. we here caught a
 green turtle, who was asleep upon the water. we soon had him in our
 coppers, making turtle-soup for all hands.
 the morning of monday, june th, saw us close in to peel’s island.
 this island presents a fine appearance from the sea, the land being
 moderately high, and thickly covered with verdure. on the west side
 is a fine harbor with good anchorage, and very convenient for ships
 wishing to water. about  a.m. the wind died away, leaving it a dead,
 dull calm, and the current slowly drifted us toward the northern
 point of the island. as we neared the land destruction appeared
 almost inevitable, and we feared that the voyage of the “emily
 morgan” was about being brought to a sudden termination, leaving her
 bones to bleach upon the rocks. but an overruling providence held
 all in his hands, and, when within a stone’s throw of the shore, we
 struck a westerly current, which swept us clear of the point.
 it still continued calm until wednesday the th. during that day
 a breeze sprang up, and we again made the land. captain e. and
 a boat’s crew had been on shore two days, in consequence of our
 drifting away from the land. they came off on this day, bringing
 with them some sweet potatoes and two fine large turtle. but very
 few persons reside on these islands—some twelve or fifteen. mr.
 savory, the oldest inhabitant, came to peel’s island in , and
 has never left it. all living on the island are english or american.
 irish and sweet potatoes, corn, melons, onions, and nearly all
 kinds of vegetables, are raised with the greatest ease. oranges and
 pine-apples are of spontaneous growth, and abundant. green turtle,
 also, are found here in great numbers, and easily procured.
 the expedition to japan, under commodore perry, paid this island
 a visit, and the commodore was very strongly impressed with the
 idea of making it a naval and coal dépôt for vessels plying between
 san francisco, australia, and hong kong; so much so that he took
 possession of a portion of it (with the consent and approbation of
 the inhabitants), and sent on shore three men, with agricultural
 implements, seeds, live-stock, etc., to experiment, while he
 proceeded to the loo choos, and to await his return.
 the reader will doubtless recollect one “john wilds,” who sailed with
 us a short time during the first part of the voyage, and who left to
 go to the gold mines in australia. what was our surprise to find him
 living on peel’s island. he informed us that, finding it rather hard
 digging in australia, he shipped for hong kong, where he joined a
 whaler. serving a short season in her, he left, and had since resided
 on peel’s island, raising vegetables, and catching turtle for ships.
 he had thrown aside the profession of sailor, and had become a
 merchant.
 while all hands were busily engaged, from ship to shore, and shore
 to ship, laying in a stock of vegetables
 and turtle for our last
 cruise, one of our men became so enamored with peel’s island that he
 concluded to take french leave. accordingly, while on shore, he took
 to his heels and made off. the officer in charge of the boat gave
 chase, but the man was too nimble for him, and he was soon out of
 sight. foolish fellow! he was the loser some four hundred dollars by
 the operation, and in a few months later lost his life, having been
 capsized in a boat and drowned.
 we now come to the last anniversary of our nation’s birthday that we
 were destined to spend together in our ocean home, and we resolved
 that it should be a merry one. all unnecessary work was suspended;
 the doctor was ordered to serve up his best dishes for the occasion,
 and all hands went in for a merry time—a celebration on our own hook.
 during the morning a national salute was fired, the glorious stars
 and stripes floating proudly at our mizzen peak the mean while. at
 twelve dinner was announced. the bill of fare, as presented by the
 doctor, was turtle soup, boiled turtle, fried turtle, and turtle in
 every conceivable way; sweet potatoes; cakes; pies; custards; turtle
 eggs, fried and boiled; plum duff, etc., etc.—the whole forming a
 repast that jack seldom sits down to. all hands did ample justice to
 the dinner, which the old darkey cook received as a great compliment.
 “i tought,” said he, “i fix dinner for you dis foufh july just suit
 you, and i been gone done it.” we now postponed further proceedings
 until evening. among other good things, the steward had brewed a
 barrel of excellent small beer for the occasion from sweet potatoes
 and hops. and now the watch had been set; none on deck save the man
 at the wheel and the officer pacing his rounds. forward were all
 hands in the forecastle, which was brilliantly illuminated by the
 real spermaceti—the spoils of our own hard-fought battles—each one
 seated with his pot of beer before him.
 the song was called for;
 and “hail columbia!” was sung by yankees, englishmen, frenchmen,
 spaniards, portuguese, and kanakas, as never sung before. patriotic
 speeches followed, and the sentiment of devotion to our country was
 toasted: “three times three,” with a will, was given for the “land
 of the free and the home of the brave.” the kanakas and portuguese,
 although not understanding the “merits of the case,” entered into
 the sport with a hearty good-will, drinking their small-beer,
 occasionally exclaiming, “hurra fourth july! very good; i like s’pose
 he come every day.” and thus our last fourth of july in a whaler
 passed. although not making as much of a “splurge” as did many
 patriots on that day, yet our hearts beat as true, and expressed as
 much devotion to our country.
 from this time our good fortune, that had followed us during the
 cruise so far, appeared to gain. during the next thirty days we
 captured nearly three hundred barrels of oil, which was in itself
 a good season’s work. fortune had at last crowned our efforts with
 success, and each day, as it passed, would hear some one exclaim,
 “one day less on board the old hooker!”
 nothing of peculiar interest transpired further during the cruise
 except an occasional meeting with a brother whaleman. we were all
 the time working our way to the eastward, preparatory to leaving the
 ground in september. on tuesday, august th, spoke the “rambler,” of
 nantucket, captain potter. soon after parting company, we lowered
 our boats and captured two large whales, they yielding us about one
 hundred and sixty barrels of oil. on the th of the same month we
 gammed with the “hope,” of new bedford, captain gifford. we found him
 quite ill, and hardly able to walk the deck; yet in this same feeble
 condition, a few days previous, when whales were raised, he had been
 placed in his boat, bolstered up with pillows, and actually
  captured
 a large whale. nothing, he said, but his anxiety to get a good voyage
 induced him to do so.
 the following day we again gammed with our old friends of the
 “roscoe.” it will be remembered that we had with us a kanaka from
 simpson’s island, whom we called “dick simpson.” as he did not
 wish to go to america, the captain told him that he might go into
 the first ship that we met that would take him to his island. an
 opportunity now presented itself in the “roscoe,” and dick availed
 himself of it. the captain gave him his discharge, and paid him in
 tobacco, pipes, calico, trinkets, etc.—the currency of “his land”—and
 dick prepared to leave us. nearly every one of the crew made him
 some present as a token of affection, for we all loved good-natured,
 obliging dick simpson. what if his skin was of a dingy hue, he had
 a brave, good heart, as we all could testify, and we could see that
 heart was heavy as he bade us each an adieu. the “pumps” of more
 than one warm-hearted sailor were “set going” on that occasion, but
 none were ashamed of them. neither was he soon forgotten, but long
 remembered by us all.
 we now, for a few days, turned our attention to fishing on a somewhat
 different scale than we had been. it is a peculiarity of the japan
 sperm-whale fishing-ground that ships are surrounded nearly the
 whole season by albicore and bonita. these fish are easily caught in
 the following manner: the fisherman seats himself upon the weather
 rail, first provided with a line and hook, the bait consisting of
 a small piece of white rag. this is fastened to the back of the hook
 in a peculiar manner, so as to resemble a pair of wings as much as
 possible. then skimming the hook thus baited along the surface of the
 water as the ship goes through it, the foolish albicore or bonita
 sees it, and, thinking to make a meal off some unlucky flying-fish,
 makes a leap for it, and finds
 himself immediately landed upon deck.
 often have we sat thus, and hauled them in as fast as we could drop
 the line and disengage the hook. as we before remarked, all hands,
 for two or three days, turned our attention to this kind of fishing,
 and we soon had about fifty barrels of them cleaned and salted for
 “liberty money” in the sandwich islands: they there command the
 highest price.
 as there must be a “first time for every thing,” so, we suppose,
 there must be a “last time” also. we had had our “first lowering,”
 and the time had now arrived when, we hoped, we were to have our
 “last.” the captain had informed us that, “just as soon as we got one
 hundred and fifty barrels more, we could sing ‘homeward bound.’” no
 one was dull now at masthead; all eyes were open; and the mastheads
 were double manned with volunteers every day. not long was it to be
 before our wishes were gratified. on the morning of friday, september
 , at about  o’clock, the old cry—never before so welcome—“t-h-e-r-e
 s-h-e b-l-o-w-s!” broke forth. the excitement that ensued beggars
 description. the day was beautiful; the whales were to leeward;
 and a nice breeze was sending us slowly through the water. every
 circumstance was in our favor. the men knew the conditions of our
 being able to soon
 point our ship’s head homeward. we were now
 nearly four years from home. many of us had heard no word—not even
 a word—from the dear friends we left behind. every man looked
 “whale” as he stepped into the boat, and our young fourth mate—a
 boy in years, but a man in soul—said to his crew as he left the
 ship, “boys, you need not expect to put foot upon the emily’s decks
 again till we have drawn the claret from one of those fellows.” and
 they did not. in less than two hours after lowering, two more of
 the leviathans of the deep had ceased to live. they were brought
 alongside and secured. the captain now called all hands aft, and
 complimented them upon the day’s success, proposed three cheers,
 which were given, and which made the old ship ring again: “and now,”
 said he, “let us have their jackets in on deck as soon as possible.”
 the following wednesday we stowed down the oil, and found we had one
 hundred and sixty barrels, ten more than we asked for, but which
 was “good for leeway.” the ship’s head was now pointed toward the
 sandwich islands, with all sail, every stitch we could carry, crowded
 upon her. joy now reigned throughout the ship.
 on monday, october th, we sighted the islands of maui and molokai.
 the weather was thick and squally, and we stood off and on the
 land that night, and the following day steered down the passage
 between the two islands. at noon we came in sight of the anchorage
 and shipping, but, the wind dying away to a calm, we were not able
 to come to an anchor until  p.m. of the next day, wednesday. it
 was hard to bear, lying in a calm, in sight of the anchorage, for
 twenty-four hours; but we had to submit. but we finally dropped our
 anchor, for the last time on foreign soil, in the harbor of lahaina,
 island of maui.
 strictly speaking, there is no harbor at this island. the
 anchorage is merely a roadstead, which is on the south side of it,
 and protects the shipping from the northerly gales, which are the
 most prevalent. in case of a sou’easter, however, ships must put to
 sea or be driven on the reef. we found about seventy sail at anchor,
 about sixty-five of them american whalemen.
 as soon as the anchor was down we were visited by the harbor-master,
 accompanied by the seamen’s chaplain, rev. mr. bishop. after the
 former had transacted his business, the latter addressed to us some
 very excellent remarks, distributed several copies of the “seamen’s
 friend,” and concluded by cordially inviting all to come and see
 him; also to attend bethel on the sabbath. the “seamen’s friend” is
 a sheet published at honolulu, wauhoo, by father damon, as he is
 familiarly called, and is devoted to the spiritual and temporal good
 of the sailor.
 the town of lahaina (pronounced lahena) is beautifully situated
 on the level land skirting the sea, and extends along the shore a
 distance of two miles. back from the shore it reaches to the foot of
 the mountains, thus lying hemmed in, as it were, by the sea in front
 and the mountains in the rear. the streets are lined with beautiful
 shade-trees on either side, which, in the hot weather, afford a cool
 and delicious retreat. the reef extends the whole length of the town,
 about forty rods from shore, and, but for a small opening or break
 in it, boats would be unable to land. in times of a southerly gale
 the breakers extend across this passage, and then it is extremely
 difficult and dangerous to go through. many seamen have lost their
 lives in attempting to go through the passage at such times.
 immediately in front of the landing is a large fort, built of coral
 rock, yet not very formidable in its appearance. the black guns which
 peer over the dingy walls are of small calibre, and not capable of
 doing much execution.
 the site is a most excellent one, as the
 whole shipping lies within its range. it is guarded by a portion
 of the hawaiian army, who look malicious enough, though not much
 like militia. they have very little of the air and appearance of
 soldiers.
 the main or principal street runs nearly east and west, and on it are
 situated the public stores, and most of the residences of the foreign
 population. we found, also, a large and commodious hotel on the north
 side of this street, the front commanding a view of the shipping,
 and the sides and back surrounded by a beautiful grove, altogether
 one of the most beautiful and lovely spots imaginable. this hotel is
 frequented by captains and officers of the various ships in port.
 on the first street in the rear of the one above mentioned stands a
 native church. it is under the direction of american missionaries.
 rambling about in search of something new, we accidentally came to
 a “seamen’s reading-room,” in the basement of the bethel church.
 here we found late papers from all parts of the union, and were
 soon lost to every thing but them. as evening drew nigh, it warned
 us that we must depart, but with more of a home feeling than
 we had experienced for years. this reading-room is supported by
 voluntary contributions from seamen visiting lahaina, and is under
 the direction and charge of rev. mr. bishop, its founder. it is open
 from  a.m. to  p.m., and is situated in a delightfully cool and
 shady spot. it forms an excellent retreat from the scorching rays
 of the sun, and too much praise can not be awarded to mr. b. for
 his kindness and liberality in establishing so useful and pleasant
 a place of resort for the sailor to pass his hours in instructive
 reading.
 the form of government of the sandwich islands is too well known to
 need even a passing notice here. the king resides at honolulu, which
 is the capital of the
 kingdom, but he has a palace in the eastern
 portion of this village, which is his residence while on this island,
 attending to matters of government. it is a large stone building,
 two stories, with a piazza at either end. it resembled a prison, we
 thought, more than a palace.
 it is well known that the missionaries of the cross have been the
 humble instruments in the hands of god of doing much good at these
 islands. we were informed that nearly all the natives of influence
 throughout the kingdom had united with the church of christ, and were
 earnest in their efforts to promote the happiness and prosperity of
 the whole population. yet many of them (the lower classes) cling
 to the superstitions of their ancestors, and, so long as they do,
 they must remain rude and ignorant. the climate appears to agree
 with foreign residents remarkably well. although situated within
 the tropics, the northeast trade-winds, which almost constantly
 blow here, cool the atmosphere, and make it exceedingly genial and
 pleasant. being situated nearly in the centre of the north pacific,
 the temperature of the atmosphere is very regular, seldom varying
 more than five degrees for months; and we were informed by an old
 resident that he had not known the thermometer to vary ten degrees in
 years. it generally is about eighty in the shade.
 back from the village, upon a fine eminence, is a missionary
 settlement, called lahainaluna, with schools for the education of
 the young. it is a beautiful location. in front may be seen the
 village of lahaina and the shipping, with the island of molokai in
 the distance; to the right, wauhoo and ranai present themselves to
 the eye of the beholder; on the left, tahoorowa; and on a clear day
 the volcanic heights of mount roa, on the island of owyhee, loom
 up in the far-off sky like a huge bank of black clouds threatening
 a tempest. fresh breezes sweep down the gulleys of the mountains,
 laden with
 the perfumes of the orange, the banana, pine-apple, and
 mountain apple trees; the beautiful grounds laid out with taste: all
 these combined render lahainaluna what its native name indicates—the
 lovely mountain home.
 the principal authority on the island of maui (pronounced mowee) is
 vested in a governor. he is assisted, however, by petty chiefs, or
 captains, who hold their office by his appointment. subordinate to
 these are the kikos, or kanaka policemen, who patrol the streets
 day and night. they are hated and despised by natives and foreigners,
 and frequently take advantage of jack tar by allowing him to do as he
 pleases for a time, and then, for some trifling breach of the laws,
 arresting him, and taking him to the calaboose or lock-up.
 seamen are obliged to be clear of the beach at drum-beat—eight
 o’clock in the evening. no person is allowed to remain on shore over
 night, unless furnished with a proper pass by the captain of the
 port; and any one found on the beach, or in the town, with no pass,
 after the proper time, is marched to the calaboose, where he is kept
 in confinement till morning, and then mulcted in a pretty round sum
 for breaking the laws. this is generally paid by the captain, and
 afterward, with pretty good interest, deducted from jack’s pay.
 saturday is a holiday with all hands in lahaina. every body and
 their wives procure horses on that day, great numbers of which are
 found here, and pass the whole day in horseback riding. go where you
 will, in whatever street you like, you will see a gay cavalcade of
 equestrians approaching, male and female. the latter dress in the
 gayest of gay calico, the “yaller” being the predominant color, and,
 seating themselves astride a horse in the same manner as the men,
 with six or eight feet of the calico swinging on each side, galloping
 through the streets, they present a rather novel appearance.
 the hawaiians appear to have queer ideas of justice.
  what is crime
 when committed by a foreigner, can be done with impunity by a native.
 for instance: a native is allowed to gallop through the streets at
 the highest rate of speed to which he can urge his horse, while a
 foreigner must content himself with riding on a slow walk, except in
 the outskirts of town. we were witness to an occurrence of this kind
 one day. an officer belonging to one of the ships in port was mounted
 upon a fractious horse, and, while passing near the grand square,
 the animal became frightened, and commenced his antics, endeavoring
 to run. it was with difficulty that the rider was enabled to retain
 his seat; and several kikos, perceiving what was the matter, ran and
 caught the horse by the bridle, and ordered the officer to dismount,
 telling him he had broken the laws against fast riding, and must go
 to jail or calaboose. this he refused to do, but offered to give bail
 for his appearance before the police magistrate the next morning to
 answer to the charge. this was accordingly done; and on the trial
 the following morning, he was fined. not a day passed while we were
 on shore that we did not see natives riding at a high rate of speed
 through the principal streets of lahaina.
 on sunday morning, october th, the packet, with the mail from
 honolulu, arrived. we hastened on shore, and were met by the
 captain, who reached forth a letter—the first in four years—which
 was immediately recognized by the superscription. it is useless
 to attempt describing our feelings. they who have been “in like
 circumstances” can understand them—no others can. as the boat was
 passing from shore to ship, thousands of thoughts rushed through
 our mind, coming one upon another like a hurricane. break the seal
 there and then we durst not. no; we would wait till we got in some
 quiet corner on board, and there, undisturbed by any thing, first
 learn the good or bad news. we felt that
 during the long interval of
 four years many changes must necessarily have taken place; perhaps
 some of those we most loved had been taken away, and we would never
 more behold their face this side heaven. but we remembered that all
 things were in the hands of a good and wise god, and in him
 we could trust. arriving on board, we hastened to a quiet nook, and
 there, with trembling hand, broke the seal. what was our happiness to
 read “all are well,” and that the rover was not forgotten, but that
 prayers daily ascended to a throne of grace that he might be returned
 in safety to his home. we read and reread the precious words, and
 our heart went out in thanksgiving to that almighty power who had
 thus far brought us on our dangerous voyage. in the afternoon we
 attended bethel, but fear that the sermon did not profit us much, as
 our thoughts would wander, in spite of us, to that home “far over the
 deep blue sea.”
 the productions of these islands are similar to those of most
 tropical climes. grapes are raised in great abundance and of a
 superior flavor. the wine made from them is said to be excellent,
 especially for medicinal purposes, in comparison with other wines.
 melons of all descriptions are raised here in great abundance,
 and are not equaled, we think, by any raised on yankee soil. the
 attention of the more enterprising natives and half-breeds has of
 late been turned to the cultivation of sugar and cotton, and we
 predict the time to be not far distant when they will be the staple
 productions of the islands.
 while at lahaina we formed the acquaintance of captain m‘culloch,
 then master of the clipper whaler “niagara,” of fairhaven. he related
 to us an incident in which he figured somewhat conspicuously, and we
 take the liberty of giving it here for the benefit of the reader.
 it will serve to show that the whaleman has dangers
  with which to
 contend aside from those connected with killing the monster of the
 deep.
 while the “sharon,” of new bedford, captain morris, was cruising
 near the king mill group, whales were raised, and the boats sent in
 pursuit. captain m., two kanakas, and a boy remained on board. for
 some time after the boats left the captain remained at masthead,
 watching the boats and whales. the boy then went to masthead, leaving
 the two natives on deck, and soon after the captain came down. he
 was immediately attacked by the natives, murdered, and his body cut
 in small pieces, and thrown to the hogs. on seeing this, the boy
 immediately went to work and cut all the running rigging, thereby
 disabling the ship, and preventing her from being run ashore, as
 the natives wished to do, being near to land. those in the boats,
 seeing the condition of things, and rightly judging something to
 be wrong, immediately gave up the chase and returned. when within
 hailing distance, the natives cried out to them that, if they came
 on board, they were dead men, at the same time holding up to their
 view portions of the captain’s dead body. the boats retired a short
 distance to consult as to the best manner of retaking the ship. mr.
 m‘c., at that time third officer of the vessel, offered to board her
 if six men would volunteer to accompany him; but, among twenty-four,
 none appeared willing to make the attempt. in justice to them,
 however, it is proper to state that it was more a want of presence
 of mind than of bravery that deterred them. he persuaded, advised,
 coaxed, and threatened, but all to no purpose. he then offered to go
 if one could be found willing to accompany him, but a panic appeared
 to have seized hold upon them, and not one would venture. knowing
 that something must be done, and that speedily, he said, “it was as
 well to die on board the ship, fighting in her defense, as to fall
 into the hands of the
 natives on shore, and be butchered by them.”
 divesting himself of his clothing, he took a large boat-knife, and,
 as it was nearly dark, plunged overboard, and cautiously swam for
 the stern of the vessel. this he reached undiscovered. fortunately,
 a rope was towing over the stern, which he seized, and by almost
 superhuman efforts, succeeded in swinging himself into the cabin
 windows. groping about, he found a pair of heavy horse-pistols, and,
 while examining one of them, accidentally dropped it. the natives
 heard the noise, and rushed into the cabin. mr. m‘c. knocked the
 foremost one down with the remaining pistol; the other being armed
 with a cutlass, a fierce and savage fight ensued in the dark. it
 ended in the kanaka being slain, mr. m‘c. receiving a severe wound in
 the thigh. after having securely bound the one stunned by the blow
 from the pistol, he went on deck, and made signals for the boats to
 come alongside. it was some time, however, before they ventured to
 do so, as they thought that mr. m‘c. was murdered, and the natives
 were endeavoring to allure them to a similar fate; but on hearing his
 well-known voice they immediately came on board. all sail was now
 made upon the ship, and she was soon clear of the land. the prisoner
 was handed over to the authorities of the next port they visited,
 tried, and executed for piracy on the high seas.
 we accidentally learned that a fellow-townsman was lying sick at the
 hospital, and hastened to visit him. on arriving, we inquired for
 him, and were led to his bedside. it proved to be a mr. stoddard,
 who had, like ourself, been trying life in a whaler. he went one
 season in the “arctic,” and, on his return to lahaina, finding his
 health completely shattered, procured his discharge, and was placed
 in the hospital, there to die, away from home and friends. we found
 his case to be one demanding great sympathy. for one year had he
 been
 there with that deceitful disease, consumption. during this
 time he had heard no word from the loved ones at home, nor met with
 any one from that locality. how eagerly did he grasp our hands, and,
 although we had never been acquainted with each other at home, yet
 we felt like brothers. he said this meeting was to him the brightest
 spot of his life; that never before had he so longed to see any one
 from home as while he had been in the hospital. he was very pale and
 thin, and fast wasting away, yet very patient and resigned. trusting
 in the blessed jesus for a home beyond the grave, where shall be
 “no more sorrow, sickness, or death,” he cheerfully submitted to
 his sufferings, believing they would “work out for him a far more
 exceeding weight of glory.” he spoke of his physician, dr. dow, in
 terms of the highest praise; also of the rev. mr. bishop—of the
 words of comfort and consolation he had poured into his wretched and
 distracted heart—of the feeling and beautiful manner in which he had
 pointed him to the “lamb of god, which taketh away the sin of the
 world”—of his daily visits, always bringing consolation. handing
 us a bible, well worn, he said, “take this book, and give it to my
 parents. tell them that, although i shall never more see them on
 earth, yet i trust and pray that i may meet them in heaven. tell them
 i die firm in the christian faith; that i have gone to jesus with
 my sins, and he has taken them all from me, and blessed me; that my
 whole trust is in him; that my peace is made with god, and
 i long to be released from this world of sin and death to dwell with
 jesus evermore.” his voice appeared to fail him; and, as we extended
 to him our hand, with tearful eyes, we felt that we were clasping
 his for the last time. as we turned to depart, our ears caught these
 words issuing from his lips:
“how sweet the name of jesus sounds
in a believer’s ear.”
 we bade him farewell, and returned to the ship with a sad and heavy
 heart. we felt to thank god that we were yet in health
 and strength, and to ask him to return us to our friends at home
 safely. on reaching the hospital the following morning, we found that
 stoddard had peacefully departed during the preceding night. he “fell
 sweetly asleep in jesus.”
 much has been written and said about the shark, and, to speak
 plainly, many falsehoods told. it has become a common idea that
 all sharks will devour a man as soon as look at him, if they get a
 chance; but a more delusive one was never entertained. of the many
 different varieties of sharks, there are but two that will attack a
 man in the water. these are the blue shark, and the ground, or
 shovel-nosed shark. no more danger need be apprehended from the
 common brown shark than from a porpoise. we have often seen a kanaka
 jump overboard in a perfectly calm day, and swim after them with
 a sheath-knife, endeavoring to stab them, but johnny shark would
 keep out of his reach. and whenever we had a whale alongside, the
 sharks would be around in great numbers, and yet never touch the
 boat-steerer, who was overboard on the whale. but of the blue and
 ground sharks, the farther one keeps from them the better for his
 safety. on the night of sunday, october d, one of the officers of
 the “south boston,” while walking the deck, made a misstep and fell
 overboard. hearing the splash, some of the crew jumped into the boat
 alongside, and hauled under the stern, where the man had fallen;
 but no sign or trace was to be seen of him. he was an excellent
 swimmer, but, in all probability, was seized by one of the numerous
 ground-sharks that prowl round the shipping in port. the water
 in lahaina is very clear, the bottom being distinctly visible at
 the depth of twenty fathoms, or one hundred and twenty feet; and,
 although every search was made the
 next morning at daylight, the
 body could nowhere be found. no doubt now remained but he had fallen
 a victim to the rapacity of the voracious ground-shark.
 on the afternoon of this sabbath we attended service in the kanaka
 church. it was filled with natives of both sexes, intermingled with
 whites, of whom here and there might be seen one. the interior of the
 church is fashioned similar to our american ones—very tasty and neat,
 without being gaudy. in the morning the sermon is delivered in the
 native tongue; in the afternoon, in english.
 the natives of these islands, like all others who have been visited
 by europeans, have suffered from the dreadful ravages of diseases
 brought by the latter. during our stay at lahaina, the small-pox
 raged with great violence there and at honolulu. hundreds of the
 natives were swept off, and, what appeared very singular, scarcely a
 white man was attacked, and none died from it, although hundreds of
 seamen were daily exposed.
 in the following chapter we give a “legend,” as related to us by
 an old native whose acquaintance we formed, probably the “oldest
 inhabitant;” and then, with the reader, we will be “homeward bound.”
 legend of kinau and tuanoa: a tale of the sandwich islands.
 a heavy gloom was upon the minds of the people of wauhoo in
 consequence of the recent death of their king, hoapili. melancholy
 filled their hearts; wailings and lamentations of various kinds
 were heard over all parts of the island. every grade mourned for
 the regal victim of death; and men, women, and children were seen
 tearing their hair, wounding themselves with sharp-pointed weapons,
 tearing their flesh with sharks’ teeth, and breaking their own front
 teeth with stones, to convince each other of the acuteness of their
 sorrows; and, above all, they prepared, as was their usual custom on
 such events, to offer up to the great spirit five human beings as a
 sacrifice. many a loving maiden, when she heard of the king’s death,
 felt a pang rush through her heart and a whirling through her brain
 as she thought of the youth who had won her affections.
 on such occasions, it was customary for the eric, or chief of each
 district, to select a young man from that part of the country over
 which he had control, and to send him to the proper place as one of
 the victims to be immolated at the shrine of the deceased king. thus
 there was a dreadful uncertainty in the minds of the whole people
 until the unfortunates were chosen; and there was no appeal from the
 will of the eric; so that, when the summons was made, there remained
 no hope for the unhappy chosen one.
 in the village of waikukii, of which nahi was the eric, or chieftain,
 lived tuanoa, a young man, and kinau, his betrothed bride. they
 had resided near each
 other from their infancy, and, even in the
 early dawning of the mind and the affections, they were observed
 constantly together; and no doubt, at that time, there was interwoven
 with their young heartstrings the tender passion of love, that
 “grew with their growth and strengthened with their strength.”
 tuanoa was a fine young man, much beloved by his neighbors. he was
 active and brave in the extreme, and he had performed many acts of
 prowess, which gave him a standing-place within the circle of the
 conquerors at a feast, or “hoola hoola;” and he was, withal, of a
 most kind and affectionate disposition, of which his friends and
 neighbors were well aware. kinau, his beloved maiden, was the most
 beautiful girl in the village, and of good family and estate; besides
 which, she was the most esteemed tappa-maker in the whole island.
 none of her competitors could approach her genius, which was so
 frequently displayed in designing figures and ornaments to adorn her
 productions, so that her tappas (native cloths) exceeded in beauty
 and strength those of all others, and they were worn by the king and
 queen. her disposition was of that rare and delightful description
 which finds pleasure in searching after the sorrows of others in
 order to relieve them, and blessing itself that it had the power
 to do so. with such a person, disposition, and possessions, we can
 not wonder that kinau was much beloved, and that tuanoa was so much
 envied by the spirited young men of the village. but they enjoyed no
 hope of gaining the object of their admiration, for she took every
 opportunity of expressing her undying love for tuanoa, and he to her.
 notwithstanding all this, there had been an eye fixed long and
 ardently upon kinau, and she was well aware of the fact, much to her
 sorrow; and many a burning tear, as it rolled over her beautiful
 cheek, awakened in tuanoa’s breast a powerful feeling of regret,
 mingled
 with surprise at the unhappy change which had come over the
 mind of his beloved. how often did he entreat, in tenderest words,
 for the avowal of the cause, which never was fully given. kinau
 full well knew that if tuanoa were to be made aware of the fact, he
 would commit some rash act that would most probably hurl them both
 to destruction; and she left the whole to chance, hoping that soon a
 day would come when the dark cloud of anticipated misfortune would be
 dispelled, and the sunshine of her love again break forth strong and
 clear.
 it was the eye of the powerful eric nahi which had fallen on kinau,
 and he had even sought a private interview with her, and declared
 his love; but she resolutely refused to listen to his advances a
 moment. “what!” said the haughty eric, “do you refuse to listen to
 the voice of nahi, your chief? daughter of my neighbor, tremble! let
 tears as salt as the waters of the ocean fall quick and fast from
 thy earth-bound eye! refuse to listen to the voice of nahi, and the
 volcano of waikukii shall consume the blood of tuanoa, as the shark
 of the ocean devours the newly-hatched turtle.”
 “oh great nahi,” answered kinau, “suffer your neighbor’s daughter to
 return the love of tuanoa, whose love, like mine, burns as the fire
 of the volcano, which the waters of the ocean can not quench.”
 “tremble!” exclaimed the eric, “daughter of kuakini, and the beloved
 of tuanoa. go from the presence of nahi, and let there be no more
 said.”
 kinau went from his presence with trembling limbs and a palpitating
 heart. she knew the disposition of nahi; cruel and vindictive in the
 extreme, he spared nothing to obtain the object of his wishes. he had
 committed many crimes, for which he had often been reproved by the
 late king and his fellow erics. the people, also, were disgusted with
 his tyrannical conduct, and
 these things combined caused him to be
 more careful than he had been in the earlier part of his government.
 kinau was well aware of this, and she therefore trusted that he would
 cease his importunities; but she dreaded his revenge, as she well
 knew that if an opportunity should ever present itself whereby he
 might injure her or tuanoa, and escape the observation of the people
 from the apparent injustice of the act, he would seize upon it with
 avidity; and this was the cause of her dejection.
 the king, hoapili, had been dangerously ill for some days, and the
 active mind of kinau saw the dreadful chasm which might be opened
 to receive her in the event of the king’s death. she knew that nahi
 had the power of choosing one of the victims for the sacrifice, and
 the thought almost bereft her of her senses. she well knew that
 tuanoa, the brave and beloved tuanoa, would be sacrificed to the
 revenge of the cruel eric; and, under these trying circumstances, the
 constitution of kinau evidently began to decline, much to the grief
 of her lover, who perceived his beautiful companion, like a lovely
 flower beset by the canker-worm, silently robbed of her beauty. he
 saw the devastation it committed, but could not discover its retreat.
 kinau still kept the secret within her own breast.
 one evening, as, to their minds, the sun was once more going to rest
 in the deep bosom of the ocean, the lovers reclined on the shelving
 and moss-covered rocks which were near to the habitation of kinau,
 in the beautiful valley of menoa. the broad-leaved banana waved
 around them, and fanned their cheeks with the sweet-scented evening
 air, when, just as the pelé of nuanu cast its deep shadow across the
 valley of her fathers, a distant cry of sorrow fell upon the ears
 of the unhappy pair. to kinau’s mind the cause was revealed in an
 instant. “the king is gone!” shrieked the unhappy maid. “oh, tuanoa,
 let us fly; let us bury ourselves in the depths of the ocean, for
 death is for us also!” the extreme agitation of her mind robbed her
 of her senses; and as she lay, apparently without life, in the arms
 of her beloved and thunder-stricken tuanoa, a number of their friends
 quickly approached the scene to render assistance, and to inquire the
 cause of the outcry.
 “neighbors,” exclaimed the bewildered tuanoa, “my peace is broken;
 my beloved is no longer herself; the spirit of darkness has been
 here and stolen the light of her soul!” while they were using means
 to restore kinau to her senses and to comfort tuanoa, a band of
 persons approached, and proclaimed, amid loud wailings, that hoapili
 the good had given his last breath to the winds; and from out this
 mass of phrensied human beings rushed three men, with disordered
 dress and disheveled hair, with red streams of blood gushing from
 self-inflicted wounds, and approached tuanoa. they immediately
 produced from under their torn tappas the fatal summons from the
 eric nahi, which consisted merely of three dark-colored poisonous
 nuts, delineated with certain inscriptions and figures. too well the
 brave tuanoa knew their import, but he was helpless before them. they
 presented them to him with certain forms and ceremonies, and then,
 as if impatient for his heart’s best blood, leaped upon and bound
 him securely. astonishment filled the minds of all his neighbors,
 who stood around kinau, their hearts ready to burst with grief. they
 knew not the revengeful feelings which had actuated the hated eric to
 the choice of the best person in the village instead of the worst,
 as was the usual custom; for there was even a by-word among them,
 which was addressed to persons of bad repute, “ah! you will serve for
 the fire—you will serve for the fire,” meaning that they would serve
 for the purpose for which tuanoa had been taken. when the sounds of
 the phrensied multitude
 had passed away, and had left the valley
 of menoa again to its solemn quietude, and there was only heard at
 intervals from out the group which still surrounded the bereft and
 senseless maiden the low murmur or the sorrowful exclamation for the
 departed king and the sorrows of the divided lovers, kinau opened her
 discolored eyes, and shot them around the group, but saw not tuanoa.
 “ah!” she exclaimed, “half of my soul has expired. friends and
 neighbors, go; stay not with kinau; the sun no longer shines upon
 her tarro-patches;[]
 the water of the mountain has also turned from
 their roots, and has fallen into the hands of nahi.”
 her kind neighbors did all in their power to comfort her in her great
 affliction, and then left her to the care of her aged parents. nature
 soon overcame the infirm pair with sleep, and kinau left her home,
 never more to return except with her beloved tuanoa.
 the past few months had altered the lovely kinau very much. her
 features were shrunken and distorted; her hair torn and loose; her
 dark eyes, rolling and flashing, betokened the storm within; her
 heaving bosom gave proof of the agitated heart; but her step was
 firm, and she stood erect, as if, with the last effort of a shattered
 frame, she had determined to devote all her remaining strength to
 one great purpose. she was convinced that there remained no hope
 from human means for the restoration of her beloved tuanoa, and she
 therefore determined to visit the enchanter kelkuewa, a thing seldom
 or scarcely ever attempted before, even by the bravest of the erics.
 but kinau, feeling strong in her virtuous cause, feared not, and
 dared destruction in its wildest forms. kelkuewa, the enchanter,
 resided in a glen at the bottom of the pelé of nuanu, and near the
 entrance of which the enchanted waterfall of two thousand feet in
 descent finished its perpendicular career. here was the supposed
 habitation of a lizard as large as a man, which the tradition of the
 islanders claims as having resided there since the flood.
 kinau, with firm determination, commenced her task. passing alone,
 away from her friends and neighbors, over the dark plains in the
 valley of menoa, she soon began to ascend the steep and rugged
 mountain of nuanu, and, after excessive exertion, reached its
 summit. she cast her wild eyes around, and saw the dark ocean which
 encompasses wauhoo; she could hear its distant roar as it broke with
 violence on the weather side of the island; the chilly and unruly
 blast of the night-wind almost forced her slender figure from the
 pointed rock on which she, for a moment, rested; her loose hair
 lashed her burning forehead with its violence. behind her was the
 valley of menoa, in which she had met the last look of her beloved
 tuanoa; before her was the valley of nuanu, four thousand feet in
 depth. midway dashing its white foam, she could just observe the
 enchanted stream gushing out of a small division in the rocks, and
 falling two thousand feet into the valley below, at the bottom of
 which the enchanter resided. still determined to visit him or die
 in the attempt, she began the fearful descent of the pelé of nuanu,
 and after great difficulties—now clinging to the branches of some
 friendly tree, and now sliding in various positions—she succeeded
 in reaching the source of the waterfall. almost overcome with
 fatigue and contending emotions, she here rested. a torrent of tears
 relieved her aching heart, and she again commenced the arduous task
 of descending, by the side of the foaming stream, over slippery
 rocks and sharp craggy points, her feet torn and bleeding, her heart
 almost broken, and her weary frame nearly exhausted. her disordered
 imagination, blinded by
 her tears, saw visions of darkness and
 despair hanging from every rock; and the murmuring of the trees, as
 they were moved by the wind, appeared like the voices of her foes
 imploring for her destruction. but still kinau wended her way—yes,
 the tender yet powerful passion of love supported her—the passion
 of love in woman, invincible love, which has caused the “change of
 empires and the loss of worlds,” has “inspired heroism and subdued
 avarice.” she succeeded in reaching the glen, where she bathed her
 bleeding feet for a moment in the waters of the cascade. the moon,
 which had before been hidden behind dark clouds, now peeped through
 an opening in them, as if anxious to look upon the devoted girl
 and admire her fortitude. the large gray owl, which inhabits the
 valleys, flapped his broad wings over her head as he moused among
 the rocks; and the quick-flying bat darted in and out of his caves,
 as if disturbed by the intruder. lifting up her eyes, kinau beheld a
 tall old man descending the pelé. quickly he took advantage of each
 jutting point of rock to secure his footsteps, and he descended with
 apparent ease to the spot where kinau rested. long gray hair fell
 over his shoulders, and he thus addressed the maiden:
 “daughter of kuakini, and the beloved of tuanoa, i am he whom you
 seek. i have followed you from the valley of menoa; i have watched
 and feel astonished at your strength, fortitude, and love. i know
 the spirit of darkness has come over you when the gladness of your
 heart was taken from you. your love for the brave tuanoa is like the
 mountain of nuanu, fixed forever, and can not change; it is clear and
 bright as the water that falls from the pelé; it is like the fire of
 the volcano of waikukii, which is unquenchable. daughter of kuakini,
 arise! go to the valley of thy fathers, and rest in the bosom of thy
 neighbors; for i have seen a great spirit, who, before to-morrow’s
 sun reacheth the valley
 of nuanu, shall come and save thy tuanoa from the blood-consuming fire.”
 “oh great kelkuewa,” said kinau, “your words are like water to the
 parched tarro; they are like the waters of the ocean to the expiring
 fish, which the fisherman returns to its element. i feel my heart
 lightened; the cold hand of the spirit of darkness has moved from my
 heart. oh kelkuewa,” continued the enraptured girl, “they say you
 have no daughter. i will be your daughter; i will make your tappas;
 i will water your tarro-patches, though i bring the water from the
 other side of the mountain of nuanu.” the enchanter seized the hand
 of kinau, assisted her over the pelé, and saw her descend to the
 valley of her fathers.
 the morn of the day on which the tragedy was to be ended appeared.
 before the sun had risen, thousands of the islanders were moving
 toward the plains of whyteetee, on which the immolation of the
 victims was to take place. lamentations were heard over the whole
 island. the plains of whyteetee were soon covered with countless
 multitudes, and five immense fires were lighted. as the sun rose, the
 odor from the burning sandal-wood perfumed the whole of wauhoo. in an
 inclosure about one hundred feet long and fifty from front to back,
 the front wall of which was about six feet high, and the back about
 twelve, formed of loose stones or masses of lava piled upon each
 other, and situated upon a rise of ground at the end of the plain,
 facing the sea, the five victims were placed.
 on a mass of rocks about one hundred feet high, which rise abruptly
 out of the plains, and command a view for a considerable distance
 around, sat the princes and chiefs, with all the great men of the
 island. among them nahi was observed in a conspicuous situation,
 watching the proceedings with great earnestness, for he had heard
 that kinau had visited the enchanted glen, and he had heard
  also of
 the prophecy of kelkuewa. indeed, it was upon the lips of every one,
 and many hoped that the prophecy would be fulfilled. the more noble
 of the erics and people began to look upon these cruel exhibitions
 with disgust, and to long for a pretext for abolishing them. they saw
 the abuse, if we may so call it, to which it was liable, from the
 base conduct of nahi, and yet, being a national custom, it was hard
 to abolish.
 the proceedings of the assembly soon commenced. the first victim,
 who happened to be an abandoned wretch, was led out of the inclosure
 by the priests, and thrust among the multitude. there were plenty of
 the wild and infuriated to commence the attack, by hurling stones and
 beating the unfortunate victim with any weapon with which they might
 have provided themselves for the occasion, and he was hunted to and
 fro like a wild beast, until the spark of life was nearly extinct;
 then he was hurled upon the funeral pile, amid the wild exclamations
 of the savage throng, while “liquid fire curled round his limbs, and
 to his hissing bones and marrow clung.”
 kinau, surrounded by her kindred, was seen in an agitated state,
 frequently looking toward the pelé of nuanu, and wondering how the
 great spirit would interpose to save her beloved tuanoa. sometimes,
 full of hope, her countenance would brighten, and she appeared to
 possess new life; then again she would doubt the enchanter’s
 successful interference, and her spirits would sink. thus was her
 gentle bosom torn with a thousand conflicting emotions. despair
 for a moment shadowed her invincible spirit with his dark and
 death-hovering wings, and the beloved kinau felt that she would
 willingly sacrifice her own life to save that of her lover. tuanoa
 observed his adored girl with those acute feelings which the
 pencil can not paint nor the pen justly describe. he was bound to
 the insensate stake, which
 heard not the heart’s flutter or the
 despairing sigh—which felt not the tremulous shake of the confined
 but powerful limb that strove in vain to break from its moveless
 grasp. at last, despairing, he hung from his confinement, apparently
 a lifeless being.
 another unfortunate but criminal victim was now given to the
 infuriated multitude and sacrificed; and the next was to be tuanoa,
 the beloved and innocent tuanoa, who was insensible now from the
 mental anguish he had suffered. to die so young, and such a horrid
 death—to go and leave his kinau behind—this was more than he
 could bear, and he fainted from misery. the brave maiden could no
 longer bear this uncertainty. she rushed through the crowd of her
 kindred—scaled the walls of the inclosure—glided between the guards
 with a supernatural quickness, and encircled with her devoted arms
 her beloved. but the guards and the priests quickly proceeded to
 separate them; and now they unbound, and were about to thrust the
 bewildered tuanoa among the savage group who thirsted for his blood.
 the gate of the inclosure was thrown open; already the savage hand
 was raised to smite with deadly violence; already the maddened and
 phrensied eyes of fanatic men were gleaming with murderous excitement
 to grace the royal death; the impatient, loyal crowd, heap upon heap,
 swayed to and fro in their eagerness to slay one of themselves—one,
 too, who had been formerly beloved by them, and for whom they would
 have made great sacrifices, but now hated and condemned; and they
 impatiently thirsted for his blood.
 but the enchanter at this moment appeared among the people. in a loud
 voice he commanded their attention, and pointed to an object which
 was seen upon the ocean at a great distance. all eyes were instantly
 directed, in great wonder, toward it. during the confusion, a stone
 was hurled by an unseen hand, which struck
 nahi, and killed him in
 an instant; but the event scarcely received attention. the object
 to which the enchanter still pointed approached the island rapidly.
 it appeared larger every moment, and in a short time its color was
 distinguishable. fear and curiosity increased, for never had the
 people witnessed such a sight before. at times it appeared of an
 immense breadth, with wide-spreading wings, and in a moment or two
 would appear quite narrow, but of great height. occasionally its
 apparent wings shook; then anon the whole mass appeared to stoop to
 the surface of the ocean. swayed by an irresistible impulse, princes,
 erics, and people went down to the edge of the sea. the liberated
 victims, surrounded by their kindred, followed. the prophecy was
 fulfilled. they were liberated by common consent. never can poet or
 painter describe or represent the two enraptured lovers, as they
 appeared walking together on the beach, having but “one soul in a
 divided body.”
 reader! the “great spirit” which so rapidly approached, and was
 bringing to those islanders light to disperse their darkness,
 humanity and religion to abolish their cruelties, the arts and
 sciences to banish their ignorance, was the great spirit of the
 immortal navigator cook, who had just discovered those
 fertile islands, and whose ship had been observed by the enchanter on
 the previous evening from the heights of the pelé of nuanu.
 shallow ponds of water, in which the tarro is
 cultivated with great care, similar to those in which rice is grown.
 “homeward bound” at last.—the prevailing feeling.—wauhoo and
 atoowi.—“stowaways.”—farewell to the sandwich islands.—ship
 “uncas.”—on the equator.—whytootucke.—roratongo.—meeting of old
 friends.—interesting missionary incidents.—a good reason.—good-by
 to roratongo.—preparing for cape horn.—christmas.—a heavy gale.—off
 cape horn.—new experiences.—in the atlantic again.—ship “betsey
 williams.”—brazilian coast.—north of the line.—hurra for yankee
 land.—brig “alpha.”—try-works overboard.—scudding off bermuda.—gulf
 stream.—soundings.—old “hard-a-lee.”—the old adage.—“home at
 last!”—conclusion.
 to the reader who has followed us through the wanderings of more than
 four years, we tender our thanks, and beg his indulgence through our
 “homeward bound” passage, where we will take leave of him, with the
 kindest wishes for his prosperity and happiness.
 on monday, october st, we commenced our preparations for sea. all
 were anxiously longing for the time to come when we should see the
 ship’s head pointed toward home.
 we had discharged several men who shipped with us at different times
 during the voyage “for the last port,” and it became necessary to
 procure more for “the passage home.” these were now all on board, and
 we only waited the arrival of the captain and lady to take up our
 anchor, loose our sails, and be under way. the day came. tuesday,
 november st, the joyful command was given to “heave away.” the old
 windlass brakes rattled merrily, and
“huzza! we’re homeward bound!”
 rang out in full clear chorus from every voice on board, till the
 hills and mountains of maui echoed back the sound. we could see
 the faces of our brother whalemen around us as they looked, no
 doubt, enviously at our craft, thinking of the long season yet on
 the “nor’west” to be gone through before they could sing as we did.
 but we felt that we had a right to be happy. for more than four
 long and weary years had the ship been our floating home. we had
 labored, toiled incessantly, in storm and in calm—in the boats and on
 board ship—beneath the scorching heat of the tropical sun, and the
 freezing cold of rigid climes—been exposed to all dangers both on sea
 and land—and now, we hoped, we were going home to enjoy the fruit
 of our hard-earned savings. going home! none but they who have been
