instruments do the work of commerce are wrong or disadvantageous, those
bad conditions may and often will prevent or interrupt the act of
commerce or make it less expeditious, less reliable, less economical and
less secure. therefore, congress may legislate about the agents and
instruments of [pg ]interstate commerce, and about the conditions under
which those agents and instruments perform the work of interstate
commerce, whenever such legislation bears, or in the exercise of a fair
legislative discretion can be deemed to bear, upon the reliability or
promptness or economy or security or utility of the interstate commerce
act."[]
the adair case
but while the idea expressed here that the human agents of commerce, in
the sense of transportation, are instrumentalities of it, and so, in
that capacity, within the protective power of congress, signalized the
entrance of congress into the field of labor legislation, the court was
not at the time prepared to give the idea any considerable scope.
pertinent in this connection is the case of adair v. united
states,[] which was decided between the two employers' liability
cases. here was involved the validity of § of the "erdman act" of
,[] by which it was made a misdemeanor for a carrier or agent
thereof to require of an employee, as a condition of employment, that he
should not become or remain a member of a trade union, or to threaten
him with loss of employment if he should become or remain a member. this
proviso the court held not to be a regulation of commerce, there being
no connection between an employee's membership in a labor organization
and the carrying on of interstate commerce. twenty-two years later,
however, in , the court conceded that the connection between
interstate commerce and union membership was a real and substantial one,
and on that ground sustained the power of congress in the railway labor
act of [] to prevent employers from interfering with the right of
employees to select freely their own collective bargaining
representatives.[]
[pg ]
the railroad retirement act
still pursuing the idea of protecting commerce and the labor engaged in
it concurrently, congress, by the railroad retirement act of june ,
,[] ordered the compulsory retirement of superannuated employees
of interstate carriers, and provided that they be paid pensions out of a
fund comprising compulsory contributions from the carriers and their
present and future employees. in railroad retirement board v. alton
r.r. company,[] however, a closely divided court held this
legislation to be in excess of congress's power to regulate commerce and
contrary to the due process clause of amendment v. said justice roberts
for the majority: "we feel bound to hold that a pension plan thus
imposed is in no proper sense a regulation of the activity of interstate
transportation. it is an attempt for social ends to impose by sheer fiat
noncontractual incidents upon the relation of employer and employee, not
as a rule or regulation of commerce and transportation between the
states, but as a means of assuring a particular class of employees
against old age dependency. this is neither a necessary nor an
appropriate rule or regulation affecting the due [pg ]fulfillment of the
railroads' duty to serve the public in interstate transportation."[]
chief justice hughes, speaking for the dissenters, contended, on the
contrary, that "the morale of the employees [had] an important bearing
upon the efficiency of the transportation service." he added: "the
fundamental consideration which supports this type of legislation is
that industry should take care of its human wastage, whether that is due
to accident or age. that view cannot be dismissed as arbitrary or
capricious. it is a reasoned conviction based upon abundant experience.
the expression of that conviction in law is regulation. when expressed
in the government of interstate carriers, with respect to their
employees likewise engaged in interstate commerce, it is a regulation of
that commerce. as such, so far as the subject matter is concerned, the
commerce clause should be held applicable."[] under subsequent
legislation, an excise is levied on interstate carriers and their
employees, while by separate but parallel legislation a fund is created
in the treasury out of which pensions are paid along the lines of the
original plan. the constitutionality of this scheme appears to be taken
for granted in railroad retirement board v. duquesne warehouse
company.[]
some years earlier the court had had occasion in united states v.
ferger,[] decided in , to reiterate the rule laid down in the
southern railway case, that congress's protective power over interstate
commerce reaches all kinds of obstructions whatever the source of their
origin. ferger and associates had been indicted under a federal statute
for issuing a false bill of lading, to cover a fictitious shipment in
interstate commerce. their defense was that, since there could be no
commerce in a fraudulent bill of lading, therefore congress's power
could not reach their alleged offense, a contention which chief justice
white, speaking for the court, answered thus: "but this mistakenly
assumes that the power of congress is to be necessarily tested by the
intrinsic existence of commerce in the particular subject dealt with,
instead of by the relation of that subject to commerce and its effect
upon it. we say mistakenly assumes, because we think it clear that if
the proposition were sustained it would destroy the power of congress to
regulate, as obviously that power, if it is to exist, must include [pg ]the
authority to deal with obstructions to interstate commerce (in re
debs,  u.s. ) and with a host of other acts which, because of
their relation to and influence upon interstate commerce, come within
the power of congress to regulate, although they are not interstate
commerce in and of themselves. *** that as instrumentalities of
interstate commerce, bills of lading are the efficient means of credit
resorted to for the purpose of securing and fructifying the flow of a
vast volume of interstate commerce upon which the commercial intercourse
of the country, both domestic and foreign, largely depends, is a matter
of common knowledge as to the course of business of which we may take
judicial notice. indeed, that such bills of lading and the faith and
credit given to their genuineness and the value they represent are the
producing and sustaining causes of the enormous number of transactions
in domestic and foreign exchange, is also so certain and well known that
we may notice it without proof."[]
congressional regulation of commerce as traffic
congress's chief effort to regulate commerce in the primary sense of
"traffic" is embodied in the sherman antitrust act of , the opening
section of which declares "every contract, combination in the form of
trust or otherwise," or "conspiracy in restraint of trade and commerce
among the several states, or with foreign nations" to be "illegal,"
while the second section makes it a misdemeanor for anybody to
"monopolize or attempt to monopolize any part of such commerce."[]
the act was passed to curb the growing tendency to form industrial
combinations and the first case to reach the court under it was the
famous "sugar trust case," united states v. e.c. knight co.[] here
the government asked for the cancellation of certain agreements,
whereby, through purchases of stock in other companies, the american
sugar refining company, had "acquired," it was conceded, "nearly
complete control of the manufacture of refined sugars in the united
states." the question of the validity of the act was not expressly
discussed by the court, but was subordinated to that of its proper
construction. so proceeding, the court, in pursuance of doctrines of
constitutional law which were then dominant with it, turned the act from
its intended purpose and destroyed its effectiveness for several years,
as that of the interstate commerce act was being contemporaneously
impaired. the following passage early in chief justice fuller's opinion
for the court, sets forth the conception of the federal system that
controlled the decision: "it is vital that the independence of the
commercial power and of the police power, and the delimitation between
them, however sometimes perplexing, should always be recognized and
observed, [pg ]for while the one furnishes the strongest bond of union, the
other is essential to the preservation of the autonomy of the states as
required by our dual form of government; and acknowledged evils, however
grave and urgent they may appear to be, had better be borne, than risk
be run, in the effort to suppress them, of more serious consequences by
resort to expedients of even doubtful constitutionality."[]
in short, what was needed, the court felt, was a hard and fast line
between the two spheres of power, and in the following series of
propositions it endeavored to lay down such a line: () production is
always local, and under the exclusive domain of the states; () commerce
among the states does not commence until goods "commence their final
movement from their state of origin to that of their destination"; ()
the sale of a product is merely an incident of its production and while
capable of "bringing the operation of commerce into play," affects it
only incidentally; () such restraint as would reach commerce, as above
defined, in consequence of combinations to control production "in all
its forms," would be "indirect, however inevitable and whatever its
extent," and as such beyond the purview of the act.[] applying then
the above reasoning to the case before it, the court proceeded: "the
object [of the combination] was manifestly private gain in the
manufacture of the commodity, but not through the control of interstate
or foreign commerce. it is true that the bill alleged that the products
of these refineries were sold and distributed among the several states,
and that all the companies were engaged in trade or commerce with the
several states and with foreign nations; but this was no more than to
say that trade and commerce served manufacture to fulfil its function.
sugar was refined for sale, and sales were probably made at philadelphia
for consumption, and undoubtedly for resale by the first purchasers
throughout pennsylvania and other states, and refined sugar was also
forwarded by the companies to other states for sale. nevertheless it
does not follow that an attempt to monopolize, or the actual monopoly
of, the manufacture was an attempt, whether executory or consummated, to
monopolize commerce, even though, in order to dispose of the product,
the instrumentality of commerce was necessarily invoked. there was
nothing in the proofs to indicate any intention to put a restraint upon
trade or commerce, and the fact, as we have seen that trade or commerce
might be indirectly affected was not enough to entitle complainants to a
decree."[]
[pg ]
four years later occurred the case of addyston pipe and steel co. v.
united states,[] in which the antitrust act was successfully applied
as against an industrial combination for the first time. the [pg ]agreements
in the case, the parties to which were manufacturing concerns, effected
a division of territory among them, and so involved, it was held, a
"direct" restraint on the distribution and hence of the transportation
of the products of the contracting firms. the holding, however, did not
question the doctrine of the earlier case, which in fact continued
substantially undisturbed until , when swift and co. v. united
states,[] was decided.
defendants in the swift case were some thirty firms engaged in chicago
and other cities in the business of buying livestock in their
stockyards, in converting it at their packing houses into fresh meat,
and in the sale and shipment of such fresh meat to purchasers in other
states. the charge against them was that they had entered into a
combination to refrain from bidding against each other in the local
markets, to fix the prices at which they would sell, to restrict
shipments of meat, and to do other forbidden acts. the case was appealed
to the supreme court on defendants' contention that certain of the [pg ]acts
complained of were not acts of interstate commerce and so did not fall
within a valid reading of the sherman act. the court, however, sustained
the government on the ground that the "scheme as a whole" came within
the act, and that the local activities alleged were simply part and
parcel of this general scheme.[]
referring to the purchases of livestock at the stockyards, the court,
speaking by justice holmes, said: "commerce among the states is not a
technical legal conception, but a practical one, drawn from the course
of business. when cattle are sent for sale from a place in one state,
with the expectation that they will end their transit, after purchase,
in another, and when in effect they do so, with only the interruption
necessary to find a purchaser at the stockyards, and when this is a
typical, constantly recurring course, the current thus existing is a
current of commerce among the states, and the purchase of the cattle is
a part and incident of such commerce."[] likewise the sales alleged
of fresh meat at the slaughtering places fell within the general design.
even if they imported a technical passing of title at the slaughtering
places, they also imported that the sales were to persons in other
states, and that shipments to such states were part of the
transaction.[] thus, sales of the type which in the sugar trust case
were thrust to one side as immaterial from the point of view of the law,
because they enabled manufacture "to fulfill its function," were here
treated as merged in an interstate commerce stream. thus, the concept of
commerce as trade, that is, as traffic, again entered the
constitutional law picture, with the result that conditions which
directly affected interstate trade could not be dismissed on the ground
that they affected interstate commerce, in the sense of interstate
transportation, only "indirectly." lastly, the court added these
significant words: "but we do not mean to imply that the rule which
marks the point at which state taxation or regulation becomes
permissible necessarily is beyond the scope of interference by congress
in cases where such interference is deemed necessary for the protection
of commerce among the states."[] that is to say, the line that
confines state power from one side does not always confine national
power from the other. for even though the line accurately divides the
subject matter of the complementary spheres, still national power is
always entitled to take on such additional extension as is requisite to
guarantee its effective exercise, and is furthermore supreme.
[pg ]
in this respect, the swift case only states what the shreveport case was
later to declare more explicitly; and the same may be said of an ensuing
series of cases in which combinations of employees engaged in such
intrastate activities as manufacturing, mining, building construction,
and the distribution of poultry were subjected to the penalties of the
sherman act because of the effect or intended effect of their activities
on interstate commerce.[]
in  congress passed the packers and stockyards act[] whereby the
business of commission men and livestock dealers in the chief stockyards
of the country was brought under national supervision; and the year
following it passed the grain futures act[] whereby exchanges dealing
in grain futures were subjected to control. the decisions of the court
sustaining these measures both built directly upon the swift case.
in stafford v. wallace,[] which involved the former act, chief
justice taft, speaking for the court, said: "the object to be secured by
the act is the free and unburdened flow of livestock from the ranges and
farms of the west and southwest through the great stockyards and
slaughtering centers on the borders of that region, and thence in the
form of meat products to the consuming cities of the country in the
middle west and east, or, still as livestock, to the feeding places and
fattening farms in the middle west or east for further preparation for
the market."[] the stockyards, therefore, were "not a place of rest
or final destination." they were "but a throat through which the current
flows," and the sales there were not merely local transactions. "they do
not stop the flow;—but, on the contrary" are "indispensable to its
continuity."[]
in chicago board of trade v. olsen,[] involving the grain futures
act, the same course of reasoning was repeated. speaking of the swift
case, chief justice taft remarked: "that case was a milestone in the
interpretation of the commerce clause of the constitution. it
[pg ]recognized the great changes and development in the business of this
vast country and drew again the dividing line between interstate and
intrastate commerce where the constitution intended it to be. it refused
to permit local incidents of a great interstate movement, which taken
alone were intrastate, to characterize the movement as such."[] of
special significance, however, is the part of the opinion which was
devoted to showing the relation between future sales and cash sales, and
hence the effect of the former upon the interstate grain trade. the
test, said the chief justice, was furnished by the question of price.
"the question of price dominates trade between the states. sales of an
article which affect the country-wide price of the article directly
affect the country-wide commerce in it."[] thus a practice which
demonstrably affects prices would also affect interstate trade
"directly," and so, even though local in itself, would fall within the
regulatory power of congress. in the following passage, indeed, chief
justice taft whittles down, in both cases, the "direct-indirect" formula
to the vanishing point: "whatever amounts to more or less constant
practice, and threatens to obstruct or unduly to burden the freedom of
interstate commerce is within the regulatory power of congress under the
commerce clause, and it is primarily for congress to consider and decide
the fact of the danger and meet it. this court will certainly not
substitute its judgment for that of congress in such a matter unless the
relation of the subject to interstate commerce and its effect upon it
are clearly nonexistent."[] and it was in reliance on the doctrine of
these cases that congress first set to work to combat the depression in
 and the years immediately following. but in fact, much of its
legislation at this time marked a wide advance upon the measures just
passed in review. they did not stop with regulating traffic among the
states and the instrumentalities thereof; they also essayed to govern
production and industrial relations in the field of production.
confronted with this revolutionary claim to power on congress' part, the
court again deemed itself called upon to define a limit to the commerce
power that would save to the states their historical sphere, and
especially their customary monopoly of legislative power in relation to
industry and labor management.
not all antidepression legislation, however, was of this revolutionary
type. the securities exchange act of [] and the public utility
company act ("wheeler-rayburn act") of [] were not. the former
creates the securities and exchange commission, and authorizes it to lay
down regulations designed to keep dealing in [pg ]securities honest and
above-board and closes the channels of interstate commerce and the mails
to dealers refusing to register under the act. the latter requires, by
sections (a) and , the companies which are governed by it to register
with the securities and exchange commission and to inform it concerning
their business, organization and financial structure, all on pain of
being prohibited use of the facilities of interstate commerce and the
mails; while by section , the so-called "death sentence" clause, the
same act closes after a certain date the channels of interstate
communication to certain types of public utility companies whose
operations, congress found, were calculated chiefly to exploit the
investing and consuming public. all these provisions have been
sustained,[] gibbons v. ogden, furnishing the court its principal
reliance.[]
[pg ]
congressional regulation of production and industrial relations
in the following words of chief justice hughes, spoken in a case which
was decided a few days after president franklin d. roosevelt's first
inauguration, the problem which confronted the new administration was
clearly set forth: "when industry is grievously hurt, when producing
concerns fail, when unemployment mounts and communities dependent upon
profitable production are prostrated, the wells of commerce go
dry."[]
the initial effort of congress to deal with this situation was embodied
in the national industrial recovery act of june , .[] the
opening section of the act asserted the existence of "a national
emergency productive of widespread unemployment and disorganization of
industry which" burdened "interstate and foreign commerce," affected
"the public welfare," and undermined "the standards of living of the
american people." to effect the removal of these conditions the
president was authorized, upon the application of industrial or trade
groups, to approve "codes of fair competition," or to prescribe the same
in cases where such applications were not duly forthcoming. among other
things such codes, of which eventually more than  were promulgated,
were required to lay down rules of fair dealing with customers and to
furnish labor certain guarantees respecting hours, wages and collective
bargaining. for the time being business and industry were to be
cartelized on a national scale.
in the case of schechter corp. v. united states,[] one of these
codes, the live poultry code, was pronounced unconstitutional. although
it was conceded that practically all poultry handled by the schechters
came from outside the state, and hence via interstate commerce, the
court held, nevertheless, that once the chickens came to rest in the
schechters' wholesale market interstate commerce in them ceased. the
act, however, also purported to govern business activities which
"affected" interstate commerce. this, chief justice hughes held, must be
taken to mean "directly" affect such commerce: "the distinction between
direct and indirect effects of intrastate transactions upon interstate
commerce must be recognized as a fundamental one, essential to the
maintenance of our constitutional system. otherwise, ***, there would
be virtually no limit to the federal power and for all practical
purposes we should have a completely centralized government."[] in
short, the case was governed by the ideology of [pg ]the sugar trust case,
which was not mentioned in the court's opinion.[]
congress' second attempt to combat the depression comprised the
agricultural adjustment act of .[] as is pointed out elsewhere
the measure was set aside as an attempt to regulate production, a
subject which was held to be "prohibited" to the united states by
amendment x.[] see pp. -.
the third measure to be disallowed was the guffey-snyder bituminous coal
conservation act of .[] the statute created machinery for the
regulation of the price of soft coal, both that sold in interstate
commerce and that sold "locally," and other machinery for the regulation
of hours of labor and wages in the mines. the clauses of the act dealing
with these two different matters were declared by the act itself to be
separable so that the invalidity of the one set would not affect the
validity of the other; but this strategy was ineffectual. a majority of
the court, speaking by justice sutherland held that the act constituted
one connected scheme of regulation which, inasmuch as it invaded the
reserved powers of the states over conditions of employment in
productive industry, was violative of the constitution and void.[]
justice sutherland's opinion set out [pg ]from chief justice hughes's
assertion in the schechter case of the "fundamental" character of the
distinction between "direct" and "indirect" effects; that is to say,
from the doctrine of the sugar trust case. it then proceeded: "much
stress is put upon the evils which come from the struggle between
employers and employees over the matter of wages, working conditions,
the right of collective bargaining, etc., and the resulting strikes,
curtailment and irregularity of production and effect on prices; and it
is insisted that interstate commerce is greatly affected thereby. but,
..., the conclusive answer is that the evils are all local evils over
which the federal government has no legislative control. the relation of
employer and employee is a local relation. at common law, it is one of
the domestic relations. the wages are paid for the doing of local work.
working conditions are obviously local conditions. the employees are not
engaged in or about commerce, but exclusively in producing a commodity.
and the controversies and evils, which it is the object of the act to
regulate and minimize, are local controversies and evils affecting local
work undertaken to accomplish that local result. such effect as they may
have upon commerce, however extensive it may be, is secondary and
indirect. an increase in the greatness of the effect adds to its
importance. it does not alter its character."[] we again see the
influence of the ideology of the sugar trust case.[]
the case in which the court reduced the distinction between "direct" and
"indirect" effects to the vanishing point, and thereby put congress in
the way of governing productive industry and labor relations in such
industry was national labor relations board v. jones and laughlin
steel corp.,[] decided april , . here the statute involved was
the national labor relations act of july , ,[] which forbids
"any unfair labor practice affecting interstate commerce" and lists
among these "the denial by employers of the right of employees to
organize and the refusal by employers to accept the procedure of
collective bargaining." ignoring recent holdings, government counsel
appealed to the "current of commerce" concept of the swift case. the
scope of respondent's activities, they pointed out, was immense. besides
its great steel-producing plants, it owned and operated mines,
steamships, and terminal railways scattered through several states, and
altogether it gave employment to many thousands of workers. a vast
industrial commonwealth such as this, whose operations constantly
traversed state lines, comprised, they contended, a species of
territorial enclave which was subject in all its parts to the only
governmental [pg ]power capable of dealing with it as an entity, that is,
the national government. yet even if this were not so, still the
protective power of congress over interstate commerce must be deemed to
extend to disruptive strikes by employees of such an immense concern,
and hence to include power to remove the causes of such strikes. the
court, speaking through chief justice hughes, held the corporation to be
subject to the act on the latter ground. "the close and intimate
effect," said he, "which brings the subject within the reach of federal
power may be due to activities in relation to productive industry
although the industry when separately viewed is local." nor will it do
to say that such effect is "indirect." considering defendant's
"far-flung activities," the effect of strife between it and its
employees "*** would be immediate and [it] might be catastrophic. we
are asked to shut our eyes to the plainest facts of our national life
and to deal with the question of direct and indirect effects in an
intellectual vacuum. *** when industries organize themselves on a
national scale, making their relation to interstate commerce the
dominant factor in their activities, how can it be maintained that their
industrial labor relations constitute a forbidden field into which
congress may not enter when it is necessary to protect interstate
commerce from the paralyzing consequences of industrial war? we have
often said that interstate commerce itself is a practical conception. it
is equally true that interferences with that commerce must be appraised
by a judgment that does not ignore actual experience."[]
while the act was thus held to be within the constitutional powers of
congress in relation to a productive concern, the interruption of whose
business by strike "might be catastrophic," the decision was forthwith
held to apply also to two minor concerns;[] and in a later case the
court stated specifically that "the smallness of the volume of commerce
affected in any particular case" is not a material consideration.[]
moreover, the doctrine of the jones-laughlin case applies equally to
"natural" products, to coal mined, to stone quarried, to fruit and
vegetables grown.[]
in  congress enacted the fair labor standards act.[] the measure
prohibits not only the shipment in interstate commerce of [pg ]goods
manufactured by employees whose wages are less than the prescribed
minimum or whose weekly hours of labor are greater than the prescribed
maximum, but also the employment of workmen in the production of goods
for such commerce at other than the prescribed wages and hours.
interstate commerce is defined by the act to mean "trade, commerce,
transportation, transmission, or communication among the several states
or from any state to any place outside thereof." it was further provided
that "for the purposes of this act an employee shall be deemed to have
been engaged in the production of goods [that is, for interstate
commerce] if such employee was employed ***, or in any process or
occupation necessary to the production thereof, in any state."
sustaining an indictment under the act, a unanimous court, speaking by
chief justice stone, said: "the motive and purpose of the present
regulation are plainly to make effective the congressional conception of
public policy that interstate commerce should not be made the instrument
of competition in the distribution of goods produced under substandard
labor conditions, which competition is injurious to the commerce and to
the states from and to which commerce flows."[] in support of the
decision the court invokes chief justice marshall's reading of the
necessary and proper clause in mcculloch v. maryland and his reading
of the commerce clause in gibbons v. ogden.[] objections purporting
to be based on the tenth amendment are met from the same point of view:
"our conclusion is unaffected by the tenth amendment which provides:
'the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively,
or to the people.' the amendment states but a truism that all is
retained which has not been surrendered. there is nothing in the history
of its adoption to suggest that it was more than declaratory of the
relationship between the national and state governments as it had been
established by the constitution before the amendment or that its purpose
was other than to allay fears that the new national government might
seek to exercise powers not granted, and that the states might not be
able to exercise fully their reserved powers. see e.g., ii elliot's
debates, , ; iii id. , , ; iv id. , ; i annals of
congress, , , -; story, commentaries on the constitution,
§§-."[] commenting recently on this decision, former justice
roberts said: "of course, the effect of sustaining the fair labor
standards act was to place the whole matter of wages and hours of
persons employed throughout the united states, with slight exceptions,
under a single federal regulatory scheme and in this way completely to
supersede state exercise of the police power in this field."[] in a
series of later cases construing terms of the act, it had been given
wide application.[]
[pg ]
meantime congress had returned to the task of bolstering agriculture by
passing the agricultural marketing agreement act of june , ,[]
authorizing the secretary of agriculture to fix the minimum prices of
certain agricultural products, when the handling of such products occurs
"in the current of interstate or foreign commerce or *** directly
burdens, obstructs or affects interstate or foreign commerce in such
commodity or product thereof." in united states v. wrightwood dairy
company[] the court sustained an order of the secretary of
agriculture fixing the minimum prices to be paid to producers of milk in
the chicago "marketing area." the dairy company demurred to the
regulation on the ground of its applying to milk produced and sold
intrastate. sustaining the order the court said: "congress plainly has
power to regulate the price of milk distributed through the medium of
interstate commerce, ***, and it possesses every power needed to make
that regulation effective. the commerce power is not confined in its
exercise to the regulation of commerce among the states. it extends to
those activities intrastate which so affect interstate commerce, or the
exertion of the power of congress over it, as to make regulation of them
appropriate means to the attainment of a legitimate end, the effective
execution of the granted power to regulate interstate commerce. see
mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat. , ; *** the power of congress
over interstate commerce is plenary and complete in itself, may be
exercised to its utmost extent, and acknowledges no limitations other
than are prescribed in the constitution. gibbons v. ogden,  wheat. ,
. it follows that no form of state activity can constitutionally
thwart the regulatory power granted by the commerce clause to congress.
hence the reach of that power extends to those intrastate activities
which in a substantial way interfere with or obstruct the exercise of
the granted power."[]
in wickard v. filburn[] a still deeper penetration by congress into
the field of production was sustained. as amended by the act of ,
the agricultural adjustment act of ,[] regulates production even
when not intended for commerce but wholly for consumption on the
producer's farm. sustaining this extension of the act, the court pointed
out that the effect of the statute was to support the market. it said:
"it can hardly be denied that a factor of such volume and variability as
home-consumed wheat would have a substantial influence on price and
market conditions. this may arise because being in marketable condition
such wheat overhangs the market and, if induced by rising prices, tends
to flow into the market and check price increases. but if we assume that
it is never marketed, it supplies a [pg ]need of the man who grew it which
would otherwise be reflected by purchases in the open market. home-grown
wheat in this sense competes with wheat in commerce. the stimulation of
commerce is a use of the regulatory function quite as definitely as
prohibitions or restrictions thereon. this record leaves us in no doubt
that congress may properly have considered that wheat consumed on the
farm where grown, if wholly outside the scheme of regulation, would have
a substantial effect in defeating and obstructing its purpose to
stimulate trade therein at increased prices."[] and it elsewhere
stated: "questions of the power of congress are not to be decided by
reference to any formula which would give controlling force to
nomenclature such as 'production' and 'indirect' and foreclose
consideration of the actual effects of the activity in question upon
interstate commerce. *** the court's recognition of the relevance of
the economic effects in the application of the commerce clause, ***,
has made the mechanical application of legal formulas no longer
feasible."[]
acts of congress prohibiting commerce
"jefferson's embargo" of -, which cut all trade with europe, was
attacked on the ground that the power to regulate commerce was the power
to preserve it, not the power to destroy it. this [pg ]argument was rejected
by judge davis of the united states district court for massachusetts in
the following words: "a national sovereignty is created [by the
constitution]. not an unlimited sovereignty, but a sovereignty, as to
the objects surrendered and specified, limited only by the
qualifications and restrictions, expressed in the constitution. commerce
is one of those objects. the care, protection, management and control,
of this great national concern, is, in my opinion, vested by the
constitution, in the congress of the united states; and their power is
sovereign, relative to commercial intercourse, qualified by the
limitations and restrictions, expressed in that instrument, and by the
treaty making power of the president and senate. *** power to
regulate, it is said, cannot be understood to give a power to
annihilate. to this it may be replied, that the acts under
consideration, though of very ample extent, do not operate as a
prohibition of all foreign commerce. it will be admitted that partial
prohibitions are authorized by the expression; and how shall the degree,
or extent, of the prohibition be adjusted, but by the discretion of the
national government, to whom the subject appears to be committed? ***
the term does not necessarily include shipping or navigation; much less
does it include the fisheries. yet it never has been contended, that
they are not the proper objects of national regulation; and several acts
of congress have been made respecting them. *** [furthermore] if it be
admitted that national regulations relative to commerce, may apply it as
an instrument, and are not necessarily confined to its direct aid and
advancement, the sphere of legislative discretion is, of course, more
widely extended; and, in time of war, or of great impending peril, it
must take a still more expanded range. congress has power to declare
war. it, of course, has power to prepare for war; and the time, the
manner, and the measure, in the application of constitutional means,
seem to be left to its wisdom and discretion. *** under the
confederation, *** we find an express reservation to the state
legislatures of the power to pass prohibitory commercial laws, and, as
respects exportations, without any limitations. some of them exercised
this power. *** unless congress, by the constitution, possess the
power in question, it still exists in the state legislatures—but this
has never been claimed or pretended, since the adoption of the federal
constitution; and the exercise of such a power by the states, would be
manifestly inconsistent with the power, vested by the people in
congress, 'to regulate commerce.' hence i infer, that the power,
reserved to the states by the articles of confederation, is surrendered
to congress, by the constitution; unless we suppose, that, by some
strange process, it has been merged or extinguished, and now exists no
where."[]
[pg ]
tariff laws have customarily contained prohibitory provisions, and such
provisions have been sustained by the court under congress's revenue
powers (see above) and under its power to regulate foreign commerce.
speaking for the court in university of illinois v. united
states,[] in , chief justice hughes said: "the congress may
determine what articles may be imported into this country and the terms
upon which importation is permitted. no one can be said to have a vested
right to carry on foreign commerce with the united states. *** it is
true that the taxing power is a distinct power; that it is distinct from
the power to regulate commerce. *** it is also true that the taxing
power embraces the power to lay duties. art. i, §, cl. . but because
the taxing power is a distinct power and embraces the power to lay
duties, it does not follow that duties may not be imposed in the
exercise of the power to regulate commerce. the contrary is well
established. gibbons v. ogden,  wheat. , . 'under the power to
regulate foreign commerce congress impose duties on importations, give
drawbacks, pass embargo and nonintercourse laws, and make all other
regulations necessary to navigation, to the safety of passengers, and
the protection of property.' groves v. slaughter,  pet. , .
the laying of duties is 'a common means of executing the power.'  story
on the constitution, §."[]
the forerunners of more recent acts excluding objectionable commodities
from interstate commerce are the laws forbidding the importation of like
commodities from abroad. this power congress has exercised since .
in that year it forbade the importation of obscene literature or
pictures from abroad.[] six years later it passed an act "to prevent
the importation of spurious and adulterated drugs" and to provide a
system of inspection to make the prohibition effective.[] such
legislation guarding against the importation of noxiously adulterated
foods, drugs, or liquor has been on the statute books ever since. in
 the importation by chinese nationals of smoking opium was
prohibited,[] and subsequent statutes passed in  and  made it
unlawful for anyone to import it.[] in  congress forbade the
importation of any tea "inferior in purity, quality, and fitness for
consumption" as compared with a legal standard.[] the act was
sustained in , in the leading case of buttfield v. stranahan.[]
in "the abby dodge" case an act excluding sponges taken by means of
diving or diving apparatus from the waters of the gulf of mexico or
straits of florida was sustained, but construed as not applying to
sponges taken from the territorial waters of a state.[] in weber v.
freed[] an act prohibiting the importation and interstate
transportation of prize-fight [pg ]films or of pictorial representation of
prize fights was upheld. speaking for the unanimous court, chief justice
white said: "in view of the complete power of congress over foreign
commerce and its authority to prohibit the introduction of foreign
articles recognized and enforced by many previous decisions of this
court, the contentions are so devoid of merit as to cause them to be
frivolous."[] in brolan v. united states[] the court again
stressed the absolute nature of congress's power over foreign commerce,
saying: "in the argument reference is made to decisions of this court
dealing with the subject of the power of congress to regulate interstate
commerce, but the very postulate upon which the authority of congress to
absolutely prohibit foreign importations as expounded by the decisions
of this court rests is the broad distinction which exists between the
two powers and therefore the cases cited and many more which might be
cited announcing the principles which they uphold have obviously no
relation to the question in hand."[]
the question whether congress's power to regulate commerce "among the
several states" embraced the power to prohibit it furnished the topic of
one of the most protracted debates in the entire history of the
constitution's interpretation, a debate the final resolution of which in
favor of congressional power is an event of first importance for the
future of american federalism. the issue was as early as  brought
forward by henry clay, in an argument before the court in which he
raised the specter of an act of congress forbidding the interstate slave
trade.[] the debate was concluded ninety-nine years later by the
decision in united states v. darby, in which the fair labor standards
act was sustained. the résumé of it which is given below is based on
judicial opinions, arguments of counsel, and the writings of jurists and
political scientists. much of this material was evoked by efforts of
congress, from about  onward, to stop the shipment interstate of the
products of child labor.
[pg ]
the earliest such acts were in the nature of quarantine regulations and
usually dealt solely with interstate transportation. in  the
exportation or shipment in interstate commerce of livestock having any
infectious disease was forbidden.[] in  power was conferred upon
the secretary of agriculture to establish regulations to prevent the
spread of such diseases through foreign or interstate commerce.[] in
 the same official was authorized to lay an absolute embargo or
quarantine upon all shipments of cattle from one state to another when
the public necessity might demand it.[] a statute passed in 
forbade the transportation in foreign and interstate commerce and the
mails of certain varieties of moths, plant lice, and other insect pests
injurious to plant crops, trees, and other vegetation.[] in  a
similar exclusion of diseased nursery stock was decreed,[] while by
the same act, and again by an act of ,[] the secretary of
agriculture was invested with powers of quarantine on interstate
commerce for the protection of plant life from disease similar to those
above described for the prevention of the spread of animal disease.
while the supreme court originally held federal quarantine regulations
of this sort to be constitutionally inapplicable to intrastate shipments
of livestock, on the ground that federal authority extends only to
foreign and interstate commerce,[] this view has today been
abandoned. see pp. -.
[pg ]
the first case to come before the court in which the issues discussed
above were canvassed at all thoroughly was champion v. ames,[]
involving the act of  "for the suppression of lotteries."[] an
earlier act excluding lottery tickets from the mails had been upheld in
the earlier case of in re rapier,[] on the proposition that congress
clearly had the power to see that the very facilities furnished by it
were not put to bad uses. but in the case of commerce the facilities are
not ordinarily furnished by the national government, and the right to
engage in foreign and interstate commerce comes from the constitution
itself, or is anterior to it.
how difficult the court found the question produced by the act of ,
forbidding any person to bring within the united states or to cause to
be "carried from one state to another" any lottery ticket, or an
equivalent thereof, "for the purpose of disposing of the same," is shown
by the fact that the case was thrice argued before the court, and the
fact that the court's decision finally sustaining the act was a
five-to-four decision. the opinion of the court, on the other hand,
prepared by justice harlan, marked an almost unqualified triumph at the
time for the view that congress's power to regulate commerce among the
states includes the power to prohibit it, especially to supplement and
support state legislation enacted under the police power.[] early in
the opinion extensive quotation is made from chief justice marshall's
opinion in gibbons v. ogden,[] with special stress upon the
definition there given of the phrase "to regulate." justice johnson's
assertion on the same occasion is also given: "the power of a sovereign
state over commerce, ***, amounts to nothing more than, a power to
limit and restrain it at pleasure." further along is quoted with evident
approval justice bradley's statement in brown v. houston,[] that
"the power to regulate commerce among the several states is granted to
congress in terms as absolute as is the power to regulate commerce with
foreign nations."
following in the wake of champion v. ames, congress has repeatedly
brought its prohibitory powers over interstate commerce and
communications to the support of certain local policies of the states in
the exercise of their reserved powers, thereby aiding them in the
repression of the liquor traffic,[] of traffic in game taken in
violation of state laws,[] of commerce in convict-made goods,[] of
the white slave traffic,[] of traffic in stolen motor vehicles,[]
of kidnapping,[] of traffic in [pg ]stolen property,[] of
racketeering,[] of prize-fight films or other pictorial
representation of encounters of pugilists.[] the conception of the
federal system on which the court based its validation of this
legislation was stated by it in  in sustaining the mann "white
slave" act in the following words: "our dual form of government has its
perplexities, state and nation having different spheres of jurisdiction,
***, but it must be kept in mind that we are one people; and the
powers reserved to the states and those conferred on the nation are
adapted to be exercised, whether independently or concurrently, to
promote the general welfare, material, and moral."[] at the same
time, the court made it plain that in prohibiting commerce among the
states, congress was equally free to support state legislative policy or
to devise a policy of its own. "congress," it said, "may exercise this
authority in aid of the policy of the state, if it sees fit to do so. it
is equally clear that the policy of congress acting independently of the
states may induce legislation without reference to the particular policy
or law of any given state. acting within the authority conferred by the
constitution it is for congress to determine what legislation will
attain its purposes. the control of congress over interstate commerce is
not to be limited by state laws."[]
hammer v. dagenhart
however, it is to be noted that none of this legislation operated in the
field of industrial relations. so when the court was confronted in ,
in the case of hammer v. dagenhart,[] with an act which forbade
manufacturers and others to offer child-made goods for transportation in
interstate commerce,[] it held the act, by the narrow vote of five
justices to four, to be not an act regulative of commerce among the
states, but one which invaded the reserved powers of the states. "the
maintenance of the authority of the states over matters purely local,"
said justice day for the court, "is as essential to the preservation of
our institutions as is the conservation of the supremacy of [pg ]the federal
power in all matters entrusted to the nation by the federal
constitution."[] as to earlier decisions sustaining congress's
prohibitory powers, justice day said: "in each of these instances the
use of interstate transportation was necessary to the accomplishment of
harmful results. *** this element is wanting in the present case.
*** the goods shipped are in themselves harmless. *** when offered
for shipment, and before transportation begins, the labor of their
production is over, and the mere fact that they were intended for
interstate commerce transportation does not make their production
subject to federal control under the commerce power. *** 'when
commerce begins is determined, not by the character of the commodity,
nor by the intention of the owner to transfer it to another state for
sale, ***, but by its actual delivery to a common carrier for
transportation, ***' (mr. justice jackson in in re greene,  fed.
rep. ). this principle has been recognized often in this court. coe
v. errol,  u.s.  ***."[]
the decision in hammer v. dagenhart was, in short, governed by the
same general conception of the interstate commerce process as that which
governed the decision in the sugar trust case. commerce was envisaged as
beginning only with an act of transportation from one state to another.
and from this it was deduced that the only commerce which congress may
prohibit is an act of transportation from one state to the other which
is followed in the latter by an act within the normal powers of
government to prohibit. commerce, however, is primarily traffic; and
the theory of the child labor act was that it was designed to discourage
a widespread and pernicious interstate traffic in the products of child
labor—pernicious because it bore "a real and substantial relation" to
the existence of child labor employment in some states and constituted a
direct inducement to its spread to other states. deprived of the
interstate market which this decision secured to it, child labor could
not exist.
in brooks v. united states,[] decided in , the court, in
sustaining the national motor vehicle theft act of ,[] materially
impaired the ratio decidendi of hammer v. dagenhart. at the outset
of his opinion for the court, chief justice taft stated the general
proposition that "congress can certainly regulate interstate commerce to
the extent of forbidding and punishing the use of such commerce as an
agency to promote immorality, dishonesty or the spread of any evil or
harm to the people of other states from the state of origin." [pg ]this
statement was buttressed by a review of previous cases, including the
explanation that the goods involved in hammer v. dagenhart were
"harmless" and did not spread harm to persons in other states. passing
then to the measure before the court, the chief justice noted "the
radical change in transportation" brought about by the automobile, and
the rise of "elaborately organized conspiracies for the theft of
automobiles ***, and their sale or other disposition" in another
police jurisdiction from the owner's. this, the opinion declared, "is a
gross misuse of interstate commerce. congress may properly punish such
interstate transportation by anyone with knowledge of the theft, because
of its harmful result and its defeat of the property rights of those
whose machines against their will are taken into other
jurisdictions."[]
the motor vehicle act was sustained, therefore, mainly as protective of
owners of automobiles, that is to say, of interests in "the state of
origin." it was designed to repress automobile thefts, and that
notwithstanding the obvious fact that such thefts must necessarily occur
before transportation of the thing stolen can take place, that is, under
the formula followed in hammer v. dagenhart, before congress's power
over interstate commerce becomes operative. also, the court took
cognizance of "elaborately organized conspiracies" for the theft and
disposal of automobiles across state lines—that, to say, of a
widespread traffic in such property.
the formal overruling of hammer v. dagenhart, however, did not occur
until  when, in sustaining the fair labor standards act, a unanimous
court, speaking by justice stone, said: "hammer v. dagenhart has not
been followed. the distinction on which the decision was rested that
congressional power to prohibit interstate commerce is limited to
articles which in themselves have some harmful or deleterious
property—a distinction which was novel when made and unsupported by any
provision of the constitution—has long since been abandoned. *** the
thesis of the opinion that the motive of the prohibition or its effect
to control in some measure the use or production within the states of
the article thus excluded from the commerce can operate to deprive the
regulation of its constitutional authority has long since ceased to have
force. *** and finally we have declared 'the authority of the federal
government over interstate commerce does not differ in extent or
character from that retained by the states over intrastate commerce.'
united states v. rock royal co-operative,  u.s. , . the
conclusion is inescapable that [pg ]hammer v. dagenhart, was a departure
from the principles which have prevailed in the interpretation of the
commerce clause both before and since the decision and that such
vitality, as a precedent, as it then had has long since been exhausted.
it should be and now is overruled."[] and commenting in a recent case
on the fair labor standards act, justice burton, speaking for the court
said: "the primary purpose of the act is not so much to regulate
interstate commerce as such, as it is, through the exercise of
legislative power, to prohibit the shipment of goods in interstate
commerce if they are produced under substandard labor conditions."[]
in view of these developments the following dictum by justice
frankfurter, was no doubt, intended to be reassuring as to the future of
the federal system: "the interpenetrations of modern society have not
wiped out state lines. it is not for us [the court] to make inroads upon
our federal system either by indifference to its maintenance or
excessive regard for the unifying forces of modern technology.
scholastic reasoning may prove that no activity is isolated within the
boundaries of a single state, but that cannot justify absorption of
legislative power by the united states over every activity."[] while
this may be conceded, the unmistakable lesson of recent cases is that
the preservation of our federal system depends today mainly upon
congress.
the commerce clause as a restraint on state powers
the grant of power to congress over commerce, unlike that of power to
levy customs duties, the power to raise armies, and some others, is
unaccompanied by correlative restrictions on state power. this
circumstance does not, however, of itself signify that the states were
expected still to participate in the power thus granted congress,
subject only to the operation of the supremacy clause. as hamilton
points out in the federalist, while some of the powers which are vested
in the national government admit of their "concurrent" exercise by the
states, others are of their very nature "exclusive," and hence render
the notion of a like power in the states "contradictory and
repugnant."[] as an example of the latter kind of power hamilton
mentioned the power of congress to pass a uniform naturalization law.
was the same principle expected to apply to the power over foreign and
interstate commerce?
[pg ]unquestionably one of the great advantages anticipated from the grant to
congress of power over commerce was that state interferences with trade,
which had become a source of sharp discontent under the articles of
confederation, would be thereby brought to an end. as webster stated in
his argument for appellant in gibbons v. ogden: "the prevailing motive
was to regulate commerce; to rescue it from the embarrassing and
destructive consequences, resulting from the legislation of so many
different states, and to place it under the protection of a uniform
law." in other words, the constitutional grant was itself a regulation
of commerce in the interest of uniformity. justice johnson's testimony
in his concurring opinion in the same case is to like effect: "there was
not a state in the union, in which there did not, at that time, exist a
variety of commercial regulations; *** by common consent, those laws
dropped lifeless from their statute books, for want of sustaining power
that had been relinquished to congress";[] and madison's assertion,
late in life, that power had been granted congress over interstate
commerce mainly as "a negative and preventive provision against
injustice among the states,"[] carries a like implication.
that, however, the commerce clause, unimplemented by congressional
legislation, took from the states any and all power over foreign and
interstate commerce was by no means universally conceded; and ogden's
attorneys directly challenged the idea. moreover, as was pointed out on
both sides in gibbons v. ogden, legislation by congress regulative of
any particular phase of commerce would still leave many other phases
unregulated and consequently raise the question whether the states were
entitled to fill the remaining gaps, if not by virtue of a "concurrent"
power over interstate and foreign commerce, then by virtue of "that
immense mass of legislation," as marshall termed it, "which embraces
everything within the territory of a state, not surrendered to the
general government,"[]—in a word, the "police power."
the commerce clause does not, therefore, without more ado, settle the
question of what power is left to the states to adopt legislation
regulating foreign or interstate commerce in greater or less measure. to
be sure, in cases of flat conflict between an act or acts of congress
regulative of such commerce and a state legislative act or acts, from
whatever state power ensuing, the act of congress is today recognized,
and was recognized by marshall, as enjoying an unquestionable
supremacy.[] but suppose, first, that congress has passed no act;
or secondly, that its legislation does not clearly cover the ground
which certain state legislation before the court attempts to cover—what
rules then apply? since gibbons v. ogden both of these situations
[pg ]have confronted the court, especially as regards interstate commerce,
hundreds of times, and in meeting them the court has, first and last,
coined or given currency to numerous formulas, some of which still
guide, even when they do not govern, its judgment.
the earliest, and the most successful, attempt to set forth a principle
capable of guiding the court in adjusting the powers of the states to
unexercised power of congress under the commerce clause was that which
was made by daniel webster in his argument in gibbons v. ogden, in the
following words: "he contended, ***, that the people intended, in
establishing the constitution, to transfer from the several states to a
general government, those high and important powers over commerce,
which, in their exercise, were to maintain a uniform and general system.
from the very nature of the case, these powers must be exclusive; that
is, the higher branches of commercial regulation must be exclusively
committed to a single hand. what is it that is to be regulated? not the
commerce of the several states, respectively, but the commerce of the
united states. henceforth, the commerce of the states was to be a unit;
and the system by which it was to exist and be governed, must
necessarily be complete, entire and uniform." at the same time webster
conceded "that the words used in the constitution, 'to regulate
commerce,' are so very general and extensive, that they might be
construed to cover a vast field of legislation, part of which has always
been occupied by state laws; and therefore, the words must have a
reasonable construction, and the power should be considered as
exclusively vested in congress, so far, and so far only, as the nature
of the power requires."[]
webster also dealt with the problem which arises when congress has
exercised its power. the results of its act, he contended, must be
treated as a unit, so that when congress had left subject matter within
its jurisdiction unregulated, it must be deemed to have done so of
design, and its omissions, or silences, accordingly be left undisturbed
by state action. although marshall, because he thought the new york act
creating the livingston-fulton monopoly to be in direct conflict with
the enrolling and licensing act of , was not compelled to pass on
either of webster's theories, he indicated his sympathy with them.[]
cooley v. board of port wardens
aside from marshall's opinion in  in brown v. maryland,[] in
which the famous "original package" formula made its debut, the [pg ]most
important utterance of the court touching interpretation of the commerce
clause as a restriction on state legislative power is that for which
cooley v. board of wardens of port of philadelphia,[] decided in
, is usually cited. the question at issue was the validity of a
pennsylvania pilotage act so far as it applied to vessels engaged in
foreign commerce and the coastwise trade. the court, speaking through
justice curtis, sustained the act on the basis of a distinction between
those subjects of commerce which "imperatively demand a single uniform
rule" operating throughout the country and those which "as imperatively"
demand "that diversity which alone can meet the local necessities of
navigation," that is to say, of commerce. as to the former the court
held congress's power to be "exclusive"—as to the latter it held that
the states enjoyed a power of "concurrent legislation."
while this formula obviously stems directly from webster's argument in
gibbons v. ogden, it covers considerably less ground. citation,
nevertheless, of the cooley case throughout the next half century
eliminated the difference and brought the curtis dictum abreast of
webster's earlier argument. the doctrine consequently came to be
established, first, that congress's power over interstate commerce is
"exclusive" as to those phases of it which require "uniform regulation";
second, that outside this field, as plotted by the court, the states
enjoyed a "concurrent" power of regulation, subject to congress's
overriding power.[]
but meantime other formulas had emerged from the judicial smithy,
several of which are brought together into something like a doctrinal
system, in justice hughes' comprehensive opinion for the court in the
minnesota rate cases,[] decided in . "direct" regulation of
foreign or interstate commerce by a state is here held to be out of the
question. at the same time, the states have their police and taxing
powers, and may use them as their own views of sound public policy may
dictate even though interstate commerce may be "incidentally" or
"indirectly" regulated, it being understood that such "incidental" or
"indirect" effects are always subject to congressional disallowance.
"our system of government," justice hughes reflects, "is a practical
adjustment by which the national authority as [pg ]conferred by the
constitution is maintained in its fall scope without unnecessary loss of
local efficiency."[]
in more concrete terms, the varied formulas which characterize this
branch of our constitutional law have been devised by the court from
time to time in an endeavor to effect "a practical adjustment" between
two great interests, the maintenance of freedom of commerce except so
far as congress may choose to restrain it, and the maintenance in the
states of efficient local governments. thus, while formulas may serve to
steady and guide its judgment, the court's real function in this area of
judicial review is essentially that of an arbitral or quasi-legislative
body. so much so is this the case that in  three justices joined in
an opinion in which they urged that the business of drawing the line
between the immunity of interstate commerce and the taxing power of the
states "should be left to the legislatures of the states and the
congress," with the final remedy in the hands of the latter.[]
state taxing power and foreign commerce
brown v. maryland; the original package doctrine
the leading case under this heading is brown v. maryland,[] decided
in , the issue in which was the validity of a maryland statute
requiring "all importers of foreign articles or commodities,"
preparatory to selling the same, to take out a license. holding this act
to be void under both article i, sec. , and the commerce clause, the
court, speaking through chief justice marshall, advanced the following
propositions: () that "commerce is intercourse; one of its most
ordinary ingredients is traffic"; () that the right to import includes
the right to sell; () that a tax on the sale of an article is a tax on
the article itself—a conception of the incidence of taxation which has
at times had important repercussions in other fields of constitutional
law; () that the taxing power of the state does not extend in any form
to imports from abroad so long as they remain [pg ]"the property of the
importer, in his warehouse, in the original form or package" in which
they were imported—the famous "original package doctrine"; () that
once, however, the importer parts with his importations "or otherwise
mixes them with the general property of the state by breaking up his
packages," the law may treat them as part and parcel of such property;
() that even while in the original package imports are subject to the
incidental operation of police measures adopted by the state in good
faith for the protection of the public against apparent dangers. lastly,
in determining whether a state law amounts to a regulation of commerce
the court would, marshall announced, be guided by "substance" and not by
"form"—a proposition which has many times opened the way to extensive
inquiries by the court into the actualities both of commercial practice
and of state administration.
the decision in brown v. maryland, but more especially the "original
package doctrine" there laid down, has been sometimes criticised as
going too far. it would have been sufficient, the critics contend, for
the court to have held the maryland act void on account of its obviously
discriminatory character; and they urge that original packages receiving
the protection of the state ought to be subject to nondiscriminatory
taxation by it. the criticism was partially anticipated by marshall
himself in the apprehensions which he voiced that any concession to "the
great importing states" might be turned by them against the rest of the
country. indeed, he is uncertain whether the original package doctrine
will prove sufficient for its purposes and accordingly offers it not as
a rule "universal in its application," but rather as a stop-gap
principle. history has proved, however, that in this he builded better
than he knew. for in the field of foreign commerce the original package
doctrine has never been disturbed, and it has scarcely been added to;
and so confined, it has never been surpassed by any later piece of
judicial legislation, whether in point of durability or in that of
definiteness and easy comprehensibility.[]
state taxation of the subject matter of interstate commerce
the task of drawing the line between state power and the commercial
interest has proved a comparatively simple one in the field of foreign
commerce, the two things being in great part territorially distinct.
with "commerce among the states" it is very different. this is conducted
in the interior of the country, by persons and [pg ]corporations that are
ordinarily engaged also in local business; its usual incidents are acts
which, if unconnected with commerce among the states, would fall within
the state's powers of police and taxation; while the things it deals in
and the instruments by which it is carried on comprise the most ordinary
subject matter of state power. in this field the court has,
consequently, been unable to rely upon sweeping solutions. to the
contrary, its judgments have often been fluctuating and tentative, even
contradictory; and this is particularly the case as respects the
infringement of the state taxing power on interstate commerce. in the
words of justice frankfurter: "the power of the states to tax and the
limitations upon that power imposed by the commerce clause have
necessitated a long, continuous process of judicial adjustment. the need
for such adjustment is inherent in a federal government like ours, where
the same transaction has aspects that may concern the interests and
involve the authority of both the central government and the constituent
states. the history of this problem is spread over hundreds of volumes
of our reports. to attempt to harmonize all that has been said in the
past would neither clarify what has gone before nor guide the future.
suffice it to say that especially in this field opinions must be read in
the setting of the particular cases and as the product of preoccupation
with their special facts."[]
the great leading case dealing with the relation of the state's taxing
power to interstate commerce is that of the state freight tax,[]
decided in . the question before the court was the validity of a
pennsylvania statute, passed eight years earlier, which required every
company transporting freight within the state, with certain exceptions,
to pay a tax at specified rates on each ton of freight carried by it.
overturning the act, the court held: "() the transportation of freight,
or of the subjects of commerce, is a constituent part of commerce
itself; () a tax upon freight, transported from state to state, is a
regulation of commerce among the states; () whenever the subjects in
regard to which a power to regulate commerce is asserted are in their
nature national, or admit of one uniform system or plan of regulation,
they are exclusively within the regulating control of congress; ()
transportation of passengers or merchandise through a state, or from one
state to another, is of this nature; () hence a statute of a state
imposing a tax upon freight, taken up within the state and carried out
of it, or taken up without the state and brought within it, is repugnant
to that provision of the constitution of the united states, which
ordains that 'congress shall have power to regulate [pg ]commerce with
foreign nations and among the several states, and with the indian
tribes.'"[]
states, therefore, may not tax property in transit in interstate
commerce. a nondiscriminatory tax, however, is permitted if the goods
have not yet started in interstate commerce, or have completed the
interstate transit even though still in the original package, unless
they are foreign imports in the original package; and states may also
impose a nondiscriminatory tax when there is a break in an interstate
transit, and the goods have not been restored to the current of
interstate commerce. such is the law in brief. two questions arise,
first, when do goods originating in a state pass from under its power to
tax; and, second, when do goods arriving from another state lose their
immunity?
the leading case dealing with the first of these questions is coe v.
errol,[] in which the matter at issue was the right of the town of
errol, new hampshire, to tax certain logs on their way to points in
maine, while they lay in the river before the town or along its shore
awaiting the spring freshets and consequent rise of the river. as to the
logs in the river, which had come from maine on their way to lewiston in
the same state, but had been detained at errol by low water, the supreme
court of new hampshire itself ruled that the local tax did not apply,
the logs being still in transit. as to the logs which had been cut in
new hampshire and lay on the shore or in tributaries of the river, both
courts were again in agreement that they were still subject to local
taxation, notwithstanding the intention of their owners to send them out
of the state. said justice bradley: "*** goods do not cease to be part
of the general mass of property in the state, subject, as such, to its
jurisdiction, and to taxation in the usual way, until they have been
shipped, or entered with a common carrier for [pg ]transportation to another
state, or have been started upon such transportation in a continuous
route or journey."[]
under the above rule, obviously, production is not interstate commerce
even though the thing produced is intended for the interstate market.
thus a pennsylvania ad valorem tax on anthracite coal when prepared
and ready for shipment was held not to be an interference with
interstate commerce although applied to coal destined for a market in
other states;[] and in oliver iron company v. lord[] an
occupation tax on the mining of iron ore was upheld, although
substantially all of the ore was immediately and continuously loaded on
cars and shipped into other states. said the court: "mining is not
interstate commerce, but, *** subject to local regulation and
taxation. its character in this regard is intrinsic, is not affected by
the intended use or disposal of the product, is not controlled by
contractual engagements, and persists even though the business be
conducted in close connection with interstate commerce."[] likewise
an annual privilege tax on the business of producing natural gas in the
state, computed on the value of the gas produced "as shown by the gross
proceeds derived from the sale thereof by the producer," was held
constitutional even though most of the gas passed into interstate
commerce in continuous movement from the wells.[] and in utah power
and light co. v. pfost[] the generation of electricity in a state
was held to be distinguishable from its transmission over wires to
consumers in another state, and hence taxable by the former state.
likewise, a state statute imposing a privilege tax on the production of
mechanical power for sale or use did not contravene the interstate
commerce clause although applied to an engine operating a compressor to
increase the pressure of natural gas and thereby permit it to be
transported to purchasers in other states.[] similarly, a tax so much
per pound on shrimp taken within the three-mile belt of the coast of the
taxing state was valid, since the taxable event, the taking of the
shrimp, occurred before they could be said to have entered the
interstate commerce stream.[]
[pg ]
but while the production of goods intended for the interstate market is
taxable by the state where it takes place, their purchase for an
established market in another state is interstate commerce and as such
is neither regulatable nor taxable by the state of origin, provided at
any rate their trans-shipment is not unduly delayed.[] thus, oil
gathered into the pipe lines of a distributing company and intended for
the most part for customers outside the state, is in interstate commerce
from the moment it leaves the wells;[] and a like result has been
reached as to natural gas.[] "the typical and actual course of
events," says the court, "marks the carriage of the greater part as
commerce among the states and theoretical possibilities may be left out
of account."[]
but the question also arises as to when goods entering a state from
another state become part of the mass of property of the former and
hence taxable by it? in brown v. maryland,[] chief justice
marshall, had remarked at the close of his opinion, "we suppose the
principles laid down in this case, apply equally to importations from a
sister state."[] forty-two years later, in woodruff v. parham,[]
an effort was made to induce the court, in reliance on this dictum, to
apply the original package doctrine against a mobile, alabama tax on
sales at auction, so far as it reached "imports" from sister states.
[pg ]the court refused the invitation; first on the ground that marshall's
statement was obiter, the point not having been involved in brown v.
maryland; second, because usage contemporary with the constitution and
of the constitution itself confined the term "imports" as employed in
article i, section  to imports from abroad; third, because the tax in
question was nondiscriminatory. at the same time, nevertheless,
reference was made to the power of congress to interpose at any time in
exercise of its power over commerce, "in such a manner as to prevent the
states from any oppressive interference with the free interchange of
commodities by the citizens of one state with those of another."[]
the same result was reached a few years later in brown v.
houston,[] where it was held that coal transported down the
mississippi from pennsylvania had been validly subjected by louisiana to
a general ad valorem property tax, having "come to its place of rest,
for final disposal or use," and hence become "a part of the general mass
of property in the state."[] again, however, a caveat was entered in
behalf of the power of congress to impose a different rule affording "a
temporary exemption" of property transported from one state to another
from taxation by the latter.[]
woodruff v. parham and brown v. houston are still good law for the
most part.[] nevertheless, there is one respect in which imports from
sister states are treated as "imports" in the sense of the constitution,
and that is in being exempt from "unreasonable" inspection charges.[]
it is true, also, that in a series of cases involving sales of oil about
 the court appeared to be contemplating reviving the original
package doctrine,[] but these holdings were presently "qualified" in
a sweeping opinion by chief justice taft, reviewing the cases.[] but
taxation is one thing, prohibition another. in the field of the police
power, where its applicability was not so much as suggested in brown
v. maryland, the original package doctrine has been frequently invoked
by the court against state legislation, and even today, perhaps retains
a spark of life.[]
[pg ]
by the same token, local sales of goods brought into a state from
another state are subject to a nondiscriminatory exercise of its taxing
power. such a tax, the court has said, "has never been regarded as
imposing a direct burden upon interstate commerce and has no greater or
different effect upon that commerce than a general property tax to which
all those enjoying the protection of the state may be subjected"; and
this is true, even of goods immediately to be used in interstate
commerce.[] the commerce clause, therefore, does not prohibit a state
from imposing special license taxes on merchants using profit sharing
coupons and trading stamps although the coupons may have been inserted
in retail packages by the manufacturer or shipper outside the state and
are redeemable outside the state, either by such manufacturer or
shipper, or by some other agency outside the state;[] nor yet a
nondiscriminatory tax upon local peddling of goods and sales thereof by
peddlers even though the goods are foreign or interstate imports, since
the sale occurs after foreign or interstate commerce thereof has
ended.[] and in kehrer v. stewart[] it was held that a state tax
upon resident managing agents of nonresident meatpacking houses did not
conflict with the commerce clause, regardless of the fact that the
greater portion of the business was interstate in character, the tax
having been construed by the highest court of the state as applying only
to the business of selling to local customers from the stock of
"original packages" shipped into the state without a previous sale or
contract to sell, and kept and held for sale in the ordinary course of
trade. contrariwise, a tax on sales discriminatory in its incidence
against merchandise because of its origin in another state is ipso
facto unconstitutional. the leading case is welton v. missouri,[]
decided in , in which a peddler's license tax confined to the sale
of goods manufactured outside the state was set aside. the doctrine of
welton v. missouri has been reiterated many times.[]
[pg ]
it also follows logically from coe v. errol,[] and the cases
deriving from it, that a state may impose a nondiscriminatory tax when
there is a break in interstate transit, and the goods have not been
restored to the current of interstate commerce. the effect of an
interruption upon the continuity of an interstate movement depends upon
its causes and purposes. if the delay is due to the necessities of the
journey, as in the coe case, where the logs were detained for a time
within the state by low water, they are deemed "in the course of
commercial transportation, and *** clearly under the protection of the
constitution."[] intention thus often enters into the determination
of the question whether goods from another state have come to rest
sufficiently to subject them to the local taxing power. in a typical
case the court held that oil shipped from pennsylvania and held in tanks
in memphis, tennessee for separation, distribution and reshipment, was
subject to the taxing power of the latter state.[] the delay in
transportation resulting from these proceedings on the part of the
owners, the court pointed out, was clearly designed for their own profit
and convenience and was not a necessary incident to the method of
transportation adopted, as had been the delay of the logs coming from
maine in coe v. errol. the distinction is fundamental.[]
applying this rule in more recent cases, the court has upheld state
taxation: on the use and storage of gasoline brought into the state by a
railroad company and unloaded and stored there, to be used for its
interstate trains;[] on gasoline imported and stored by an airplane
company and withdrawn to fill airplanes that use it in their interstate
travel;[] on supplies brought into the state by an interstate
railroad company to be used in replacements, repairs and extensions,
[pg ]and installed immediately upon arrival in the taxing state;[] on
equipment brought into the state by a telephone and telegraph company
for operation, maintenance, and repair of its interstate system.[] in
all these cases the court applied the principle that "use and storage"
are subject to local taxation when "there is an interval after the
articles have reached the end of their interstate movement and before
their consumption in interstate operation has begun."[] on the other
hand, in the absence of such an "interval," the court declared invalid
state gasoline taxes imposed per gallon of gasoline imported by
interstate carriers as fuel for use in such vehicles, and used within
the state as well as in their interstate travel.[]
the drummer cases; robbins v. shelby county taxing district
but there is one situation in which goods introduced into one state from
another have until recent years enjoyed a special immunity from taxation
by the former, and that is when they were introduced in consequence of a
contract of sale. the leading case is robbins v. shelby county taxing
district,[] in which the court, after a penetrating survey of
commercial practices, ruled that "the negotiation of sales of goods"—in
this instance by sample—"which are in another state, for the purpose of
introducing them into the state in which the negotiation is made, is
interstate commerce." in short, whereas in foreign commerce, importation
is succeeded by the right to sell in the original package, in interstate
commerce sale was succeeded by the right of importation, which continued
until the goods reached the hands of the purchaser. the benefits of this
holding were extended in a series of rulings in which it was held to
apply whether solicitation of orders was or was not made with
sample,[] and to sales which were not, accurately speaking,
consummated until the actual delivery of the goods, [pg ]which was attended
by local incidents. so, where a north carolina agent of a chicago firm
took orders for framed pictures, which were then sent to him packed
separately from the frames and then framed by him before delivery, the
rule laid down in the robbins case was held to apply throughout, with
the result that north carolina could tax or license no part of the
transaction described;[] so also as to a sewing machine ordered by a
customer in north carolina and sent to her c.o.d.;[] so also as to
brooms sent in quantity for the fulfillment of a number of orders, and
subject to rejection by the purchaser if deemed by him not up to
sample.[] said justice holmes in the case last referred to:
"'commerce among the states' is a practical conception not drawn from
the 'witty diversities' *** of the law of sales. *** the brooms were
specifically appropriated to specific contracts, in a practical, if not
in a technical, sense. under such circumstances it is plain that,
wherever might have been the title, the transport of the brooms for the
purpose of fulfilling the contracts was protected commerce."[] nor
did it make any difference that the solicitor received his compensation
in form of down payment by the purchaser.[] moreover, sales under a
mail order business, with delivery taking place within the state to a
carrier for through shipment to another state to fill orders, was held
to be beyond the taxing power of the first state.[] the fact that a
concern doing a strictly interstate business had goods on hand within
the state which were capable of being used in intrastate commerce, did
not, the court declared, take the business out of the protection of the
commerce clause and allow the state to impose a privilege tax on such
concern.
on the other hand, it was early held that the rule laid down in the
robbins case did not prevent a state from taxing a resident citizen [pg ]who
engaged in a general commission business, on the profits thereof,
although the business consisted "for the time being, wholly or partially
in negotiating sales between resident and nonresident merchants, of
goods situated in another state."[] also, it has been held that a
stamp tax on transfers of corporate stock, as applied to a sale between
two nonresidents, of the stock of foreign railway corporations, was not
an interference with interstate commerce.[] likewise, the business of
taking orders on commission for the purchase and sale of grain and
cotton for future delivery not necessitating interstate shipment was
ruled not to be interstate commerce, and as such exempt from taxation,
although deliveries were sometimes made by interstate shipment.[] and
in banker bros. co. v. pennsylvania[] it was held that a tax upon a
domestic corporation selling automobiles built by a foreign corporation
under an arrangement by which the latter agreed to build for and sell to
the former, for cash, at a specified price less than list price, was not
a tax on interstate transactions, there being nothing which connected
the ultimate buyer with the manufacturer but a warranty and the buyer's
agreement to pay the list price f.o.b. factory. similarly, in browning
v. waycross[] it was held that the business of erecting lightning
rods within the limits of a town by the agent of a nonresident
manufacturer on whose behalf such agent had solicited orders for the
sale of the rods, and from whom he had received them when shipped into
the state, was validly subjected to a municipal license tax. "it was
not," said the court, "within the power of the parties by the form of
their contract to convert what was exclusively a local business, ***,
into an interstate commerce business ***"[] also, a municipal
license tax upon persons engaged in the business of buying or selling
cotton for themselves was found not to impose a forbidden burden upon
interstate commerce even though the cotton was purchased with a view to
ultimate shipment in some other state or country.[] nor was a
gallonage tax imposed by a state upon a distributor of liquid fuel
rendered repugnant to the commerce clause by the fact that the
distributor caused fuel sold to customers in the state to be shipped
from another state for delivery in tank cars—"deemed original
packages"—on purchaser's siding, as agreed. said the court: "the
contracts were executory and related to unascertained goods. *** it
does not appear that when they were made appellant had any fuels of the
kinds covered, or that those to be delivered were then in existence.
there was no selection of goods by purchasers. appellant was not
required by the contracts to obtain the fuels at wilmington but was free
to effect performance by shipping from, any place within or without
pennsylvania."[]
[pg ]
in the cases reviewed in the preceding paragraph protestants against
local taxation appealed, but unavailingly, to the robbins case. so it
would seem that the generative powers of that prolific precedent had
begun to wane somewhat even before the depression, an event which
rendered judicial reaction against it still more pronounced. indeed, by
the court's decision in mcgoldrick v. berwind-white co.,[] in ,
the authority of the entire line of cases descending from robbins v.
shelby county taxing district was seriously impaired, for the time
being, while a second holding the same year seemed to reduce the
significance of the robbins case itself to that of a reassertion of the
elementary rule against discrimination. "the commerce clause," justice
reed remarked sententiously, "forbids discrimination, whether forthright
or ingenious."[]
with a majority of the states on the verge of bankruptcy, extensive
recourse was had to sales taxes and, as an offset to these in favor of
the local economy, "use" taxes on competing products coming from sister
states. the basic decision sustaining the use tax, in this novel
employment of it, was henneford v. silas mason co.,[] in which was
involved a state of washington two per cent tax on the privilege of
using products coming from sister states. excepted from the tax, on the
other hand, was any property the sole use of which had already been
subjected to an equal or greater tax, whether under the laws of
washington or any other state. stressing this provision in its opinion,
the court said: "equality is the theme that runs through all the
sections of the statute. *** when the account is made up, the stranger
from afar is subject to no greater burdens as a consequence of ownership
than the dweller within the gates."[] there being no actual
discrimination in favor of washington products, the tax was valid.
[pg ]
a companion piece of the henneford case in motivation, although it
occurred three years later, was mcgoldrick v. berwind-white coal
mining company,[] in which it was held that in the absence of
congressional action, a new york city general sales tax was applicable
to sales of coal under contracts entered into within the municipality
and calling for delivery therein. speaking for the majority, justice
stone declared any "distinction *** between a tax laid on sales made,
without previous contract, after the merchandise had crossed the state
boundary, and sales, the contracts for which when made contemplate or
require the transportation of merchandise interstate to the taxing
state," to be "without the support of reason or authority";[] and the
robbins case was held to be "narrowly limited to fixed-sum license taxes
imposed on the business of soliciting order for the purchase of goods to
be shipped interstate, ***"[] three justices, speaking by chief
justice hughes, dissented. three companion cases decided the same day
were found to follow the berwind-white pattern,[] while a fourth was
held not to, on the ground that foreign commerce was involved.[] for
the time being robbins and family looked to be on the way out.
[pg ]
two cases, decided respectively in  and , signalized the end of
the depression. in mcleod v. dilworth co.,[] a divided court ruled
that a sales tax could not be validly imposed by a state on sales to its
residents which were consummated by acceptance of orders in, and
shipment of goods from another state, in which title passed upon
delivery to the carrier. said justice frankfurter for the majority: "a
sales tax and a use tax in many instances may bring about the same
result. but they are different in conception, are assessments upon
different transactions, *** a sales tax is a tax on the freedom of
purchase *** a use tax is a tax on the enjoyment of that which was
purchased. in view of the differences in the basis of these two taxes
and the differences in the relation of the taxing state to them, a tax
on an interstate sale like the one before us and unlike the tax on the
enjoyment of the goods sold, involves an assumption of power by a state
which the commerce clause was meant to end."[] he also
"distinguished" the berwind-white case—just as it had "distinguished"
the robbins case—but not to the satisfaction of three of his brethren,
who found the decision to mark a retreat from the berwind-white
case.[]
the second case, nippert v. richmond,[] involved a municipal
ordinance imposing upon solicitors of orders for goods a license tax of
fifty dollars and one-half of one per cent of the gross earnings,
commissions, etc., for the preceding year in excess of $,. speaking
for the same majority that had decided mcleod v. dilworth co., justice
rutledge found that "as the case has been made, the issue is
substantially whether the long line of so-called 'drummer cases'
beginning with robbins v. shelby county taxing district,  u.s. ,
shall be adhered to in result or shall now be overruled in the light of
what attorneys for the city say are recent trends requiring that
outcome."[] the tax was held void, berwind-white being not only
"distinguished" this time, but also "explained." "the drummer," said
justice rutledge, "is a figure representative of a by-gone day," citing
wright, hawkers and walkers in early america (). "but his modern
prototype persists under more euphonious appellations. [pg ]so endure the
basic reasons which brought about his protection from the kind of local
favoritism the facts of this case typify."[]
a year later a mississippi "privilege tax" laid upon each person
soliciting business for a laundry not licensed in the state, was set
aside directly on the authority of the robbins case.[] it would
appear that robbins and his numerous progeny can once more claim full
constitutional status.[]
whether the carriage of persons from one state to another was a branch
of interstate commerce was a question which the court was able to
side-step in gibbons v. ogden.[] a quarter of a century later,
however, an affirmative answer was suggested in the passenger
cases,[] in which a state tax on each passenger arriving on a vessel
from a foreign country was set aside, though chiefly in reliance on
existing treaties and acts of congress. but similar cases arising after
the civil war were disposed of by direct recourse to the commerce
clause.[] meantime, in , the newly admitted state of nevada, in
an endeavor to prevent a threatened dissipation of its population,
levied a special tax on railroad and stage companies for every passenger
they carried out of the state, and in crandall v. nevada[] this act
was held void on the general ground that the national government had at
all times the right to require the services of its citizens at the seat
of government and they the correlative right to visit the seat of
government, rights which, if the nevada tax was valid, were at the mercy
of any state, the power to tax being without limit. reference was also
made to the right of the government to transport troops at all times by
the most expeditious method. two of the justices, however, rejected this
line of reasoning and held the act to be void under the commerce
clause.[] but it was not until  that the court, in deciding
gloucester ferry company v. pennsylvania,[] stated flatly that
"commerce among the states *** includes the transportation of
persons,"[] and hence was not taxable by the states, a proposition
which is still good law.[] four years earlier it had been held that
the transmission of telegraph messages from one state to another, being
interstate commerce, was something that the state of origin could not
tax.[]
[pg ]
state taxation of the interstate commerce privilege: foreign
corporations
in the famous case of paul v. virginia,[] decided in , it was
held that a corporation chartered by one state could enter other states
only with their assent, which might "be granted upon such terms and
conditions as those states may think proper to impose";[] but along
with this holding went the statement that "the power conferred upon
congress to regulate commerce includes as well commerce carried on by
corporations as commerce carried on by individuals."[] and in the
state freight tax case it is implied that no state can regulate or
restrict the right of a "foreign" corporation—one chartered by another
state—to carry on interstate commerce within its borders,[] an
implication which soon became explicit. in leloup v. port of
mobile,[] decided in , the court had before it a license tax on a
telegraph company which was engaged in both domestic and interstate
business. the general nature of the exaction did not suffice to save it.
said the court: "the question is squarely presented to us, ***,
whether a state, as a condition of doing business within its
jurisdiction, may exact a license tax from a telegraph company, a large
part of whose business is the transmission of messages from one state to
another and between the united states and foreign countries, and which
is invested with the powers and privileges conferred by the act of
congress passed july , , and other acts incorporated in title lxv
of the revised statutes? can a state prohibit such a company from doing
such a business within its jurisdiction, unless it will pay a tax and
procure a license for the privilege? if it can, it can exclude such
companies, and prohibit the transaction of such business altogether. we
are not prepared to say that this can be done."[]
[pg ]in crutcher v. kentucky[] a like result was reached, without
assistance from an act of congress, with respect to a kentucky statute
which provided that the agent of an express company not incorporated by
the laws of that state should not carry on business there without first
obtaining a license from the state, and that, preliminary thereto, he
must satisfy the auditor of the state that the company he represented
was possessed of an actual capital of at least $,. the act was
held to be a regulation of interstate commerce so far as applied to a
corporation of another state in that business. "to carry on interstate
commerce," said the court, "is not a franchise or a privilege granted by
the state; it is a right which every citizen of the united states is
entitled to exercise under the constitution and laws of the united
states; and the accession of mere corporate facilities, as a matter of
convenience in carrying on their business, cannot have the effect of
depriving them of such right, unless congress should see fit to
interpose some contrary regulation on the subject."[]
the demand for what in effect is a license is, of course, capable of
assuming various guises. in ozark pipe line v. monier[] an annual
franchise tax on foreign corporations equal to one-tenth of one per cent
of the par value of their capital stock and surplus employed in business
in the state was found to be a privilege tax, and hence one which could
not be exacted of a foreign corporation whose business in the taxing
state consisted exclusively of the operation of a pipe line for
transporting petroleum through the state in interstate commerce, and of
activities the sole purpose of which was the furtherance of its
interstate business. likewise a massachusetts tax based on "the
corporate surplus" of a foreign corporation having only an office in the
state for the transaction of interstate business was held in alpha
portland cement co. v. massachusetts to be virtually an attempt to
license interstate commerce.[] in the same category of
unconstitutional taxation of the interstate commerce privilege, the
court has also included the following: a state "franchise" tax on a
foreign corporation, whose sole business in the state consisted in
landing, storing and selling in the original package goods imported by
it from abroad, the tax being imposed annually on the doing of such
business and measured by the value of the goods on hand;[] a state
privilege or occupation tax on every corporation engaged in the business
of operating and maintaining telephone lines and furnishing telephone
service in the state, of so much for each telephonic instrument
controlled and operated by it, [pg ]as applied to a company furnishing both
interstate and intrastate service, and employing the same telephones,
wires, etc., in both as integrated parts of its system;[] a state
occupation tax measured by the entire gross receipts of the business of
a radio broadcasting station, licensed by the federal communications
commission, and engaged in broadcasting advertising "programs" for
customers for hire to listeners within and beyond the state, since it
did not "appear that any of the taxed income ... [was] allocable to
interstate commerce";[] a state occupation tax on the business of
loading and unloading vessels engaged in interstate and foreign
commerce;[] an indiana income tax imposed on the gross receipts from
commerce inasmuch as the tax reached indiscriminately and without
apportionment the gross income from both interstate commerce and
intrastate activities;[] an arkansas statute making entry into the
state of motor vehicles carrying more than twenty gallons of gasoline
conditional on the payment of an excise on the excess.[]
[pg ]
doctrine of western union telegraph v. kansas ex rel. coleman
one of the most striking concessions ever made by the court to the
interstate commercial interest at the expense of the state's taxing
power was that which appeared originally in , in western union
telegraph. co. v. kansas ex rel. coleman,[] which involved a
percentage tax upon the total capitalization of all foreign corporations
doing or seeking to do a local business in the state. the court
pronounced the tax, as to the western union, a burden upon the company's
interstate business and upon its property located and used outside the
state, and hence void under both the commerce clause and the due process
of law clause of the fourteenth amendment. the decision was
substantially aided by the fact that the company had been doing a
general telegraphic business within the state for more than fifty years
without having been subjected to such an exaction.[]
the doctrine of the case, however, soon cast off these initial
limitations. in looney v. crane company[] a similar tax by the
state of texas was disallowed as to an illinois corporation, engaged in
its home state in the manufacture of hardware, but maintaining in texas
depots and warehouses from which orders were filled and sales made,
likewise, in international paper company v. massachusetts,[] it was
clearly stated that "the immunity of interstate commerce from state
taxation" is not confined to what is done by carriers in such commerce,
but "is universal and covers every class of ... [interstate] commerce,
including that conducted by merchants and trading companies." on the
same occasion the general proposition was laid down that "the power of a
state to regulate the transaction of a local business [pg ]within its
borders by a foreign corporation, ... is not unrestricted or absolute,
but must be exerted in subordination to the limitations which the
constitution places on state action."[]
the precise standing of this doctrine is, nevertheless, seriously
clouded by certain more recent holdings. in sprout v. south bend,[]
decided in , the doctrine was still applied, to disallow a license
tax on concerns operating a bus interstate. pointing to the fact that
the ordinance made no distinction between busses engaged exclusively
interstate and those engaged intrastate or both interstate and
intrastate, the court said: "in order that the fee or tax shall be
valid, it must appear that it is imposed solely on account of the
intrastate business; that the amount exacted is not increased because of
the interstate business done; that one engaged exclusively in interstate
commerce would not be subject to the imposition; and that the person
taxed could discontinue the intrastate business without withdrawing also
from the interstate business."[] likewise, in cooney v. mountain
states telephone and telegraph co., the court asserted that to sustain a
state occupation tax on one whose business is both interstate and
intrastate, "it must appear ***, and that the one [who is] taxed could
discontinue the intrastate business without [also] withdrawing from the
interstate business."[] a year later, nevertheless, justice brandeis,
speaking for the court in pacific telephone and telegraph co. v. tax
commission,[] asserted flatly: "no decision of this court lends
support to the proposition that an occupation tax upon local business,
otherwise valid, must be held void merely because the local and
interstate branches are for some reason inseparable."[] an occupation
tax, like other taxes and expenses, lessens the benefit derived [pg ]by
interstate commerce from the joint operation with it of the intrastate
business of the carrier; but it is not an undue burden on interstate
commerce where, as in this case, the advantage to the carrier, and to
the interstate commerce, of continuing the intrastate business is
greatly in excess of the tax. and subsequent holdings in cases involving
foreign corporations doing a mixed business, comprising both interstate
and intrastate elements, have tended on the whole to restore the rule
stated in paul v. virginia[] shortly after the civil war, that the
constitution does not confer upon a foreign corporation the right to
engage in local business in a state without its assent, which it may
give on such terms as it chooses.[]
state taxation of property engaged in, and of the proceeds from,
interstate commerce
in this area of constitutional law the principle asserted in the state
freight tax case,[] that a state may not tax interstate commerce, is
confronted with the principle that a state may tax all purely domestic
business within its borders and all property "within its jurisdiction."
inasmuch as most large concerns prosecute both an interstate and a
domestic business, while the instrumentalities of interstate commerce
and the pecuniary returns from such commerce are ordinarily property
within the jurisdiction of some state or other, the task before the
court in drawing the line between the immunity claimed by interstate
business on the one hand and the prerogatives claimed by local power on
the other has at times involved it in self-contradiction, as successive
developments have brought into prominence novel aspects of its complex
problem or have altered the perspective in which the interests competing
for its protection have appeared. in this field words of the late
justice rutledge, spoken in , are especially applicable: "for
cleanly as the commerce clause has worked affirmatively on the whole,
its implied negative operation on state power has been uneven, at times
highly variable. *** [pg ]into what is thus left open for inference to
fill, divergent ideas of meaning may be read much more readily than into
what has been made explicit by affirmation. that possibility is
broadened immeasurably when not logic alone, but large choices of
policy, affected in this instance by evolving experience of federalism,
control in giving content to the implied negation."[]
at the outset the court appears to have thought that it could solve all
difficulties by the simple device of falling back on marshall's opinion
in brown v. maryland;[] and on the same day that it set aside
pennsylvania's freight tax by appeal to that transcendent precedent, it
sustained, by reference to the same authority, a pennsylvania tax on the
gross receipts of all railroads chartered by it, the theory being that
such receipts had, by tax time, become "part of the mass of property of
the state."[] this precedent stood fourteen years, being at last
superseded by a ruling in which substantially the same tax was held void
as to a pennsylvania chartered steamship company.[] a year later the
court sustained massachusetts in levying a tax on western union, a new
york corporation, on account of property owned and used by it in the
state, taking as the basis of the assessment such proportion of the
value of its capital stock as the length of its lines within the state
bore to their entire length throughout the country.[] the tax was
characterized by the court as an attempt by massachusetts "to ascertain
the just amount which any corporation engaged in business within its
limits shall pay as a contribution to the support of its government upon
the amount and value of the capital so employed by it therein."[] and
drawing on certain decisions in which it had sought to limit the
principle of tax exemption as applied in the case of railroads chartered
by the united states, it expressed concern that "the necessary powers of
the states" should not be destroyed or "their efficient exercise" be
prevented.[] three years later pennsylvania, still in quest of
revenue, was sustained in applying the massachusetts idea to pullman's
palace car company, a "foreign" corporation.[] pointing to the fact
that the company had at all times substantially the same number of cars
within the state and continuously and constantly used there a portion of
its property, the court commended the state for taking "as a basis of
assessment such proportion of the capital stock of the company as the
number of miles over which it ran cars within the state bore to the
whole number of miles, in that and other states, ***" this, said the
court, was "a just and equitable method of assessment;" one which, "if
it were adopted [pg ]by all the states through which these cars ran, the
company would be assessed upon the whole value of its capital stock, and
no more."[]
and pursuing the same course of thought, the court, in adams express
company v. ohio,[] decided in , sustained that state in taxing
property worth less than $,. at a valuation of more than half a
million, on the ground that the latter figure did not exceed, in
relation to the total capital value of the company, the proportion borne
by the railway mileage which the company covered in ohio to the total
mileage which it covered in all states. to the objection that "the
intangible values" reached by the tax were derived from interstate
commerce, the court replied with the "cardinal rule *** that whatever
property is worth for purposes of income and sale it is also worth for
purposes of taxation,"[] which obviously does not meet the issue.
what the case indubitably establishes is that a state may tax property
within its limits "as part of a going concern" and hence "at its value
as it is in its organic relations," although those relations constitute
interstate commerce.[] in short, values created by interstate
commerce are taxed.
thus emerged the concept of an "apportioned" tax, or as it is called
when applied to the problem of property valuation, the "unit rule,"
which till  afforded the court its chief reliance in the field of
constitutional law now under review. the theory underlying the concept
appears to be that it is always possible for a state to devise a formula
whereby it may assign to the property employed in interstate commerce
within its limits, or to the proceeds from such commerce, a value which
it may tax or by which it may "measure" a tax, without
unconstitutionally burdening or interfering with interstate commerce,
while at the same time exacting from it a fair return for the protection
which the state gives it. the question in each case is, of course,
whether the state has guessed right.
[pg ]
in reliance on the apportionment concept the court has at various times
sustained, in the case of a sleeping car company, as we have seen, a
valuation based on the ratio of the miles of track over which the
company runs within the state to the whole track mileage over which it
runs;[] in the case of a railroad company, a valuation based on the
ratio of its mileage within the state to its total mileage;[] in the
case of a telegraph company, a valuation based upon the ratio of its
length of line within the state to its total length;[] in the case of
an express company, as we have just seen, a valuation based upon the
ratio of miles covered by it in the state to the mileage covered by it
in all states.[] also, a tax has been upheld as to a railroad line
whose principal business was hauling ore from mines in the taxing state
to terminal docks outside the state, where the line and the docks were
treated by the railway as a unit, the charge for the dock service being
absorbed in the charge per ton transported; and where the evidence did
not show that the mileage value of the part of the line outside of the
taxing state, with the docks included, was greater than the mileage
value of part within it.[] nor does the commerce clause preclude the
assessment of an interstate railway within a state by taking such part
of the value of the railroad's entire system, less the value of its
localized property, such as terminal buildings, shops and nonoperating
real estate, as is represented by the ratio which the railroad's mileage
within the state bears to its total mileage.[] to the objection that
the mileage formula was inapplicable in this instance because of the
disparity of the revenue-producing capacity between the lines in and out
of the state, the court answered that mathematical exactitude in making
an apportionment had never been a constitutional requirement.
"wherever," it explained, "the state's taxing authorities have been held
to have intruded upon the protected domain of interstate commerce in
their use of a mileage formula, the special circumstances of the
particular situation, in the view which this court took of them,
precluded a defensible utilization of the mileage basis."[] the
principle of apportionment is, moreover, applicable to the intangible
property of a company engaged in both interstate and local commerce, as
well as to its tangible property.[]
[pg ]
the first state to attempt to employ the apportionment device in order
to tax the gross receipts of companies engaged in interstate commerce
was maine, in connection with a so-called "franchise tax," which was
levied on such proportion of the revenues of railroads operating in the
state as their mileage there bore to their total mileage. in maine v.
grand trunk railway company,[] a sharply divided court upheld the tax
on the basis of its designation, giving scant attention to its
apportionment feature. said justice field for the majority: "the
privilege of exercising the franchises of a corporation within a state
is generally one of value, and often of great value, and the subject of
earnest contention. it is natural, therefore, that the corporation
should be made to bear some proportion of the burdens of government. as
the granting of the privilege rests entirely in the discretion of the
state, whether the corporation be of domestic or foreign origin, it may
be conferred upon such conditions, pecuniary or otherwise, as the state
in its judgment may deem most conducive to its interests or
policy."[] four justices, speaking by justice bradley, protested
forcefully that the decision directly contradicted a whole series of
decisions holding that the states are without power to tax interstate
commerce;[] and seventeen years later another sharply divided court
endorsed this contention when it overturned a texas gross receipts tax
drawn on the lines of the earlier maine statute.[] the maine tax,
however, the later court suggested, had been in the nature of a
commutation tax in lieu of all taxes, which the texas tax was not.[]
today the term, franchise tax, possesses no specific saving quality of
its own. if the tax is merely a "just equivalent" of other taxes it is
valid however calculated.[] conversely, when such taxes are in
addition to other taxes then their fate will be determined by the same
rules as would apply had the label been omitted.[] more precisely,
the rule governing this species of tax is ordinarily the apportionment
[pg ]concept, and if the basis of apportionment adopted by the taxing state
is deemed by the court to be a fair and reasonable one, the tax will be
sustained; otherwise, not.
thus a franchise tax may be measured by such proportion of the company's
net income as its capital invested in the taxing state and its business
carried on there bear to its total capital and business;[] also by
the net income justly attributable to business done within the state
although a part of this was derived from foreign or interstate
commerce;[] also by such proportion of the company's outstanding
capital stock, surplus and undivided profits, plus its long-term
obligations, as the gross receipts of its local business bear to its
total gross receipts from its entire business;[] also by such
proportion of the company's total capital stock as the value of its
property in the taxing state and of the business done there bears to the
total value of its property and of its business.[] on the other hand,
a "franchise" tax on the unapportioned gross receipts of railroad
companies engaged in interstate commerce, was, as we saw above, held
void;[] as was also one which was measured by assigning to the
company's property in the state the same proportion of the total value
of its stocks and bonds as its mileage in the state bore to its total
mileage, no account being taken of the greater cost of construction of
the company's lines in other states or of its valuable terminals
elsewhere.[] other examples were given earlier.[]
the late justice rutledge classified gross receipts taxes which have
been sustained by the court as follows: (a) those which were judged to
be fairly apportioned;[] (b) those which were justified on a "local
incidence" theory, or the burden of which on interstate commerce was
held to be "remote";[] (c) those which were justified as not inviting
the danger of multiple taxation of interstate commerce.[] gross
receipts taxes which, on the other hand, have been invalidated [pg ]under
the commerce clause he placed in the following groups: (a) those which
were held not to be fairly apportioned;[] (b) those which were not
apportioned at all and were bound to subject interstate commerce to the
risk of multiple taxation;[] (c) those in which a discriminatory
element was detected in that they were directed exclusively at
transportation or communication;[] (d) those in which there was no
discrimination but a possible multiple burden;[] and, of course, any
tax which it disallows the court is always free to stigmatize as an
unconstitutional attempt to tax or license the interstate commerce
privilege.[]
that the depression—allowing for the customary judicial lag—greatly
altered the court's conception of congress's powers under the commerce
clause, was pointed out earlier.[] to a less, but appreciable degree,
it also affected its views as to the allowable scope under the clause of
the taxing power of the states, a majority of which were on [pg ]the verge
of bankruptcy. the more evident proofs of this fact occurred in relation
to state taxation of the subject matter of interstate commerce, as is
indicated above.[] but a certain revision of doctrine, apparently
temporary in nature, however, is to be seen in the connection with state
taxes impinging on property engaged in interstate commerce and the
revenues from such commerce, the principal manifestation of which is to
be seen in the emphasis which was for a time given the "multiple
taxation" test. thus in his opinion in the western live stock case,[]
cited above, justice stone seems to be engaged in an endeavor to erect
this into an almost exclusive test of the validity, or invalidity of
state taxation affecting interstate commerce. "it was not," he there
remarks, "the purpose of the commerce clause to relieve those engaged in
interstate commerce from their just share of state tax burden even
though it increases the cost of doing the business. 'even interstate
business must pay its way,' *** and the bare fact that one is carrying
on interstate commerce does not relieve him from many forms of state
taxation which add to the cost of his business."[] then citing cases,
he continues: "all of these taxes in one way or another add to the
expense of carrying on interstate commerce, and in that sense burden it;
but they are not for that reason prohibited. on the other hand, local
taxes, measured by gross receipts from interstate commerce, have often
been pronounced unconstitutional. the vice characteristic of those which
have been held invalid is that they have placed on the commerce burdens
of such a nature as to be capable, in point of substance, of being
imposed *** [or added to] with equal right by every state which the
commerce touches, merely because interstate commerce is being done, so
that without the protection of the commerce clause it would bear
cumulative burdens not imposed on local commerce. *** the
multiplication of state taxes measured by the gross receipts from
interstate transactions would spell the destruction of interstate
commerce and renew the barriers to interstate trade which it was the
object of the commerce clause to remove," citing cases, most of which
have been discussed above.[] and speaking again for the court eleven
months later, in gwin, white and prince v. henneford,[] justice
stone applied the test to invalidate a state of washington tax. "such a
tax," said he, "at least when not apportioned to the activities carried
on within the state, *** would, if sustained, expose it [interstate
commerce] to multiple tax burdens, each measured by the entire amount of
the commerce, to which local commerce is not subject." the tax thus
discriminated against interstate commerce; and threatened to
"reestablish the barriers to interstate trade which it was the object of
the commerce clause to remove."[]
[pg ]the adoption by the court of the multiple taxation principle as an
exclusive test of state taxing power in relation to interstate commerce
would have enlarged the former; but this was not the sole reason for its
temporary vogue with the court, or at least a section of it. discontent
with the difficulties and uncertainties of the apportionment rule also
played a great part. thus in his concurring opinion in the gwin case,
justice butler, speaking for himself and justice mcreynolds after
showing the instability of decisions in this area of constitutional law,
contend that "the problems of conjectured 'multiple taxation' or
'apportionment'" should be left to congress,[] a suggestion which
justice black, speaking also for justices frankfurter and douglas a year
later, made the basis of a dissenting opinion,[] from the doctrines
of which, however, justice frankfurter appears since to have
recanted.[]
in freedman v. hewit,[] decided in , the court held void as an
"unconstitutional burden on interstate commerce" an indiana gross income
tax of the proceeds from certain securities sent outside the state to be
sold. justice frankfurter spoke for the court; justice rutledge
concurred in an opinion deploring the majority's failure to employ the
multiple taxation test;[] three justices dissented.[] in joseph
v. carter and weekes stevedoring co.,[] also decided in , the
court, reaffirming an earlier ruling, held void the application of a
washington gross receipts tax to the receipts of a stevedoring company
from loading and unloading vessels employed in interstate and foreign
commerce, or to the privilege of engaging in such business measured by
their receipts. said justice reed for the court: "although state laws do
not discriminate against interstate commerce or *** subject it to the
cumulative burden of multiple levies, those laws may be unconstitutional
because they burden or interfere with [interstate] commerce."[] this
time justice rutledge was among the dissenters so far as interstate
commerce was concerned.[] in central greyhound lines, inc. v.
mealey,[] decided in , five members of the court ruled that a new
york tax on the gross income of public utilities doing business in the
state could not be constitutionally imposed on a carrier's unapportioned
receipts from continuous transportation between termini in the state
over a route a material part of which passes through other states.
justice frankfurter, speaking [pg ]for the court, held, however, that the
tax was sustainable as to receipts apportioned as to the mileage within
the state.[] justice rutledge concurred without opinion. justice
murphy, for himself and justices black and douglas, thought the tax was
on an essentially local activity and that the transportation through
other states was "a mere geographic incident," conceding at the same
time, that this view invited the other states involved to levy similar
taxes and exposed the company to the danger of multiple taxation. in
memphis natural gas co. v. stone,[] also of the  grist, a
mississippi franchise tax, measured by the value of capital invested or
employed in the state, was sustained in the case of a gas pipeline
company a portion of whose line passed through the state but which did
no local business there. three justices, speaking by justice reed, held
that the tax was on the intrastate activities of the company in
maintaining its facilities there, and was no more burdensome than the
concededly valid ad valorem tax on the company's property in the
state. justice rutledge held that the tax was valid because it did not
discriminate against interstate commerce nor invite multiple taxation,
while justice black concurred without opinion. four justices, speaking
by justice frankfurter, contended that the pipeline already paid the ad
valorem tax to which justice reed had adverted, and that the franchise
tax must therefore be regarded as being on the interstate commerce
privilege.
this survey of recent cases leaves the impression that the court is at
loose ends for intermediate guiding principles in this field of
constitutional law. the "leave it to congress" formula is evidently in
the discard, although justice black's successive dissents without
opinion may indicate that he still thinks it sound. the multiple tax
test seems to be in an equally bad way, with both chief justice stone
and justice rutledge in the grave. the concept of an apportioned tax
[pg ]still has some vitality however, although just how much is difficult to
assess. thus in interstate oil pipe line co. v. stone,[] which was
decided in , we find justice rutledge, speaking for himself and
justices black, douglas, and murphy, endorsing the view that mississippi
was within her rights in imposing on a delaware corporation, as a
condition of doing a local business, a "privilege" tax equal to two per
cent of its intrastate business even though the exaction amounted to "a
'direct' tax on the 'privilege' of engaging in interstate commerce," an
assertion which was countered by one just as positive, and also endorsed
by four justices, that no state may "levy privilege, excise or franchise
taxes on a foreign corporation for the privilege of carrying on or the
actual doing of solely interstate business," even though the tax is not
discriminatory and is fairly apportioned between the corporation's
intrastate and interstate business. the tax in controversy was sustained
by the vote of the ninth justice, who construed it as being levied only
on the privilege of engaging in intrastate commerce, a conclusion which
obviously ignores the question of the tax's actual impact on interstate
commerce, the precise question on which many previous decisions have
turned.[]
the leading case under this caption is united states glue co. v. oak
creek[] where it was held that the state of wisconsin, in laying a
general income tax upon the gains and profits of a domestic corporation,
was entitled to include in the computation the net income derived from
transportations in interstate commerce. pointing out the difference
between such a tax and one on gross receipts, the court said the latter
"affects each transaction in proportion to its magnitude and
irrespective of whether it is profitable or otherwise. conceivably it
may be sufficient to make the difference between profit and loss, or to
so diminish the profit as to impede or discourage the conduct of the
commerce. a tax upon the net profits has not the same deterrent effect,
since it does not arise at all unless a gain is shown over and above
expenses and losses, and the tax cannot be heavy unless the profits are
large." such a tax "constitutes one of the ordinary and general burdens
of government, from which persons and corporations otherwise subject to
the jurisdiction of the states are not exempted *** because they
happen to be engaged in commerce among the states."[]
adhering to this precedent, the court has held that a tax upon the net
income of a nonresident from business carried on by him in the state is
not a burden on interstate commerce merely because the products [pg ]of the
business are shipped out of the state;[] also that a tax which is
levied upon the proportion of the net profits of a foreign corporation
earned by operations conducted within the taxing state is valid, if the
method of allocation employed be not arbitrary or unreasonable.[]
where, however, the method of allocating the net income of a foreign
corporation attributed to the state an amount of income out of all
proportion to the business there transacted by the corporation, it was
held void.[]
also, a state may impose a tax upon the net income of property, as
distinguished from the net income of him who owns or operates it,
although the property is used in interstate commerce;[] also a
"franchise tax" measured by the net income justly attributable to
business done by corporations within the state, although part of the
income so attributable comes from interstate and foreign commerce;[]
also a tax on corporate net earnings derived from business done wholly
within the state may be applied to the income of a foreign pipeline
corporation which is commercially domiciled there and which pipes
natural gas into that state for delivery to, and sale by, a local
distributing corporation to local consumers.[] indeed it was asserted
that even if the taxpayer's business were wholly interstate commerce,
such a nondiscriminatory tax upon its net income "is not prohibited by
the commerce clause," there being no showing that the income was not on
net earnings partly attributable to the taxing state;[] but a more
recent holding appears to contradict this position.[]
vessels
in gloucester ferry company v. pennsylvania,[] decided in , the
court held inapplicable to a new jersey corporation which was [pg ]engaged
solely in transporting passengers across the delaware river and entered
pennsylvania only to discharge and receive passengers and freight, a
statute which taxed the capital stock of all corporations doing business
within the state. such transactions, the court held, were interstate
commerce; nor were the company's vessels subject to taxation by
pennsylvania, their taxing situs being in the company's home state.
the only property held by the company in pennsylvania was the lease
there of a wharf which could be taxed by the state according to its
appraised value; and the state could also levy reasonable charges by way
of tolls for the use of such facilities as it might itself furnish for
the carrying on of commerce. this ruling rested on two earlier ones. in
, the court had held that vessels registered in new york, owned by a
new york corporation, and plying between new york city and san francisco
had the former city for their home port, and were not taxable by
california where they remained no longer than necessary to discharge
passengers and freight;[] and in  it had sustained keokuk, iowa
in charging tolls for the use by vessels plying the mississippi of
wharves owned by the municipality, said tolls being reasonable and not
discriminatory as between interstate and intrastate commerce.[] today
it is still the general rule as to vessels plying between ports of
different states and engaged in the coastwise trade, that the domicile
of the owner is deemed to be the situs of the vessel for purposes of
taxation,[] unless the vessel has acquired actual situs in another
state, by continuous employment there, in which event it may be taxed
there.[] recently, however, this long standing rule has been amended
by the addition to it of the apportionment rule as developed in the
pullman case. this occurred in ott v. mississippi barge line co.,[]
decided in , in which the court sustained louisiana in levying an
ad valorem tax on vessels owned by an interstate carrier and used
within the state, the assessment for the tax being based on the ratio
between the number of miles of the carrier's lines within the state and
its total mileage.
airplanes
when, however, it was confronted by an attempt on the part of the state
of minnesota to impose a personal property tax on the entire air fleet
owned and operated by a company in interstate commerce [pg ]although only a
part of it was in the state on tax day, the court found itself unable to
recruit a majority for any of the above formulas.[] pointing to the
fact that the company was a minnesota corporation and that its principal
place of business was located in the state, justice frankfurter for
himself and three others wished to stress the prerogatives of the state
of domicile.[] justice black, concurring in this view, added the
caveat that the taxing rights of other states should not be foreclosed
and made reference to his "leave it to congress" notion.[] justice
jackson, after speaking lightly of the apportionment theory,[] joined
the affirming brethren on the ground that the record seemed "to
establish minnesota as a 'home port' within the meaning of the old and
somewhat neglected but to me wise authorities cited," to wit, the hays
case and those decided by analogy to it.[] four justices, speaking by
chief justice stone dissented, urging the pullman case[] as an
applicable model and the fact that "the rationale found necessary to
support the present tax leaves other states free to impose comparable
taxes on the same property."[] evidently in this area of
constitutional law the court is still much at sea or better perhaps, "up
in the air."
motor vehicles
in the matter of motor vehicle taxation, on the other hand, durable and
consistent results have been achieved. this is because most such
taxation has been readily classifiable as the exaction of a toll for the
use of the state's highways, and the only question was whether the toll
was exorbitant. moreover, such taxation is apt to be designed not merely
to raise revenue but to promote safety on the highways. in the leading
case, hendrick v. maryland,[] decided in , the court took
cognizance of the fact that "the movement of motor vehicles over the
highways is attended by constant and serious dangers to the [pg ]public, and
is also abnormally destructive to the ways themselves";[] and on this
factual basis it has held that registration may be required by a state
for out-of-state vehicles operated therein,[] or passing through from
one state to another;[] that a special fee may be exacted for the
privilege of transporting motor vehicles on their own wheels in
caravans,[] unless excessive;[] that taxes may also be imposed on
carriers based on capacity[] or mileage,[] or as a flat fee;[]
but that a privilege tax on motor busses operated exclusively in
interstate commerce, cannot be sustained unless it appears affirmatively
in some way, that it is levied only as compensation for use of the
highways in the state or to defray the expense of regulating motor
traffic.[] later decisions follow in the same general track,[] the
most recent one being capitol greyhound lines v. brice,[] in which
the court, speaking by justice black passed upon a maryland excise tax
on the fair market value of motor vehicles used in interstate commerce
as a condition to the issuance of certificates of title as prerequisites
to the registration and operation of motor vehicles in the state.
because the tax was applied to vehicles used in both interstate and
intrastate commerce and the proceeds were used for road purposes and
because the court considered the tax, though actually separate, to be an
adjunct of maryland's mileage tax, it was able to find that the total
charge varied substantially with the mileage travelled, and on that
ground sustained it, being constant, it said with "rough approximation
rather than precision," no showing having been made that maryland's
taxes considered as a whole exceeded "fair compensation for the
privilege of using state roads." justice frankfurter, who was joined by
justice jackson, dissented, and in so doing contributed as an appendix
to his opinion a useful analysis of decisions involving state taxation
of motor vehicles engaged in interstate commerce, for highway
purposes.[]
[pg ]
public utilities; regulatory charges
"the principles governing decision [in this class of cases] have
repeatedly been announced and were not questioned below.[] in the
exercise of its police power the state may provide for the supervision
and regulation of public utilities, such as railroads; may delegate the
duty to an officer or commission; and may exact the reasonable cost of
such supervision and regulation from the utilities concerned and
allocate the exaction amongst the members of the affected class without
violating the rule of equality imposed by the fourteenth amendment.[]
the supervision and regulation of the local structures and activities of
a corporation engaged in interstate commerce, and the imposition of the
reasonable expense thereof upon such corporation, is not a burden upon,
or regulation of, interstate commerce in violation of the commerce
clause of the constitution.[] a law exhibiting the intent to impose a
compensatory fee for such a legitimate purpose is prima facie
reasonable.[] if the exaction be so unreasonable and disproportionate
to the service as to impugn the good faith of the law[] it cannot
stand either under the commerce clause or the fourteenth amendment.[]
the state is not bound to adjust the charge after the fact, but may, in
anticipation, fix what the legislature deems to be a fair fee for the
expected service, the presumption being that if, in practice, the sum
charged appears inordinate the legislative body will reduce it in the
light of experience.[] such a statute may, in spite of the
presumption of validity, show on its face that some part of the exaction
is to be used for a purpose other than the legitimate one of supervision
and regulation and may, for that reason, be void.[] and a statute
fair upon its face may be shown to be void and unenforceable on account
of its actual operation.[] if the exaction be clearly excessive it is
bad in toto and the state cannot collect any part of it."[]
[pg ]
dominance of congress
the supreme court has never forgotten the lesson which was administered
it by the act of congress of august , ,[] which pronounced the
wheeling bridge "a lawful structure," thereby setting aside the court's
determination to the contrary earlier the same year.[] this lesson,
stated in the court's own language thirty years later, was, "it is
congress, and not the judicial department, to which the constitution has
given the power to regulate commerce ***."[] a parallel to the
wheeling bridge episode occurred in .
the mccarran act: regulation of insurance
less than a year after the ruling in united states v. south-eastern
underwriters association[] that insurance transactions across state
lines constituted interstate commerce, thereby logically establishing
their immunity from discriminatory state taxation, congress passed the
mccarran act[] authorizing state regulation and taxation of the
insurance business; and in prudential insurance co. v. benjamin,[]
a statute of south carolina which imposed on foreign insurance
companies, as a condition of their doing business in the state, an
annual tax of three per cent of premiums from business done in south
carolina, while imposing no similar tax on local corporations, was
sustained. "obviously," said justice rutledge for the court, "congress'
purpose was broadly to give support to the existing and future state
systems for regulating and taxing the business of insurance. this was
done in two ways. one was by removing obstructions which might be
thought to flow from its own power, whether dormant or [pg ]exercised,
except as otherwise expressly provided in the act itself or in future
legislation. the other was by declaring expressly and affirmatively that
continued state regulation and taxation of this business is in the
public interest and that the business and all who engage in it 'shall be
subject to' the laws of the several states in these respects. *** the
power of congress over commerce exercised entirely without reference to
coordinated action of the states is not restricted, except as the
constitution expressly provides, by any limitation which forbids it to
discriminate against interstate commerce and in favor of local trade.
its plenary scope enables congress not only to promote but also to
prohibit interstate commerce, as it has done frequently and for a great
variety of reasons. *** this broad authority congress may exercise
alone, subject to those limitations, or in conjunction with coordinated
action by the states, in which case limitations imposed for the
preservation of their powers become inoperative and only those designed
to forbid action altogether by any power or combination of powers in our
governmental system remain effective."[] the generality of this
language enforces again the sweeping nature of congress's power to
prohibit interstate commerce.[]
the police power and foreign commerce
in gibbons v. ogden[] cognizance was taken of the existence in the
states of an "immense mass" of legislative power to be used for the
protection of their welfare and the promotion of local interests.[]
in marshall's opinion in brown v. maryland[] this power is
christened "the police power," a name which has since come to supply one
of the great titles of constitutional law. counsel for maryland had
argued that if the state was not permitted to tax imports in the
original package before they left the hands of the importer, it would
also be unable to prevent their introduction into its midst although
they might comprise articles dangerous to the public health and safety.
"the power to direct the removal of gunpowder," the chief justice
answered, "is a branch of the police power, which unquestionably
remains, and ought to remain, with the states;" and the power to direct
"the removal or destruction of infectious or unsound articles" fell
within the same category.[]
[pg ]
in short, the power to tax was one thing, the police power something
quite different. to concede the former would be to concede a power which
could be exercised to any extent and at the will of its possessor;[]
to concede the latter was to concede a power which was limited of its
own inherent nature to certain necessary objectives. in new york v.
miln,[] however, the court which came after marshall inclined toward
the notion of a power of internal police which was also unlimited; and
on this ground upheld a new york statute which required masters of all
vessels arriving at the port of new york to make reports as to
passengers carried, and imposed fines for failure to do so. "we are of
opinion," the court said, "that the act is not a regulation of commerce,
but of police." but, when new york, venturing a step further, passed an
act to authorize state health commissioners to collect certain fees from
captains arriving in ports of that state, and when massachusetts enacted
a statute requiring captains of ships to give bonds as to immigrants
landed, both measures were pronounced void, either as conflicting with
treaties and laws of the united states or as invading the "exclusive"
power of congress to regulate foreign commerce.[] following the civil
war, indeed, new york v. miln was flatly overruled, and a new york
statute similar to the one sustained in  was pronounced void as
intruding upon congress's powers.[] nothing was gained, said the
court, by invoking "[the police power] ***, it is clear, from the
nature of our complex form of government, that, whenever the statute of
a state invades the domain of legislation which belongs exclusively to
the congress of the united states, it is void, no matter under what
class of powers it may fall, or how closely allied to powers conceded to
belong to the states."[] at the same time a california statute
requiring a bond from shipowners as a condition precedent to their being
permitted to land persons whom a state commissioner of immigration might
choose to consider as coming within certain enumerated classes, e.g.,
"debauched women," was also disallowed. said the court: "if the right of
the states to pass statutes to protect themselves in regard to the
criminal, the pauper, and the diseased foreigner, landing within their
borders, exists at all, it is limited to such laws as are absolutely
necessary for that purpose; and this mere police regulation cannot
extend so far as to prevent or obstruct other classes of persons from
the right to hold personal and commercial intercourse with the people of
the united states."[]
[pg ]
on the other hand, it has been repeatedly held that the states may, in
the absence of legislation by congress, enact quarantine laws, even
though in effect they thereby regulate foreign commerce; and furthermore
that such legislation may be, in the interest of effective enforcement,
applied beyond the mere exclusion of diseased persons. thus in the
leading case the state of louisiana was sustained in authorizing its
board of health in its discretion to prohibit the introduction into any
infected portion of the state of "persons acclimated, unacclimated or
said to be immune, when in its judgment the introduction of such persons
would add to or increase the prevalence of the disease."[] at the
same time it was emphasized that all such legislation was subject to be
supplanted by congress at any time.
the court's tolerance of legal provisions which might not standing alone
be constitutional, when they are designed to make legislation within the
police power practically enforceable, is also illustrated in connection
with state game laws. in the case of silz v. hesterberg[] the court
was confronted with a new york statute establishing a closed season for
certain game, during which season it was a penal offense to take or
possess any of the protected animals, fish or birds; and providing
farther that the ban should equally apply "to such fish, game or flesh
coming from without the state as to that taken within the state." this
provision was held to have been validly applied in the case of a dealer
in imported game who had in his possession during the closed season "one
dead body of an imported grouse, ..., and taken in russia." again the
absence of conflicting legislation by congress was adverted to.[]
the police power and interstate commerce
in southern pacific co. v. arizona,[] decided in , chief
justice stone made the following systematic statement of principles
which have guided the court in the exercise of its power of judicial
review of state legislation affecting interstate commerce: "although the
commerce clause conferred on the national government power to regulate
commerce, its possession of the power does not exclude all state power
of regulation. ever since willson v. black-bird creek [pg ]marsh co., 
pet. , and cooley v. board of wardens,  how. , it has been
recognized that, in the absence of conflicting legislation by congress,
there is a residuum of power in the state to make laws governing matters
of local concern which nevertheless in some measure affect interstate
commerce or even, to some extent, regulate it.[] thus the states may
regulate matters which, because of their number and diversity, may never
be adequately dealt with by congress.[] when the regulation of
matters of local concern is local in character and effect, and its
impact on the national commerce does not seriously interfere with its
operation, and the consequent incentive to deal with them nationally is
slight, such regulation has been generally held to be within state
authority.[]
"but ever since gibbons v. ogden,  wheat. , the states have not been
deemed to have authority to impede substantially the free flow of
commerce from state to state, or to regulate those phases of the
national commerce which, because of the need of national uniformity,
demand that their regulation, if any, be prescribed by a single
authority.[] whether or not this long-recognized distribution of
power between the national and the state governments is predicated upon
the implications of the commerce clause itself,[] or upon the
presumed intention of congress, where congress has not spoken,[] the
result is the same.
[pg ]"in the application of these principles some enactments may be found to
be plainly within and others plainly without state power. but between
these extremes lies the infinite variety of cases, in which regulation
of local matters may also operate as a regulation of commerce, in which
reconciliation of the conflicting claims of state and national power is
to be attained only by some appraisal and accommodation of the competing
demands of the state and national interests involved.[]
"for a hundred years it has been accepted constitutional doctrine that
the commerce clause, without the aid of congressional legislation, thus
affords some protection from state legislation inimical to the national
commerce, and that in such cases, where congress has not acted, this
court, and not the state legislature, is under the commerce clause the
final arbiter of the competing demands of state and national
interests.[]
"congress has undoubted power to redefine the distribution of power over
interstate commerce. it may either permit the states to regulate the
commerce in a manner which would otherwise not be permissible,[] or
exclude state regulation even of matters of peculiarly local concern
which nevertheless affect interstate commerce.[]
[pg ]"but in general congress has left it to the courts to formulate the
rules thus interpreting the commerce clause in its application,
doubtless because it has appreciated the destructive consequences to the
commerce of the nation if their protection were withdrawn,[] and has
been aware that in their application state laws will not be invalidated
without the support of relevant factual material which will 'afford a
sure basis' for an informed judgment.[] meanwhile, congress has
accommodated its legislation, as have the states, to these rules as an
established feature of our constitutional system. there has thus been
left to the states wide scope for the regulation of matters of local
state concern, even though it in some measure affects the commerce,
provided it does not materially restrict the free flow of commerce
across state lines, or interfere with it in matters with respect to
which uniformity of regulation is of predominant national concern."
state regulation of agencies of interstate commerce
in one of the granger cases decided in  the court upheld the power
of the legislature of wisconsin in the absence of legislation by
congress, to prescribe by law the maximum charges to be made by a
railway company for fare and freight upon the transportation of persons
and property within the state, or taken up outside the state and brought
within it, or taken up inside and carried without it.[] ten years
later, in wabash, st. louis and pacific railway co. v. illinois[]
this decision was reversed as to persons and property taken up within
the state and transported out of it and as to persons and property
brought into the state from outside. as to these, the court held that
the regulation of rates and charges must be uniform and that, therefore,
the states had no power to deal with the subject even when congress had
not acted. the following year congress passed the interstate commerce
act[] to fill the gap created by the wabash decision. today, the
states still exercise the power to regulate railway rates for the
carriage of persons and property taken up and put down within their
borders, but do so subject to the rule, which is enforced by the
interstate commerce commission, that such rates may not discriminate
against interstate commerce.[]
[pg ]
in many other respects the power still remains with the states to
require by statute or administrative order a fair and adequate service
for their inhabitants from railway companies, including interstate
carriers operating within their borders, so long as the burdens thus
imposed upon interstate commerce are, in the judgment of the court,
"reasonable." in an instructive brace of cases the court was asked to
say whether a carrier, in the interest of providing proper local
facilities of commerce, could be required to stop its interstate trains.
in one case a state regulation requiring all regular passenger trains
operating wholly within the state to stop at all county seats was held
to have been validly applied to interstate connection trains;[] while
in the other case a statute requiring all passenger trains to stop at
county seats was held invalid, there being "other and ample
accommodation."[] comparing these and other like decisions, the court
has stated "the applicable general doctrine" to be as follows: () it is
competent for a state to require adequate local facilities, even to the
stoppage of interstate trains or the rearrangement of their schedules.
() such facilities existing—that is, the local conditions being
adequately met—the obligation of the railroad is performed, and the
stoppage of interstate trains becomes an improper and illegal
interference with interstate commerce. () and this, whether the
interference be directly by the legislature or by its command through
the orders of an administrative body. () the fact of local facilities
this court may determine, such fact being necessarily involved in the
determination of the federal question whether an order concerning an
interstate train does or does not directly regulate interstate commerce,
by imposing an arbitrary requirement.[] "there is, however," it later
added, "no inevitable test of the instances; the facts in each must be
considered."[]
in the same way a state regulation requiring intersecting railways to
make track connections was held valid,[] as was also a regulation
requiring equality of car service between shippers;[] while a
regulation requiring the delivery of shipments on private sideways[]
and one requiring cars for local shipments to be furnished on demand,
were held to be invalid.[] in the first brace of decisions, the
application [pg ]of the local regulation to interstate commerce was found
not to be "unduly" burdensome; in the second brace the contrary
conclusion was reached.
a class of regulations as to which the court has exhibited marked
tolerance although they "incidentally" embrace interstate transportation
within their operation are those which purport to be in furtherance of
"public safety."[] the leading case is smith v. alabama,[] in
which the court held it to be within the police power of the state to
require locomotive engineers to be examined and licensed, and to enforce
this requirement until congress should decree otherwise in the case of
an engineer employed exclusively in interstate transportation. also
upheld as applicable to interstate trains were a statute which forbade
the heating of passenger cars by stoves;[] a municipal ordinance
restricting the speed of trains within city limits;[] the order of a
public utility commission requiring the elimination of grade
crossings;[] a statute requiring electric headlights of a specified
minimum capacity;[] a statute requiring three brakemen on freight
trains of over twenty-five cars.[] in the last case the court
admitted that "under the evidence," there was "some room for
controversy" as to whether the statute was necessary, but thought it
"not so unreasonable as to justify the court in adjudging it" to be
"merely an arbitrary exercise of power" and "not germane" to objects
which the state was entitled to accomplish.[] and in  the court
sustained, though again in somewhat doubtful terms, the order of a state
railroad commission requiring a terminal railroad which served both
interstate and local commerce to provide caboose cars for its
employees.[] at times, indeed, the court has made surprising
concession to local views that had nothing to do with safety. hennington
v. georgia,[] decided in , where was sustained a georgia
statute forbidding freight trains to run on sunday, is perhaps the
supreme example. whether such an act would pass muster today is
doubtful. and earlier statutes reinforcing the legal liability of
railroads as common carriers and the carriers of passengers were
sustained in the absence of legislation by congress.[]
[pg ]
"the principle that, without controlling congressional action, a state
may not regulate interstate commerce so as substantially to affect its
flow or deprive it of needed uniformity in its regulation is not to be
avoided by 'simply invoking the convenient apologetics of the police
power.'" so remarks chief justice stone in his summarizing opinion cited
above, in southern pacific co. v. arizona.[] among others he lists
the following instances in which state legislation was invalidated on
the basis of this rule: "in the kaw valley case[] the court held that
the state was without constitutional power to order a railroad to remove
a railroad bridge over which its interstate trains passed, as a means of
preventing floods in the district and of improving its drainage, because
it was 'not pretended that local welfare needs the removal of the
defendants' bridges at the expense of the dominant requirements of
commerce with other states, but merely that it would be helped by
raising them.' and in seaboard air line r. co. v. blackwell,[] it
was held that the interference with interstate rail transportation
resulting from a state statute requiring as a safety measure that trains
come almost to a stop at grade crossings, outweigh the local interest in
safety, when it appealed that compliance increased the scheduled running
time more than six hours in a distance of one hundred and twenty-three
miles."[] and "more recently in kelly v. washington,"[] the
chief justice continued, "we have pointed out that when a state goes
beyond safety measures which are permissible because only local in their
effect upon interstate commerce, and 'attempts to impose particular
standards as to structure, design, equipment and operation [of vessels
plying interstate] which in the judgment [pg ]of its authorities may be
desirable but pass beyond what is plainly essential to safety and
seaworthiness, the state will encounter the principle that such
requirements, if imposed at all, must be through the action of congress
which can establish a uniform rule. whether the state in a particular
matter goes too far must be left to be determined when the precise
question arises.'"
applying the test of these precedents, the chief justice concluded that
arizona, in making it unlawful to operate within the state a railroad
train of more than fourteen passenger or seventy freight cars, had gone
"too far"; and in support of this conclusion he recites the following
facts: "in arizona, approximately % of the freight traffic and % of
the passenger traffic is interstate. because of the train limit law
appellant is required to haul over % more trains in arizona than would
otherwise have been necessary. the record shows a definite relationship
between operating costs and the length of trains, the increase in length
resulting in a reduction of operating costs per car. the additional cost
of operation of trains complying with the train limit law in arizona
amounts for the two railroads traversing that state to about $,,
a year. the reduction in train lengths also impedes efficient operation.
more locomotives and more manpower are required; the necessary
conversion and reconversion of train lengths at terminals and the delay
caused by breaking up and remaking long trains upon entering and leaving
the state in order to comply with the law, delays the traffic and
diminishes its volume moved in a given time, especially when traffic is
heavy.
"at present the seventy freight car laws are enforced only in arizona
and oklahoma, with a fourteen car passenger car limit in arizona. the
record here shows that the enforcement of the arizona statute results in
freight trains being broken up and reformed at the california border and
in new mexico, some distance from the arizona line. frequently it is not
feasible to operate a newly assembled train from the new mexico yard
nearest to arizona, with the result that the arizona limitation governs
the flow of traffic as far east as el paso, texas. for similar reasons
the arizona law often controls the length of passenger trains all the
way from los angeles to el paso.
"if one state may regulate train lengths, so may all the others, and
they need not prescribe the same maximum limitation. the [pg ]practical
effect of such regulation is to control train operations beyond the
boundaries of the state exacting it because of the necessity of breaking
up and reassembling long trains at the nearest terminal points before
entering and after leaving the regulating state. the serious impediment
to the free flow of commerce by the local regulation of train lengths
and the practical necessity that such regulation, if any, must be
prescribed by a single body having a nation-wide authority are apparent.
"the trial court found that the arizona law had no reasonable relation
to safety, and made train operation more dangerous. examination of the
evidence and the detailed findings makes it clear that this conclusion
was rested on facts found which indicate that such increased danger of
accident and personal injury as may result from the greater length of
trains is more than offset by the increase in the number of accidents
resulting from the larger number of trains when train lengths are
reduced. in considering the effect of the statute as a safety measure,
therefore, the factor of controlling significance for present purposes
is not whether there is basis for the conclusion of the arizona supreme
court that the increase in length of trains beyond the statutory maximum
has an adverse effect upon safety of operation. the decisive question is
whether in the circumstances the total effect of the law as a safety
measure in reducing accidents and casualties is so slight or
problematical as not to outweigh the national interest in keeping
interstate commerce free from interferences which seriously impede it
and subject it to local regulation which does not have a uniform effect
on the interstate train journey which it interrupts."[]
the lesson of southern pacific co. v. arizona
the lesson to be extracted from southern pacific co. v. arizona is a
threefold one: ) where uniformity is judged by the court to be
"essential for the functioning of commerce, a state may not interpose
its regulation"; ) in resolving this question the court will canvass
what it considers to be relevant facts extensively; ) its task is,
however, in the last analysis, one of weighing competing values, in
brief, arbitral rather than strictly judicial.
the lesson of southern pacific is further exemplified by the more recent
holding in morgan v. virginia,[] in which the court was confronted
with a state statute which, in providing for the segregation of white
and colored passengers, required passengers to change seats from time to
time as might become necessary to increase the number of seats available
to the one race or the other. first, reciting the rule of uniformity,
justice heed, for the court, said: "congress, within the limits of the
fifth amendment, has authority to burden [interstate] commerce if that
seems to it a desirable means of accomplishing [pg ]a permitted end. ***
as no state law can reach beyond its own border nor bar transportation
of passengers across its boundaries, diverse seating requirements for
the races in interstate journeys result. as there is no federal act
dealing with the separation of races in interstate transportation, we
must decide the validity of this virginia statute on the challenge that
it interferes with commerce, as a matter of balance between the exercise
of the local police power and the need for national uniformity in the
regulations for interstate travel. it seems clear to us that seating
arrangements for the different races in interstate motor travel require
a single, uniform rule to promote and protect national travel.
consequently, we hold the virginia statute in controversy invalid."
cases arising under this caption further illustrate the competition for
judicial recognition between the interstate commerce interest and local
interests, especially that of public safety. a new element enters the
problem, however, which lends some added weight to the claims of the
police power, the fact, namely, that motor vehicles use highways
furnished and maintained by the state.
a state is entitled to enact a comprehensive scheme for the licensing
and regulation of motor vehicles using its highways with a view to
insuring itself of reasonable compensation for the facilities afforded
and to providing adequate protection of the public safety; and such
scheme may embrace out-of-state vehicles using the state's
highways.[] thus legislation limiting the net loads of trucks using
the state's highways is valid;[] as are also, in the absence of
national legislation on the subject, state regulations limiting the
weight and width of the vehicles themselves, provided such regulations
are applied without discrimination as between vehicles moving in
interstate commerce and those operating only intrastate.[] likewise,
a state may deny a certificate of public convenience and necessity to
one desiring to operate a common carrier over a particular highway to an
out-of-state destination in an adjacent state, on the ground that the
specified route is already congested. so it was held in bradley v.
public utilities commission of ohio,[] in which the court took
cognizance of the full hearing accorded the appellant, and of his
failure to choose another route, although he was at liberty to do so.
and in maurer v. hamilton a pennsylvania[] statute prohibiting the
operation over its highways of any motor vehicle carrying any other
vehicle over the head of the operator was upheld in the absence of
conflicting congressional legislation. similarly, in welch v. new
hampshire[] a statute of that state establishing maximum hours for
drivers of motor vehicles was held not to be superseded by the federal
motor carrier act prior to the effective date of regulations by the
interstate [pg ]commerce commission dealing with the subject. nor was
pendency before the interstate commerce commission of an application
under the motor carrier act for a license to operate a motor carrier in
interstate commerce found to supersede as to the applicant the authority
of a state to enforce "reasonable regulations" of traffic upon its
highways. "in the absence of the exercise of federal authority," said
the court, "and in the light of local exigencies, the state is free to
act in order to protect its legitimate interests even though interstate
commerce is directly affected."[] and for the same reason new york
city was entitled to apply to trucks engaged in the delivery of goods
from new jersey a traffic regulation forbidding the operation on the
streets of an advertising vehicle.[] said justice douglas for the
court: "many of these trucks are engaged in delivering goods in
interstate commerce from new jersey to new york. where traffic control
and the use of highways are involved and where there is no conflicting
federal regulation, great leeway is allowed local authorities, even
though the local regulation materially interferes with interstate
commerce."[] also, the court has consistently sustained state
regulations requiring motor carriers to provide adequate insurance
protection for injuries caused by the negligent operation of their
vehicles.[]
a state law which imposes upon all persons engaged in transporting for
hire by motor vehicle over the public highways of the state the burdens
and duties of common carriers and requires them to furnish bonds to
secure the payment of claims and liabilities resulting from injury to
property carried, may not be validly applied to a private carrier which
is engaged exclusively in hauling from one state to another state the
goods of particular factories under standing contracts with their
owners, the said carrier enjoying neither a special franchise nor using
the eminent domain power.[] on the [pg ]other hand, a state statute which
prohibits common carriers for hire from using the highways of the state
between fixed termini or over regular routes without having first
obtained from a director of public works a certificate of public
convenience, is primarily not a regulation to secure safety on the
highways or to conserve them, but a ban on competition and, as applied
to a common carrier by motor vehicle of passengers and express purely in
interstate commerce, is both violation of the commerce clause and
defeats the express purpose of congressional legislation rendering
federal aid for the construction of interstate highways.[]
the special characteristics of motor travel have brought about a
reversal of the court's attitude toward state control of transportation
agencies. sustaining in  a california statute requiring that agents
engaged in negotiating for the transportation of passengers in motor
vehicles over the highways of the state take out a license, justice
(later chief justice) stone, speaking for the court, said: "in di santo
v. pennsylvania,[] this court took a different view ***, it held
that a pennsylvania statute requiring others than railroad or steamship
companies, who engage in the intrastate sale of steamship tickets or of
orders for transportation to and from foreign countries, to procure a
license by giving proof of good moral character and filing a bond as
security against fraud and misrepresentation to purchasers, was an
infringement of the commerce clause. since the decision in that case
this court has been repeatedly called upon to examine the
constitutionality of numerous local regulations affecting interstate
motor vehicle traffic. it has uniformly held that in the absence of
pertinent congressional legislation there is constitutional power in the
states to regulate interstate commerce by motor vehicle wherever it
affects the safety of the public or the safety and convenient use of its
highways, provided only that the regulation does not in any other
respect unnecessarily obstruct interstate commerce."[]
in gibbons v. ogden[] the court, speaking by chief justice
marshall, held that new york legislation which excluded from the
[pg ]navigable waters of that state steam vessels enrolled and licensed
under an act of congress to engage in the coasting trade was in conflict
with the act of congress and hence void. in willson v. blackbird creek
and marsh co.[] the same court held that in the absence of an act of
congress, "the object of which was to control state legislation over
those small navigable creeks into which the tide flows," the state of
delaware was entitled to incorporate a company vested with the right to
erect a dam across such a creek. from these two cases the court in
cooley v. the board of wardens,[] decided in , extracted the
rule that in the absence of conflicting legislation by congress states
were entitled to enact legislation adapted to the local needs of
interstate and foreign commerce, that a pilotage law was of this
description, and was, accordingly, constitutionally applicable until
congress acted to the contrary to vessels engaged in the coasting trade.
in the main, these three holdings have controlled the decision of cases
under the above and the following caption, there being generally no
applicable act of congress involved. but the power which the rule
attributed to the states, they must use "reasonably," something they
have not always done in the judgment of the court.
thus an alabama statute which required that owners of vessels using the
public waters of the enacting state be enrolled, pay fees, file
statements as to ownership, etc., was held to be inapplicable to vessels
licensed under the act of congress to engage in the coasting trade;[]
as was also a louisiana statute ordering masters and wardens of the port
of orleans to survey the hatches of all vessels arriving there and to
enact a fee for so doing.[] "the unreason and the oppressive
character of the act" was held to take it out of the class of local
legislation protected by the rule of the cooley case.[] likewise,
while control by a state of navigable waters wholly within its borders
has been often asserted to be complete in the absence of regulation by
congress,[] congress may assume control at any time;[] and when
such waters connect with other similar waters "so as to form a waterway
to other states or foreign nations, [they] cannot be obstructed or
impeded so as to impair, defeat, or place any burden upon a right to
their navigation granted by congress."[]
[pg ]on the other hand, in kelly v. washington,[] decided in , the
court sustained the state in applying to motor-driven tugs operating in
navigable waters of the united states legislation which provided for the
inspection and regulation of every vessel operated by machinery if the
same was not subject to inspection under the laws of the united states.
it was conceded that there was "elaborate" federal legislation in the
field, but it was asserted that the washington statute filled a gap.
"the principle is thoroughly established," said chief justice hughes for
the court, "that the exercise by the state of its police power, which
would be valid if not superseded by federal action, is superseded only
where the repugnance or conflict is so 'direct and positive' that the
two acts cannot 'be reconciled or consistently stand together.'"[]
and in bob-lo excursion co. v. michigan,[] the court, elbowing
aside a decision of many years standing,[] ruled that the commerce
clause does not preclude a state, in the absence of federal statute or
treaty, from forbidding racial discrimination by one carrying passengers
by vessel to and from a port in the united states to an island situated
in canadian territory.
the holding in willson v. blackbird creek marsh co.[] has been
invoked by the court many times in support of state legislation
permitting the construction across navigable streams of dams, booms, and
other shore protections,[] as well as in support of state legislation
authorizing the erection of bridges and the operation of ferries across
such streams.[] bridges, it is true, may obstruct some commerce, but
they may more than compensate for this by aiding other commerce.[] in
justice field's words in huse v. glover,[] it should not be
forgotten that: "the state is interested in the domestic as well as in
the interstate and foreign commerce conducted on the illinois river, and
to increase its facilities, and thus augment its growth, it has full
power. it is only when, in the judgment of congress, its action is
deemed to encroach upon the navigation of the river as a means of
interstate and foreign commerce, that that body may interfere and
control or supersede it. *** how the highways of a state, whether on
land or by water, shall be best improved for the public good is a matter
for state determination, subject always to the right of congress to
interpose in the cases mentioned."[] the same principle applies to
the construction of piers and wharves in a navigable stream,[] as
well as to harbor improvements by a state for the aid and protection of
navigation;[] [pg ]and reasonable tolls may be charged for the use of
such aids, and reasonable regulations laid down governing their
employment.[]
ferries
a state may license individuals to operate a ferry across an interstate
river bounding its territory, or may incorporate a company for the
purpose.[] nor may a neighbor state make the securing of its consent
and license a condition precedent to the operation of such a ferry to
one of its towns.[] earlier the right of a state to regulate the
rates to be charged by an interstate bridge company for passage across
its structure was denied by a closely divided court.[] the ruling
does not, however, control the regulation of rates to be charged by an
interstate ferry company. these the chartering state may, in the absence
of action by congress, regulate except in the case of ferries operated
in connection with railroads,[] as to which congress has acted with
the result of excluding all state action.[] a state may also regulate
the rates of a vessel plying between two points within the state
although the journey is over the high seas; although again action by
congress may supersede state action at any time.[]
an indiana statute which required telegraph companies to deliver
dispatches by messenger to the persons to whom they were [pg ]addressed if
the latter resided within one mile of the telegraph station or within
the city or town where it was located, and which prescribed the order of
preference to be given various kinds of messages, was held to be an
unconstitutional interference with interstate commerce;[] as was also
the order of the massachusetts public service commission interfering
with the transmission to firms within the state's borders of continuous
quotations of the new york stock exchange by means of ticker
service.[] but a virginia statute which imposed a penalty on a
telegraph company for failure in its "clear common-law duty" of
transmitting messages without unreasonable delay, was held, in the
absence of legislation by congress, to be valid;[] as was also a
michigan statute which prohibited the stipulation by a company against
liability for nonperformance of such duty.[] however, a south
carolina statute which sought to make mental anguish caused by the
negligent nondelivery of a telegram a cause of action, was held to be,
as applied to messages transmitted from one state to another or to the
district of columbia, an unconstitutional attempt to regulate interstate
commerce.[] a state has no authority to interfere with the operation
of the lines of telegraph companies constructed along postal routes
within its borders under the authority of the post road act of
,[] nor to exclude altogether a company proposing to take
advantage of the act;[] but that act does not deprive the state or a
municipality of the right to subject telegraph companies to reasonable
regulations, and an ordinance regulating the erection and use of poles
and wires in the streets does not interfere with the exercise of
authority under that act.[] the jurisdiction conferred by the
transportation act of  upon the interstate commerce commission, and
since transferred to the federal communications commission, over
accounts and depreciation rates of telephone companies does not, in the
absence of exercise by the federal agency of its power, operate to
curtail the analogous state authority;[] nor is an unconstitutional
burden laid upon interstate commerce by the action of a state agency in
requiring a telephone company to revise its intrastate toll rates so as
to conform to rates charged for comparable distances in interstate
service.[]
[pg ]
the business of piping natural gas from one state to another to local
distributors which sell it locally to consumers is a branch of
interstate commerce which a state may not regulate.[] likewise, an
order by a state commission fixing rates on electric current generated
within the states and sold to a distributor in another state, imposes an
unconstitutional burden on interstate commerce, although the regulation
of such rates would necessarily benefit local consumers of electricity
furnished by the same company.[] in the absence, on the other hand,
of contrary regulation by congress a state may regulate the sale to
consumers in its cities of natural gas produced in and transmitted from
another state;[] nor did congress, by the national gas act of ,
impose any such contrary regulation.[] likewise, a state is left free
by the same act to require a gas company engaged in interstate commerce
to obtain a certificate of convenience before selling directly to
customers in the state.[] and where a pipe line is used to distribute
both gas that is brought in from without the state and gas that is
produced and used within the state, and the two are commingled, but
their proportionate quantities are known, an order by the state
commission directing the gas company to continue supplying gas from the
line to a certain community does not burden interstate commerce.[]
the transportation of natural gas from sources outside the state to
local consumers in its municipalities ceases to be interstate commerce
at the point where it passes from a pressure producing station into
local distributing stations, and from that point is subject to state
regulation.[] a state public utilities commission is entitled to
require a natural gas distributing company seeking an increase of rates
to show the fairness and reasonableness of the rate paid by it to the
pipe line company from which it obtains its supplies, both companies
being subsidiaries of a third.[] a state agency may require a company
which sells natural gas to local consumers and distributing companies,
transporting it in pipe lines from other states, to file contracts,
agreements, etc., for sales and deliveries to the distributing
companies;[] nor does the fact that a natural gas pipe line from the
place of production to the distributing points in the same state cuts
across a corner of another state render it improper, in determining
maximum rates for gas sold by the owner of the pipe line to distributing
companies, to include the value of the total line in the rate base.[]
a state may, as a conservation measure, fix the minimum prices at the
wellhead on natural gas produced in the state and sold interstate.[]
[pg ]
a state may require that a foreign corporation as a condition of its
being admitted to do a local business or to having access to its courts
obtain a license, and in connection therewith furnish information as to
its home state or country, the location of its principal office, the
names of its officers and directors, its authorized capitalization, and
the like, and that it pay a reasonable license fee;[] nor is a
corporation licensed by the national government to act as a customs
broker thereby relieved from meeting such conditions.[] so it was
decided in . the holding does not necessarily disturb one made
thirty years earlier in which the court ruled that a statute which
closed the courts of the enacting state to any action on any contract in
the state by a foreign corporation unless it had previously appointed a
resident agent to accept process, could not be constitutionally applied
to the right of a foreign corporation to sue on an interstate
transaction.[] a suit brought in a state court by a foreign
corporation having its principal place of business in the state against
another foreign corporation engaged in interstate commerce on a cause of
action arising outside the state does not impose an undue burden on such
commerce; and the forum being in other respects appropriate, its
jurisdiction is not forfeited because the property attached is an
instrumentality of interstate commerce.[] there is nothing in the
commerce clause which immunizes a foreign corporation doing business in
a state from any fair inquiry, judicial or legislative, that is required
by local laws.[]
banks and banking
a state statute which forbids individuals or partnerships to engage in
the banking business without a license is not, as to one whose business
chiefly consists in receiving deposits for periodic shipment [pg ]to other
states and to foreign countries, invalid as a regulation of interstate
and foreign commerce.[]
brokers
a statute which requires dealers in securities evidencing title or
interest in property to obtain a license from a state officer, is not
invalid as applied to dispositions within the state securities
transported from other states.[]
commission men
a statute requiring commission merchants to give bonds for the
protection of consignees may be validly applied to commission merchants
handling produce shipped to them from without the state.[]
attachment and garnishment
railway cars are not exempt from attachment under state laws, although
they may have been or are intended to be used in interstate
commerce.[]
statutory liens
a state statute which gives a lien upon all vessels whether domestic or
foreign, and whether engaged in interstate commerce or not, for injuries
to persons and property within the state, does not as applied to
nonmaritime torts offend the commerce clause, there being no act of
congress in conflict.[] nor can the enforcement of a lien for
materials used in the construction of a vessel be avoided because the
vessel is engaged in interstate commerce.[]
the police power and the subject-matter of commerce
"quarantine regulations are essential measures of protection which the
states are free to adopt when they do not come into conflict with
federal action. in view of the need of conforming such measures to local
conditions, congress from the beginning has been content to leave the
matter for the most part, notwithstanding its vast importance, to the
states and has repeatedly acquiesced in the enforcement of state [pg ]laws.
*** such laws undoubtedly operate upon interstate and foreign
commerce. they could not be effective otherwise. they cannot, of course,
be made the cover for discriminations and arbitrary enactments having no
reasonable relation to health ***; but the power of the state to take
steps to prevent the introduction or spread of disease, although
interstate and foreign commerce are involved (subject to the paramount
authority of congress if it decides to assume control), is beyond
question.[] *** state inspection laws and statutes designed to
safeguard the inhabitants of a state from fraud and imposition are valid
when reasonable in their requirements and not in conflict with federal
rules, although they may affect interstate commerce in their relation to
articles prepared for export or by including incidentally those brought
into the state and held for sale in the original imported
packages."[]
in two earlier cases a missouri statute which prohibited the driving of
all texan, mexican, and indian cattle into the state during certain
seasons of the year was held void;[] while a statute making anybody
in the state who had texas cattle which had not wintered north of a
certain line liable for damage through the communication of disease from
these to other cattle was sustained;[] as were also the regulations
of a sanitary commission which excluded all cattle, horses, and mules,
from the state at a certain period when anthrax was prevalent.[]
reviewing previous cases in the one last cited, the court declared their
controlling principle to be simply whether the police power of the state
had been exerted to exclude "beyond what is necessary for any proper
quarantine," a question predominantly of fact, and one therefore to be
determined for each case with only general guidance from earlier
decisions.[]
more recent cases conform to the same pattern. among measures sustained
are the following: an ohio statute forbidding the sale in that state of
condensed milk unless made from unadulterated milk;[] a new york
statute penalizing the sale with intent to defraud of preparations
falsely represented to be kosher;[] a new york statute requiring that
cattle shall not be imported for dairy or breeding purposes unless
accompanied by the certificate of a proper sanitary official in the
state of origin, in order to prevent the spread of an infectious
[pg ]disease;[] an order of a state department of agriculture, pursuant
to a state law, regulating the standards of containers in which
agricultural products (berries) may be marketed within the state;[] a
state statute restricting the processing of fish found within the waters
of the state with the purpose of conserving it for food, even though it
also operates upon fish brought into the state from without;[] the
price fixing and licensing provisions of a state milk and cream act, not
applicable to transactions in interstate commerce, by declaration of the
act;[] a maine statute requiring the registration with the state
health department of cosmetic preparations for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the products are harmless;[] an indiana animals
disposal act requiring that animal carcasses, not promptly disposed of
by the owner, be delivered to the representative of a disposal plant
licensed by the state, and prohibiting their transportation on the
public highways for any other purpose;[] a pennsylvania statute
providing for the licensing and bonding of all milk dealers and fixing a
minimum price to be paid producers, as applied to a dealer purchasing
milk within the state for shipment to points outside it.[]
the application of state inspection laws to imports from outside the
state has been sustained as warranted by local interests and as not
discriminating against out-of-state products, in the following
instances: a north carolina statute providing that "every bag, barrel,
or other package" of commercial fertilizer offered for sale in the state
should bear a label truly describing its chemical composition, which
must comply with certain requirements, and charging  cents per ton to
meet the cost of inspection;[] an indiana statute forbidding the sale
in the original package of concentrated feeding stuffs prior to
inspection and analysis for the purpose of ascertaining whether certain
minimum standards as to composition had been met;[] a minnesota
statute requiring as a precondition of its being offered for sale in the
state, the inspection of illuminating oil and gasoline;[] a kansas
statute forbidding any moving picture film or reel to be exhibited in
the state unless it had been examined by the state superintendent of
instruction and certified by him as moral and instructive and not
tending to debase or corrupt the morals.[] a minnesota statute, on
the other hand, which forbade the sale in any city of the state of any
[pg ]beef, mutton, lamb, or pork which, had not been inspected on the hoof
by local inspectors within twenty-four hours of slaughter, was held
void.[] its "necessary operation," said the court, was to ban from
the state wholesome and properly inspected meat from other states.[]
also a virginia statute which required the inspection and labelling of
all flour brought into the state for sale was disallowed because flour
produced in the state was not subject to inspection;[] likewise a
florida statute providing for the inspection of all cement imported into
the state and enacting a fee therefor, but making no provision for the
inspection of the local product, met a like fate;[] as did also a
madison, wisconsin ordinance which sought to exclude a foreign
corporation from selling milk in that city solely because its
pasteurization plants were more than five miles away.[]
the original package doctrine made its debut in brown v.
maryland,[] where it was applied to remove imports from abroad which
were still in the hands of the importer in the original package, out of
the reach of the state's taxing power. this rule the court, overriding a
dictum in marshall's opinion in brown v. maryland,[] rejected
outright after the civil war as to imports from sister states.[]
however, when in the late eighties and early nineties state-wide
prohibition laws began making their appearance, the court seized on the
rejected dictum and began applying it as a brake on the operation of
such laws with respect to interstate commerce in intoxicants, which the
court denominated "legitimate articles of commerce." while holding that
a state was entitled to prohibit the manufacture and sale within its
limits of intoxicants,[] even for an outside market—manufacture
being no part of commerce[]—it contemporaneously laid down the rule,
in bowman v. chicago and northwestern railroad co.,[] that so long
as congress remained silent in the matter, a state lacked the power,
even as part and parcel of a program of statewide prohibition of the
traffic in intoxicants, to prevent the shipment into it of intoxicants
from a sister state; and this holding was soon followed by another to
the effect that, so long as congress remained silent, a state had no
power to prevent the sale in the original package of liquors introduced
from another state.[] the effect of the latter decision was [pg ]soon
overcome by an act of congress, the so-called wilson act, repealing its
alleged silence,[] but the bowman decision still stood, the act in
question being interpreted by the court not to subject liquors from
sister states to local authority until their arrival in the hands of the
person to whom consigned.[] not till  was the effect of the
decision in the bowman case fully nullified by the webb-kenyon act,[]
which placed intoxicants entering a state from another state under the
control of the former for all purposes whatsoever.
long before this the immunity temporarily conferred by the original
package doctrine upon liquors had been extended to cigarettes[] and,
with an instructive exception, to oleomargarine. the exception referred
to was made in plumley v. massachusetts,[] where the court held
that a statute of that state forbidding the sale of oleomargarine
colored to look like butter could validly be applied to oleomargarine
brought from another state and still in the original package. the
justification of the statute to the court's mind was that it sought "to
suppress false pretenses and promote fair dealing in the sale of an
article of food." nor did leisy and co. v. hardin[] apply, said
justice harlan for the court, because the beer in that case was "genuine
beer, and not a liquid or drink colored artificially so as to cause it
to look like beer." that decision was never intended, he continued, to
hold that "a state is powerless to prevent the sale of articles
manufactured in or brought from another state, and subjects of traffic
and commerce, if their sale may cheat the people into purchasing
something they do not intend to buy ***."[] obviously, the argument
was conclusive only on the assumption that a state has a better right to
prevent frauds than it has to prevent drunkenness and like evils; and
doubtless that is the way the court felt about the matter at that date.
on the one hand, the liquor traffic was a very [pg ]ancient, if not an
altogether, venerable institution, while oleomargarine was then a
relatively novel article of commerce whose wholesomeness was suspect. on
the other hand, laws designed to secure fair dealing and condemnatory of
fraud followed closely the track of the common law, while anti-liquor
laws most decidedly did not. the real differentiation of the two cases
had to be sought in historical grounds. yet the state must not put
unreasonable burdens upon interstate commerce even in oleomargarine.
thus a pennsylvania statute forbidding the sale of this product even in
the unadulterated condition was pronounced invalid so far as it operated
to prevent the introduction of such oleomargarine from another state and
its sale in the original package;[] as was also a new hampshire
statute which required that all oleomargarine marketed in the state be
colored pink.[] a little later in the case above mentioned involving
cigarettes, the court discovered some of the difficulties of the
original package doctrine when applied to interstate commerce, in which
the package is not so apt to be standardized as it is in foreign
commerce.[]
what importance has the original package doctrine today as a restraint
on state legislation affecting interstate commerce? the answer is, very
little, if any. state laws prohibiting the importation of intoxicating
liquor, have since the passage of the twenty-first amendment
consistently been upheld, even when imposing a burden on interstate
commerce or discriminating against liquor imported from another
state.[] indeed the court has, without appealing to the twenty-first
amendment, even gone so far as to uphold a statute requiring a permit
for transportation of liquor through the enacting state.[] in
whitfield v. ohio,[] moreover, the court upheld a state law
prohibiting the sale in open market of convict-made goods including
sales of goods imported from other states and still in the original
package. while the decision is based on the hawes-cooper act of
,[] which follows the pattern of the webb-kenyon act, justice
sutherland speaking for the court, takes pains to disparage the
"unbroken-package doctrine, as applied to interstate commerce, ***, as
more artificial than sound."[] indeed, earlier cases make it clear
that the enforcement of state quarantine and inspection acts, [pg ]otherwise
constitutional, is not to be impeded by the doctrine in any way.[]
prior to the civil war the slaveholding states, ever fearful of a slave
uprising, adopted legislation meant to exclude from their borders free
negroes whether hailing from abroad or from sister states, and in  a
south carolina negro seamen's act embodying this objective was held void
by justice william johnson, himself a south carolinian, in a case
arising in the carolina circuit and involving a colored british
sailor.[] the basis of the ruling, which created tremendous uproar in
charleston,[] was the commerce clause and certain treaties of the
united states. there followed two rulings of attorneys general, the
earlier by attorney general wirt, denouncing such legislation as
unconstitutional;[] the latter by attorney general berrien,
sustaining it;[] and in city of new york v. miln[] the court,
speaking by justice barbour of virginia, asserted, six years after nat
turner's rebellion, the power of the states to exclude undesirables in
sweeping terms, which in the passenger cases,[] decided in , a
narrowly divided court considerably qualified. shortly after the civil
war the court overturned a nevada statute which sought to halt the
further loss of population by a special tax on railroads on every
passenger carried out of the state.[] this time only two justices
invoked the commerce clause; the majority, speaking by justice miller
held the measure to be an unconstitutional interference with a right of
national citizenship—a holding today translatable, in the terminology
of the fourteenth amendment, as an abridgment of a privilege or immunity
of citizens of the united states.
[pg ]against this background the court in , in edwards v.
california,[] held void a statute which penalized the bringing into
that state, or the assisting to bring into it, any nonresident knowing
him to be "an indigent person." five justices, speaking by justice
byrnes, held the act to be even as to "persons who are presently
destitute of property and without resources to obtain the necessities of
life, and who have no relatives or friends able and willing to support
them,"[] an unconstitutional interference with interstate commerce.
"the state asserts," justice byrnes recites, "that the huge influx of
migrants into california in recent years has resulted in problems of
health, morals, and especially finance, the proportions of which are
staggering. it is not for us to say that this is not true. we have
repeatedly and recently affirmed, and we now reaffirm, that we do not
conceive it our function to pass upon 'the wisdom, need, or
appropriateness' of the legislative efforts of the states to solve such
difficulties. *** but this does not mean that there are no boundaries
to the permissible area of state legislative activity. there are. and
none is more certain than the prohibition against attempts on the part
of any single state to isolate itself from difficulties common to all of
them by restraining the transportation of persons and property across
its borders. it is frequently the case that a state might gain a
momentary respite from the pressure of events by the simple expedient of
shutting its gates to the outside world. but, in the words of mr.
justice cardozo: 'the constitution was framed under the dominion of a
political philosophy less parochial in range. it was framed upon the
theory that the peoples of the several states must sink or swim
together, and that in the long run prosperity and salvation are in union
and not division'."[] four of the justices would have preferred to
rest the holding of unconstitutionality on the rights of national
citizenship under the privileges and immunities clause of amendment
in geer v. connecticut[] the court sustained the right of the state
to forbid the shipment beyond its borders of game taken within the
state—this on the ground, in part, that a state has an underlying
property right to wild things found within its limits, and so is
entitled [pg ]to qualify the right of individual takers thereof to any
extent it chooses; and a similar ruling was laid down in a later case as
to the prohibition by a state of the transportation out of it of water
from its important streams.[] in oklahoma v. kansas natural gas
co.,[] however, this doctrine was held inapplicable to the case of
natural gas, on the ground: first, that "gas, when reduced to
possession, is a commodity, the individual property" of the owner; and
secondly, that "the business welfare of the state," is subordinated by
the commerce clause to that of the nation as a whole. if the states had
the power asserted in the oklahoma statute, said justice mckenna, "a
singular situation might result. pennsylvania might keep its coal, the
northwest its timber, the mining states their minerals. and why may not
the products of the field be brought within the principle? *** and yet
we have said that 'in matters of foreign and interstate commerce there
are no state lines.' in such commerce, instead of the states, a new
power appears and a new welfare, a welfare which transcends that of any
state. but rather let us say it is constituted of the welfare of all the
states and that of each state is made greater by a division of its
resources, ***, with every other state, and those of every other state
with it. this was the purpose, as it is the result, of the interstate
commerce clause of the constitution of the united states."[] in
pennsylvania v. west virginia[] the same doctrine was enforced in
disallowance of a west virginia statute whereby that state sought to
require that a preference be accorded local consumers of gas produced
within the state. west virginia's argument that the supply of gas within
the state was waning and no longer sufficed for both the local and the
interstate markets, and that therefore the statute was a legitimate
measure of conservation in the interest of the people of the state, was
answered in the words just quoted.
in the above cases the state prohibition overturned was directed
specifically to shipments beyond the state. in two other cases the state
enactments involved reached all commerce, both domestic and interstate
without discrimination. in the first of these, sligh v. kirkwood,[]
the court upheld the application to oranges which were intended for the
interstate market of a florida statute prohibiting the sale, shipment,
or delivery for shipment of any citrus fruits which were immature or
otherwise unfit for consumption. the burden thus imposed upon interstate
commerce was held by the court to be incidental merely to the effective
enforcement of a measure intended to safeguard the health of the people
of florida. moreover, said the court, "we may take judicial notice of
the fact that the raising of citrus fruits is one of the great
industries of the state of florida. it was competent [pg ]for the
legislature to find that it was essential for the success of that
industry that its reputation be preserved in other states wherein such
fruits find their most extensive market."[] in lemke v. farmers
grain co.,[] on the other hand, a north dakota statute which confined
the purchase of grain within that state to those holding licenses from
the state and which regulated prices, was pronounced void under the
commerce clause. to the argument that such legislation was "in the
interest of the grain growers and essential to protect them from
fraudulent purchases, and to secure payment to them of fair prices for
the grain actually sold," the court answered that, "congress is amply
authorized to pass measures to protect interstate commerce if
legislation of that character is needed."
the differentiation of the above two cases is twofold. the statute under
review in the earlier one was of the ordinary type of inspection law and
was applied without discrimination to fruits designed for the home and
the interstate market. the north dakota act was far more drastic,
approximating an attempt on the part of the state to license interstate
commerce. what is even more important, however, the later case
represents a new rule of law, and one which at the time the florida act
was before the court had not yet been heard of. this is embodied in the
head note of the case in the following words: "the business of buying
grain in north dakota, practically all of which is intended for shipment
to, and sale at, terminal markets in other states, conformably to the
usual and general course of business in the grain trade, is interstate
commerce."[] the application of this rule in the field of state
taxation was mentioned on a previous page.[]
certain recent cases have had to deal with state regulation of the milk
business. in nebbia v. new york,[] decided in , that state's
law regulating the price of milk was sustained by the court against
objections based on the due process clause of amendment xiv. a year
later, in baldwin v. seelig[] the refusal of a license under the
same act to a dealer who had procured his milk at a lower minimum price
than producers were guaranteed in new york, was set aside as an
unconstitutional interference with interstate commerce. however, a
pennsylvania statute requiring dealers to obtain licenses was sustained
as to one who procured milk from neighboring farms and shipped it all
into a neighboring state for sale.[] the purpose of the act,
explained justice roberts, was to control "a domestic situation in the
interest of the welfare of the producers and consumers," and its
application to the kind of case before the court was essential to [pg ]its
effective enforcement and affected interstate commerce only
incidentally.[] but when a distributor of milk in massachusetts, who
already had two milk stations in eastern new york, was refused a license
for a third on the ground, among others, that the further diversion of
milk to massachusetts would deprive the local market of a supply needed
during the short season, a narrowly divided court interposed its veto on
the basis of oklahoma v. kansas natural gas co.[]
meantime, geer v. connecticut has been somewhat overcast by subsequent
rulings. in a case, decided in , it was held that a louisiana
statute which permitted the shipment of shrimp taken in the tidal waters
of louisiana marshes only if the heads and hulls have been previously
removed was unconstitutional.[] distinguishing geer v. connecticut
the court said: "as the representative of its people, the state might
have retained the shrimp for [local] consumption and use therein." but
the object of the louisiana statute was in direct opposition to the
conservation of a local food supply. its object was to favor the canning
of shrimp for the interstate market. "*** by permitting its shrimp to
be taken and all the products thereof to be shipped and sold in
interstate commerce, the state necessarily releases its hold and, as to
the shrimp so taken, definitely terminates its control. *** and those
taking the shrimp under the authority of the act necessarily thereby
become entitled to the rights of private ownership and the protection of
the commerce clause."[] on the same reasoning a south carolina
statute which required that owners of shrimp boats, fishing in the
marine waters off the coast of the state, dock at a state port and
unload, pack and stamp their catch with a tax stamp before shipping or
transporting it to another state, was pronounced void in .[]
however, a california statute which restricted the processing of fish,
both that taken in the waters of the state and that brought into the
state in a fresh condition, was found by the court to be purely a food
conservation measure, and hence valid.[] the application of the act
to fish brought from outside was held to be justified "by rendering
evasion of it less easy."[]
[pg ]
concurrent federal and state legislation
since the turn of the century federal legislation under the commerce
clause has penetrated more and more deeply into areas once occupied
exclusively by the police power of the states. the result has been that
state laws have come under increasingly frequent attack as being
incompatible with acts of congress operating in the same general field.
the court's decisions resolving such alleged conflicts fall into three
groups: first, those which follow webster's theory, advanced in
gibbons v. ogden, that when congress acts upon a particular phase of
interstate commerce, it designs to appropriate the entire field with the
result that no room is left for supplementary state action; second,
those in which, in the absence of conflict between specific provisions
of the state and congressional measures involved, the opposite result is
reached; third, those in which the state legislation involved is found
to conflict with certain acts of congress, and in which the principle of
national supremacy is invoked by the court. most of the earlier cases
stemming from state legislation affecting interstate railway
transportation fall in the first class; while illustrations of the
second category usually comprise legislation intended to promote the
public health and fair dealing. more recent cases are more difficult to
classify, especially as between the first and third categories.
no act ever passed by congress was more destructive of legislation on
the state statute books than the hepburn act of ,[] amending the
interstate commerce act. thus a state statute which, while prohibiting a
railway from giving free passes or free transportation, authorized the
issuance of transportation in payment for printing and advertising, was
found to conflict with the unqualified prohibition by congress of free
interstate transportation.[] likewise, a state statute which
penalized a carrier for refusing to receive freight for transportation
whenever tendered at a regular station was found to conflict with the
congressional provision that no carrier "shall engage or participate in
the transportation of passengers or property, as defined in this act,
unless the rates, fares, and charges upon which the same are transported
by said carrier have been filed and published in accordance with the
provisions of this act."[] in enacting this provision, the court
found, congress had intended to occupy the entire field. in a third
case, it was held that the hepburn act had put it outside the power of a
state to regulate the delivery of cars for interstate shipments;[]
and on the same ground, a state statute authorizing recovery of a
penalty for delay in giving notice of the arrival of freight [pg ]was
disallowed;[] as was also the similar rule of a state railroad
commission with respect to failure to deliver freight at depots and
warehouses within a stated time limit.[] and in adams express co.
v. croninger[] it was sweepingly ruled that the so-called carmack
amendment to the hepburn act, which puts the responsibility for loss of,
or injury to, cargo upon the initial carrier, had superseded all state
statutes limiting recovery for loss or injury to goods in transportation
to an agreed or declared value. substantially contemporaneous with these
holdings were others in which the court ruled that the federal
employers' liability act of , as amended in ;[] the federal
hours of service act (railroads) of ;[] and the federal safety
appliance acts of , as amended in [] superseded all state
legislation dealing with the same subjects so far as such legislation
affected interstate commerce.[] however, the states were still able
to regulate the time and manner of payment of the employees of
railroads, including those engaged in interstate commerce,[] congress
having not legislated on the subject.
[pg ]
in  it was held that a new york statute prohibiting the manufacture
or sale of any adulterated food or drug, or the coloring or coating of
food whereby it is made to appear better than it really is, was not, as
applied to imported coffee, repugnant to either the commerce clause or
the meat inspection act of ,[] prohibiting the importation into
the united states of adulterated and unwholesome food, but as exertion
by the state of power to legislate for the protection of the health and
safety of the community and to provide against deception and fraud.[]
and in  it was held that an indiana statute regulating the sale of
concentrated commercial feeding stuff and requiring the disclosure of
ingredients by certificate and label, and providing for inspection and
analysis, was not in conflict with the pure food and drugs act of
.[] however, when wisconsin about the same time passed an act
requiring that when certain commodities were offered for sale in that
state they should bear the label required by state law and no other, she
was informed that she could not validly apply it to articles which had
been labeled in accordance with the federal statute nor did it make any
difference that the goods in question had been removed from the
container in which they had been shipped into the state, inasmuch as
they could still be proceeded against under the act of congress.[]
the original package doctrine, it was added, "was not intended to limit
the right of congress, ***, to keep the channels of interstate
commerce free from the carriage of injurious or fraudulently branded
articles and to choose appropriate means to that end."[] but a north
dakota statute requiring that lard compound or substitutes, unless sold
in bulk, should be put up in pails or containers holding one, three, or
five pounds net weight, or some multiple of these numbers, was held not
to be repugnant to the pure food and drugs act.[] on the other hand,
a decade later the court found that the plant quarantine act of , as
amended in ,[] had so completely occupied the field indicated by
its title that a state was left without power to prevent the importation
of plants infected by a particular disease to which the secretary of
agriculture's regulations did not apply.[] congress promptly
intervened by further amending the federal statute to permit the states
to impose quarantines in such overlooked cases.[]
[pg ]
in , it was held[] that an order of the new york commissioner of
agriculture prohibiting the importation of cattle for dairy or breeding
purposes unless such cattle and the herds from which they come had been
certified by the chief sanitary officer of the state of origin as being
free from bang's disease, was not in conflict with the cattle contagious
diseases acts.[] in , it was ruled[] that a georgia statute
fixing maximum charges for handling and selling leaf tobacco did not, as
applied to sales of tobacco destined for export, conflict with the
tobacco inspection act.[] in ,[] it was held that an order
of the wisconsin employment relations board which commanded a union, its
agents, and members, to desist from mass picketing of a factory,
threatening personal injury or property damage to employees desiring to
work, obstructing the streets about the factory, and picketing the homes
of employees, was not in conflict with the national labor relations
act,[] to which the employer was admittedly subject but which had
not been invoked. an "intention of congress," said the court, "to
exclude states from exerting their police power must be clearly
manifested."[] in ,[] the court sustained the marketing
program for the  california raisin crop, adopted pursuant to the
california agricultural prorate act. although it was conceded that the
program and act operated to eliminate competition among producers
concerning terms of sale and price as to product destined for the
interstate market, they were held not to conflict with the commerce
clause or with the sherman act or the agricultural marketing agreement
act.[] to the contrary, said chief justice stone, speaking for the
unanimous court, the program "is one which it has been the policy of
congress to aid and encourage through federal agencies" under federal
act.[] the case was not one, he further observed, which was to be
resolved by "mechanical test," but with the object in view of
accommodating "the competing demands of the state and national interests
involved."[] in ,[] the court upheld the right of minnesota
to exclude from its courts a firm licensed by the national government to
carry on the business of customs broker because of its failure to comply
with a state statute requiring foreign corporations to obtain a license
to do business in the state. speaking for the court, justice
frankfurter, again disparaged "the generalities" to which certain cases
had given utterance. actually, he asserted, "the fate of state
legislation in these cases has not been determined by these generalities
but by the weight of the circumstances and the practical and experienced
judgment in applying these generalities to the particular
instances."[] in cases, decided in ,[] the court ruled that
indiana had not violated the natural gas act[] by attempting [pg ]to
regulate the rates for natural gas sold within the state by an
interstate pipe line company to local industrial consumers; and that
illinois was not precluded by the commodity exchange act[] from
imposing upon grain exchanges doing business within her borders
regulations not at variance with the provisions of the act or with
regulations promulgated under it by the secretary of agriculture. nor,
it was held by a bare majority of the court in , did the motor
carrier act of , as amended in ,[] prevent california from
prohibiting the sale or arrangement of any transportation over its
public highways if the transporting carrier has no permit from the
interstate commerce commission.[] the opposed opinions line up most
of the cases on either side of the question.
on the other side of the ledger appear the following cases, decided
contemporaneously with those just reviewed: one in  in which it was
held that a gas company engaged in the business of piping natural gas
from without the state of illinois and selling it wholesale to
distributors in that state was subject to the jurisdiction of the
federal power commission under the natural gas act,[] and hence
could not be required by the illinois commerce commission to extend its
facilities in the absence of a certificate of convenience from the
federal power commission;[] one, in the same year, in which it was
held, by a sharply divided court, that federal regulation of the
production of renovated butter under the internal revenue code[]
prevented the state of alabama from inspecting, seizing and detaining
stock butter from which such butter was made, some of it being intended
for interstate commerce;[] one in  holding that the united
[pg ]states warehouse act, as amended,[] must be construed as superseding
state authority to regulate licenses thereunder, and hence overruled the
stricter requirements of illinois law dealing with such subject as rate
discrimination, the dual position of grain warehousemen storing their
own grain, the mixing of inferior grain owned by the warehousemen with
superior grain of other users of the facility, delay in loading grain,
the sacrificing or rebating of storage charges, retraining desirable
transit tonnage, utilizing preferred storage space, maintenance of
unsafe and inadequate grain elevators, inadequate and ineffectual
warehouse service, the obtaining of a license, the abandonment of
warehousing service, and the rendition of warehousing service without
filing and publishing rate schedules;[] one decided the same year in
which it was held that the authority of the federal power commission
under the natural gas act[] extended to and superseded state
regulatory power over sales made within a state by a natural gas
producing company to pipe line companies which transported the purchased
gas to markets in other states;[] one in , in which a sharply
divided court held that michigan law governing the rights of dissenting
stockholders could not be applied to embarrass a merger agreement
between two railroad companies which had been approved by the interstate
commerce commission under the interstate commerce act[] as "just and
reasonable";[] and finally one decided the same year in which it was
held by a unanimous court that the interstate commerce commission may,
in approving the acquisition by a railroad corporation of one state of
railroad lines in another, relieve such corporation from being
incorporated under the laws of the latter state.[]
one group of cases, which has caused the court some difficulty and its
attitude in which has perhaps shifted in some measure, deals with the
question of the effect of the wagner, and, latterly, of the taft-hartley
act on state power to govern labor union activities. [pg ]in a case decided
in [] it was held that a florida statute which required business
agents of a union operating in the state to file annual reports and pay
an annual fee of one dollar conflicted with the wagner act,[]
standing, as the court put it, "'as an obstacle to the accomplishment
and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress.'"[]
in two cases decided in , however, state legislation regulative of
labor relations was sustained. in one a "cease and desist" order of the
wisconsin employment relations board[] implementing the state
employment peace act, which made it an unfair labor practice for an
employee to interfere with production except by leaving the premises in
an orderly manner for the purpose of going on strike, was found not to
conflict with either the wagner or the taft-hartley act,[] both of
which, the court asserted, designedly left open an area for state
control. in the other,[] the wisconsin board, acting under the same
statute, was held to be within its powers in labelling as "an unfair
labor practice" the discharge by an employer of an employee under a
maintenance of membership clause which had been inserted in the contract
of employment in  under pressure from the national war labor board,
but which was contrary to provisions of the wisconsin act. on the other
hand, in , the court invalidated a michigan mediation statute, and
in , a wisconsin public utility anti-strike act, on the ground that
these matters were governed by the policies embodied in the wagner and
taft-hartley acts.[]
commerce with indian tribes
united states v. kagama
congress is given power to regulate commerce "with the indian tribes."
faced in  with a congressional enactment which prescribed a system
of criminal laws for indians living on their reservations, the court
rejected the government's argument which sought to base the act on the
commerce clause. it sustained the act, however, on the following
grounds: "from their very weakness and helplessness, so largely due to
the course of dealing of the federal government with them and the
treaties in which it has been promised, there arises the duty of
protection, and with it the power. this has always been recognized by
the executive and by congress, and by this court, whenever the question
has arisen. *** the power of the general government over these
remnants of a race once powerful, now weak [pg ]and diminished in numbers,
is necessary to their protection, as well as to the safety of those
among whom they dwell. it must exist in that government, because it
never has existed anywhere else, because the theatre of its exercise is
within the geographical limits of the united states, because it has
never been denied, and because it alone can enforce its laws on all the
tribes." moreover, such power was operative within the states.[]
obviously, this line of reasoning renders the commerce clause
superfluous as a source of power over the indian tribes; and some years
earlier, in , congress had forbidden the further making of treaties
with them.[] however, by a characteristic judicial device the effort
has been made at times to absorb the doctrine of the kagama case into
the commerce clause,[] although more commonly the court, in
sustaining congressional legislation, prefers to treat the commerce
clause and "the recognized relations of tribal indians," as joint
sources of congress's power.[] most of the cases have arisen, in
fact, in connection with efforts by congress to ban the traffic in "fire
water" with tribal indians. in this connection it has been held that
even though an indian has become a citizen, yet so long as he remains a
member of his tribe, under the charge of an indian agent, and so long as
the united states holds in trust the title to land which has been
allotted him, congress can forbid the sale of intoxicants to him.[]
also congress can prohibit the introduction of intoxicating liquors into
land occupied by a tribe of uncivilized indians within territory
admitted to statehood.[] nor can a state withdraw indians within its
borders from the operation of acts of congress regulating trade with
them by conferring on them rights of citizenship and suffrage, whether
by its constitution or its statutes.[] and when a state is admitted
into the union congress may, in the enabling act, reserve authority to
legislate in the future respecting the indians residing within the new
state, and may declare that existing acts of congress relating to
traffic and intercourse with them shall remain in force.[]
[pg ]
clause . the congress shall have power *** to establish an uniform
rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies
throughout the united states.
naturalization and citizenship
naturalization has been defined by the supreme court as "the act of
adopting a foreigner, and clothing him with the privileges of a native
citizen, ***"[] in the dred scott case,[] the court asserted
that the power of congress under this clause applies only to "persons
born in a foreign country, under a foreign government."[] these
dicta are much too narrow to sustain the power which congress has
actually exercised on the subject. the competence of congress in this
field merges, in fact, with its indefinite, inherent powers in the field
of foreign relations. in the words of the court: "as a government, the
united states is invested with all the attributes of sovereignty. as it
has the character of nationality it has the powers of nationality,
especially those which concern its relations and intercourse with other
countries."[] by the immigration and nationality act of june ,
,[] which codifies much previous legislation, it is enacted that
the following shall be citizens of the united states at birth:
"() a person born in the united states, and subject to the jurisdiction
thereof;
"() a person born in the united states to a member of an indian, eskimo,
aleutian, or other aboriginal tribe: provided, that the granting of
citizenship under this subsection shall not in any manner impair or
otherwise affect the right of such person to tribal or other property;
"() a person born outside of the united states and its outlying
possessions of parents both of whom are citizens of the united states
and one of whom has had a residence in the united states or one of its
outlying possessions, prior to the birth of such person;
"() a person born outside of the united states and its outlying
possessions of parents one of whom is a citizen of the united states who
has been physically present in the united states or one of its outlying
possessions for a continuous period of one year prior to the birth of
such person, and the other of whom is a national, but not a citizen of
the united states;
"() a person born in an outlying possession of the united states of
parents one of whom is a citizen of the united states who has been
physically present in the united states or one of its outlying
possessions for a continuous period of one year at any time prior to the
birth of such person;
[pg ]"() a person of unknown parentage found in the united states while under
the age of five years, until shown, prior to his attaining the age of
twenty-one years, not to have been born in the united states;
"() a person born outside the geographical limits of the united states
and its outlying possessions of parents one of whom is an alien, and the
other a citizen of the united states who, prior to the birth of such
person, was physically present in the united states or its outlying
possessions for a period or periods totaling not less than ten years, at
least five of which were after attaining the age of fourteen years:
provided, that any periods of honorable service in the armed forces of
the united states by such citizen parent may be included in computing
the physical presence requirements of this paragraph."[] by the same
act, "persons born in the canal zone and panama after february , ,
one or both of whose parents were at the time of birth of such person
citizens of the united states, are declared to be citizens of the united
states; as likewise are of certain categories of persons born in puerto
rico, alaska, hawaii, the virgin islands and guam on or after certain
stated dates."[]
naturalization is a privilege to be given, qualified, or withheld as
congress may determine, which an alien may claim only upon compliance
with the terms which congress imposes. earlier the privilege was
confined to white persons and persons of african descent, but was
extended by the act of december , , to descendants of races
indigenous to the western hemisphere and chinese persons or persons of
chinese descent;[] and by the act of june , , "the rights of a
person to become a naturalized citizen of the united states shall not be
denied or abridged because of race or sex or because the person is
married."[] but, any person "who advocates or teaches or who is a
member of or affiliated with any organization that advocates or teaches
***" opposition to all organized [pg ]government, or "who advocates or
teaches or who is a member of or affiliated with any organization that
advocates or teaches the overthrow by force or violence or other
unconstitutional means of the government of the united states" may not
be naturalized as a citizen of the united states.[] these
restrictive provisions are, moreover, "applicable to any applicant for
naturalization who at any time within a period of ten years immediately
preceding the filing of the petition for naturalization or after such
filing and before taking the final oath of citizenship is, or has been
found to be within any of the classes enumerated within this section,
notwithstanding that at the time the petition is filed he may not be
included within such classes."[]
this involves as its principal and culminating event the taking in open
court by the applicant of an oath: "() to support the constitution of
the united states; () to renounce and abjure absolutely and entirely
all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or
sovereignty of whom or which the petitioner was before a subject or
citizen; () to support and defend the constitution and the laws of the
united states against all enemies, foreign and domestic; () to bear
true faith and allegiance to the same; and ()(a) to bear arms on behalf
of the united states when required by the law, or (b) to perform
noncombatant service in the armed forces of the united states when
required by the law, or (c) to perform work of national importance under
civilian direction when required by law."[] any naturalized person
who takes this oath with mental reservations or conceals beliefs and
affiliations which under the statute disqualify one for naturalization,
is subject, upon these facts being shown in a proceeding brought for the
purpose, to have his certificate of naturalization cancelled.[]
furthermore, if a naturalized person shall within five years "following
his naturalization become a member of or affiliated with any
organization, membership in or affiliation with which at the time of
naturalization would have precluded such person from naturalization
under the provisions of section , it shall be considered prima facie
evidence that such person was not attached to the principles of the
constitution of the united states and was not well disposed to the good
order and happiness of the united states at the time of naturalization,
and, in the absence of countervailing evidence, it shall be sufficient
in the proper proceeding to authorize the revocation and setting aside
of the order admitting such person to citizenship and the cancellation
of the certificate of [pg ]naturalization as having been obtained by
concealment of a material fact or by willful misrepresentation. ***"
chief justice marshall early stated the dictum that "a naturalized
citizen *** become[s] a member of the society, possessing all the
rights of a native citizen, and standing, in the view of the
constitution, on the footing of a native. the constitution does not
authorize congress to enlarge or abridge those rights. the simple power
of the national legislature is, to prescribe a uniform rule of
naturalization, and the exercise of this power exhausts it, so far as
respects the individual."[] a similar idea was expressed in  in
knauer v. united states:[] "citizenship obtained through
naturalization is not a second-class citizenship. *** [it] carries
with it the privilege of full participation in the affairs of our
society, including the right to speak freely, to criticize officials and
administrators, and to promote changes in our laws including the very
charter of our government."[] but, as shown above, a naturalized
citizen is subject at any time to have his good faith in taking the oath
of allegiance to the united states inquired into, and to lose his
citizenship if lack of such faith is shown in proper proceedings.[]
also, "a person who has become a national by naturalization" may lose
his nationality by "having a continuous residence for three years in the
territory of a foreign state of which he was formerly a national or in
which the place of his birth is situated," or by "having a continuous
residence for five years in any other foreign state or states."[]
however, in the absence of treaty or statute to the contrary effect, a
child born in the united states who is taken during minority to the
country of his parents' origin, where his parents resume their former
allegiance, does not thereby lose his american citizenship provided that
on attaining his majority he elects to retain it and returns to the
united states to assume its duties.[]
[pg ]
congress' power over naturalization is an exclusive power. a state
cannot denationalize a foreign subject who has not complied with federal
naturalization law and constitute him a citizen of the united states, or
of the state, so as to deprive the federal courts of jurisdiction over a
controversy between him and a citizen of a state.[] but power to
naturalize aliens may be, and early was, devolved by congress upon state
courts having a common law jurisdiction.[] also states may confer
the right of suffrage upon resident aliens who have declared their
intention to become citizens, and have frequently done so.[]
notwithstanding evidence in early court decisions[] and in the
commentaries of chancellor kent of a brief acceptance of the ancient
english doctrine of perpetual and unchangeable allegiance to the
government of one's birth, whereby a citizen is precluded from
renouncing his allegiance without permission of that government, the
united states, since enactment of the act of ,[] if indeed not
earlier, has expressly recognized the right of everyone to expatriate
himself and choose another country. retention of citizenship is not
dependent entirely, however, upon the desires of the individual; for,
although it has been "conceded that a change of citizenship cannot be
arbitrarily imposed, that is, imposed without the concurrence of the
citizen," the united states, by virtue of the powers which inhere in it
as a sovereign nation, has been deemed competent to provide that an
individual voluntarily entering into certain designated conditions
shall, as a consequence thereof, suffer the loss of citizenship.[]
[pg ]
exclusion of aliens
the power of congress "to exclude aliens from the united states and to
prescribe the terms and conditions on which they come in" is absolute,
being an attribute of the united states as a sovereign nation. in the
words of the court: "that the government of the united states, through
the action of the legislative department, can exclude aliens from its
territory is a proposition which we do not think open to controversy.
jurisdiction over its own territory to that extent is an incident of
every independent nation. it is a part of its independence. if it could
not exclude aliens, it would be to that extent subject to the control of
another power. *** the united states, in their relation to foreign
countries and their subjects or citizens are one nation, invested with
powers which belong to independent nations, the exercise of which can be
invoked for the maintenance of its absolute independence and security
throughout its entire territory."[] by the immigration and
nationality act of june , , some thirty-one categories of aliens
are excluded from the united states[] including "aliens who are, or
at any time have been, members *** of or affiliated with any
organization that advocates or teaches *** the overthrow by force,
violence, or other unconstitutional means of the government of the
united states ***"[]
[pg ]with this power of exclusion goes also the power to assert a
considerable degree of control over aliens after their admission to the
country. by the alien registration act of [] it was provided
that all aliens in the united states, fourteen years of age and over,
should submit to registration and finger printing, and wilful failure to
do so was made a criminal offense against the united states. this act,
taken in conjunction with other laws regulating immigration and
naturalization, has constituted a comprehensive and uniform system for
the regulation of all aliens and precludes enforcement of a state
registration act. said the court, speaking by justice black: "with a
view to limiting prospective residents from foreign lands to those
possessing the qualities deemed essential to good and useful citizenship
in america, carefully defined qualifications are required to be met
before aliens may enter our country. these qualifications include rigid
requirements as to health, education, integrity, character, and
adaptability to our institutions. nor is the alien left free from the
application of federal laws after entry and before naturalization. if
during the time he is residing here he should be found guilty of conduct
contrary to the rules and regulations laid down by congress, he can be
deported. at the time he enters the country, at the time he applies for
permission to acquire the full status of citizenship, and during the
intervening years, he can be subjected to searching investigations as to
conduct and suitability for citizenship."[] the act of june ,
, repeats these requirements of the act of .[]
recent cases underscore the sweeping nature of the powers of the
national government to exclude aliens from the united states and to
deport by administrative process members of excluded classes. in knauff
v. shaughnessy,[] decided early in , an order of the attorney
general excluding, on the basis of confidential information, a wartime
bride who was prima facie entitled to enter the united states under the
war brides act of ,[] was held to be not reviewable by the
courts; nor were regulations on which the order was based invalid as
representing an undue delegation of legislative power. said the court:
"normally congress supplies the conditions of the privilege of entry
into the united states. but because the power of exclusion of aliens is
also inherent in the executive department of the sovereign, congress may
in broad terms authorize the executive to exercise the power, e.g., as
was done here, for the best interests of the country during a time of
national emergency. executive officers may be entrusted with the duty of
specifying the procedures for carrying out the congressional
intent."[]
[pg ]in cases decided in march and april, , comparable results were
reached: the internal security act of , section , in authorizing
the attorney general to hold in custody, without bail, aliens who are
members of the communist party of the united states, pending
determination as to their deportability, is not unconstitutional.[]
nor was it unconstitutional to deport under the alien registration act
of [] a legally resident alien because of membership in the
communist party, although such membership ended before the enactment of
the act. such application of the act did not make it ex post facto,
being but an exercise of the power of the united states to terminate its
hospitality ad libitum.[] and a statutory provision[] which
makes it a felony for an alien against whom a specified order of
deportation is outstanding "to willfully fail or refuse to make timely
application for travel or other documents necessary to his departure" is
not on its face void for "vagueness."[]
the power of congress to legislate with respect to the conduct of alien
residents is, however, a concomitant of its power to prescribe the terms
and conditions on which they may enter the united states; to establish
regulations for sending out of the country such aliens as have entered
in violation of law; and to commit the enforcement of such conditions
and regulations to executive officers. it is not a power to lay down a
special code of conduct for alien residents or to govern private
relations with them. purporting to enforce the above distinction, the
court, in , held void a statutory provision which, in prohibiting
the importation of "any alien woman or girl for the purpose of
prostitution," provided further that whoever should keep for the purpose
of prostitution "any alien woman or girl within three years after she
shall have entered the united states" should be deemed guilty of a
felony and punished therefor.[] three justices, however, thought the
measure justifiable on the principle that "for the purpose of excluding
those who unlawfully enter this country congress has power to retain
control over aliens long enough to make sure of the facts. *** to this
end it may make their admission conditional for three years. ***"
[and] "if congress can forbid the entry ***, it can punish those who
cooperate in their fraudulent entry."[]
[pg ]
bankruptcy
in an early case on circuit justice livingston suggested that inasmuch
as the english statutes on the subject of bankruptcy from the time of
henry viii down had applied only to traders it might "well be doubted,
whether an act of congress subjecting to such a law every description of
persons within the united states, would comport with the spirit of the
powers vested in them in relation to this subject."[] neither
congress nor the supreme court has ever accepted this limited view. the
first bankruptcy law, passed in , departed from the english practice
to the extent of including bankers, brokers, factors and underwriters as
well as traders.[] asserting that the narrow scope of the english
statutes was a mere matter of policy, which by no means entered into the
nature of such laws, justice story defined a law on the subject of
bankruptcies in the sense of the constitution as a law making provisions
for cases of persons failing to pay their debts.[] this
interpretation has been ratified by the supreme court. in hanover
national bank v. moyses,[] it held valid the bankruptcy act of
 which provided that persons other than traders might become
bankrupts and that this might be done on voluntary petition. the court
has given tacit approval to the extension of the bankruptcy laws to
cover practically all classes of persons and corporations,[]
including even municipal corporations.[]
as the coverage of the bankruptcy laws has been expanded, the scope of
the relief afforded to debtors has been correspondingly enlarged. the
act of , like its english antecedents, was designed primarily for
the benefit of creditors. beginning with the act of , which opened
the door to voluntary petitions, rehabilitation of the debtor has become
an object of increasing concern to congress. an adjudication in
bankruptcy is no longer requisite to the exercise of bankruptcy
jurisdiction. in  the debtor for the first time was permitted,
either before or after adjudication of bankruptcy, to propose terms of
composition which would become binding upon acceptance by a designated
majority of his creditors and confirmation by a bankruptcy court. this
measure was held constitutional,[] as were later acts which provided
for the reorganization of corporations [pg ]which are insolvent or unable to
meet their debts as they mature,[] and for the composition and
extension of debts in proceedings for the relief of individual
farmer-debtors.[] nor is the power of congress limited to adjustment
of the rights of creditors. the supreme court has also ruled that the
rights of a purchaser at a judicial sale of the debtor's property are
within reach of the bankruptcy power, and may be modified by a
reasonable extension of the period for redemption from such sale.[]
the sympathetic attitude with which the court has viewed these
developments is reflected in the opinion in continental illinois
national bank and trust co. v. chicago, r.i. and p.r. co.,[] where
justice sutherland wrote, on behalf of a unanimous court: "*** these
acts, far-reaching though they may be, have not gone beyond the limit of
congressional power; but rather have constituted extensions into a field
whose boundaries may not yet be fully revealed."[]
in the exercise of its bankruptcy powers congress must not transgress
the fifth and tenth amendments. it may not take from a creditor specific
property previously acquired from a debtor nor circumscribe the
creditor's right to such an unreasonable extent as to deny him due
process of law;[] neither may it subject the fiscal affairs of a
political subdivision of a state to the control of a federal bankruptcy
court.[] since congress may not supersede the power of a state to
determine how a corporation shall be formed, supervised and dissolved, a
corporation which has been dissolved by a decree of a state court may
not file a petition for reorganization under the bankruptcy acts.[]
but congress may impair the obligation of a contract and may extend the
provisions of the bankruptcy laws to contracts already entered into at
the time of their passage.[] it may also empower courts of
bankruptcy to entertain petitions by taxing agencies or
instrumentalities for a composition of their indebtedness where the
state has consented to the proceeding and the federal court is not
authorized to interfere with the fiscal or governmental affairs of the
petitioner.[] also bankruptcy legislation must be uniform, but the
uniformity required is geographic, not personal. congress may recognize
the laws of the states relating to dower, exemption, the validity of
mortgages, [pg ]priorities of payment and similar matters, even though such
recognition leads to different results from state to state.[]
prior to  congress exercised the power to establish "uniform laws on
the subject of bankruptcies" only very intermittently. the first
national bankruptcy law was not enacted until  to be repealed in
; the second was passed in  and repealed two years later; the
third was enacted in  and repealed in .[] thus during the
first  years under the constitution a national bankruptcy law was in
existence only sixteen years altogether. consequently the most important
problems of interpretation which arose during that period concerned the
effect of this clause on state law. the supreme court ruled at an early
date that in the absence of congressional action the states may enact
insolvency laws since it is not the mere existence of the power but
rather its exercise which is incompatible with the exercise of the same
power by the states.[] later cases were to settle further that the
enactment of a national bankruptcy law does not invalidate state laws in
conflict therewith but serves only to relegate them to a state of
suspended animation with the result that upon repeal of the national
statute they again come into operation without reenactment.[]
a state is, of course, without power to enforce any law governing
bankruptcies which impairs the obligation of contracts,[] extends to
persons or property outside its jurisdiction,[] or conflicts with
the national bankruptcy laws.[] giving effect to the policy of the
federal statute, the supreme court has held that a state statute
regulating the distribution of property of an insolvent was suspended by
that law,[] and that a state court was without power to proceed with
pending foreclosure proceedings after a farmer-debtor had filed a
petition in the federal bankruptcy court for a composition or extension
of time to pay his debts.[] a state law governing fraudulent
[pg ]transfers was found to be compatible with the act of congress,[] as
was a statute which provided that a discharge in bankruptcy should be
unavailing to terminate the suspension of the driver's license of a
person who failed to pay a judgment rendered against him for damages
resulting from his negligent operation of a motor vehicle.[] if a
state desires to participate in the assets of a bankrupt it must submit
to the appropriate requirements of the bankruptcy court with respect to
the filing of claims by a designated date; it cannot assert a claim for
taxes by filing a demand therefor at a later date.[]
clauses  and . the congress shall have power *** to coin money,
regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the standard of
weights and measures.
*** to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and
current coin of the united states.
fiscal and monetary powers of congress
the power "to coin money" and "regulate the value thereof" has been
broadly construed to authorize regulation of every phase of the subject
of currency. congress may charter banks and endow them with the right to
issue circulating notes,[] and may restrain the circulation of notes
not issued under its own authority.[] to this end it may impose a
prohibitive tax upon the circulation of the notes of state banks[]
or of municipal corporations.[] it may require the surrender of gold
coin and of gold certificates in exchange for other currency not
redeemable in gold. a plaintiff who sought payment for the gold coin and
certificates thus surrendered in an amount measured by the higher market
value of gold, was denied recovery on the ground that he had not proved
that he would suffer any actual loss by being compelled to accept an
equivalent amount of other currency.[] inasmuch as "every contract
for the payment of money, simply, is necessarily subject to the
constitutional power of the government over the currency, whatever that
power may be, and the obligation [pg ]of the parties is, therefore, assumed
with reference to that power,"[] the supreme court sustained the
power of congress to make treasury notes legal tender in satisfaction of
antecedent debts,[] and, many years later, to abrogate the clauses
in private contracts calling for payment in gold coin, even though such
contracts were executed before the legislation was passed.[] the
power to coin money also imports authority to maintain such coinage as a
medium of exchange at home, and to forbid its diversion to other uses by
defacement, melting or exportation.[]
in its affirmative aspect this clause has been given a narrow
interpretation; it has been held not to cover the circulation of
counterfeit coin or the possession of equipment susceptible of use for
making counterfeit coin.[] at the same time the supreme court has
rebuffed attempts to read into this provision a limitation upon either
the power of the states or upon the powers of congress under the
preceding clause. it has ruled that a state may punish the utterance of
forged coins.[] on the ground that the power of congress to coin
money imports "the correspondent and necessary power and obligation to
protect and to preserve in its purity this constitutional currency for
the benefit of the nation,"[] it has sustained federal statutes
penalizing the importation or circulation of counterfeit coin,[] or
the willing and conscious possession of dies in the likeness of those
used for making coins of the united states.[] in short, the above
clause is entirely superfluous. congress would have had the power which
it purports to confer under the necessary and proper clause; and the
same is the case with the other enumerated crimes which it is authorized
to punish. the enumeration was unnecessary and is not exclusive.[]
usually the aggregate of the fiscal and monetary powers of the national
government—to lay and collect taxes, to borrow money and to coin money
and regulate the value thereof—have reinforced [pg ]each other, and,
cemented by the necessary and proper clause, have provided a secure
foundation for acts of congress chartering banks and other financial
institutions,[] or making its treasury notes legal tender in the
payment of antecedent debts.[] but in  the opposite situation
arose—one in which the power to regulate the value of money collided
with the obligation incurred in the exercise of the power to borrow
money. by a vote of eight-to-one the supreme court held that the
obligation assumed by the exercise of the latter was paramount, and
could not be repudiated to effectuate the monetary policies of
congress.[] in a concurring opinion justice stone declined to join
with the majority in suggesting that "the exercise of the sovereign
power to borrow money on credit, which does not override the sovereign
immunity from suit, may nevertheless preclude or impede the exercise of
another sovereign power, to regulate the value of money; or to suggest
that although there is and can be no present cause of action upon the
repudiated gold clause, its obligation is nevertheless, in some manner
and to some extent, not stated, superior to the power to regulate the
currency which we now hold to be superior to the obligation of the
bonds."[]
clause . the congress shall have power *** to establish post
offices and post roads.
the postal power
the great question raised in the early days with reference to the postal
clause concerned the meaning to be given to the word "establish"—did it
confer upon congress the power to construct post offices and post
roads, or only the power to designate from existing places and routes
those that should serve as post offices and post roads? as late as 
justice mclean stated that this power "has generally been considered as
exhausted in the designation of roads on which the mails are to be
transported," and concluded that neither under the commerce power nor
the power to establish post roads could congress construct a bridge over
a navigable water.[] a decade earlier, however, the court, without
passing upon the validity of the original construction of the cumberland
road, held that being "charged, ***, with the transportation of the
mails," congress could enter a valid compact with the state of
pennsylvania regarding the use and upkeep [pg ]of the portion of the road
lying in that state.[] the debate on the question was terminated in
 by the decision in kohl v. united states[] sustaining a
proceeding by the united states to appropriate a parcel of land in
cincinnati as a site for a post office and courthouse.
the postal powers of congress embrace all measures necessary to insure
the safe and speedy transit and prompt delivery of the mails.[] and
not only are the mails under the protection of the national government,
they are in contemplation of law its property. this principle was
recognized by the supreme court in  in holding that wagons carrying
united states mail were not subject to a state toll tax imposed for use
of the cumberland road pursuant to a compact with the united
states.[] half a century later it was availed of as one of the
grounds on which the national executive was conceded the right to enter
the national courts and demand an injunction against the authors of any
wide-spread disorder interfering with interstate commerce and the
transmission of the mails.[]
prompted by the efforts of northern anti-slavery elements to disseminate
their propaganda in the southern states through the mails, president
jackson, in his annual message to congress in , suggested "the
propriety of passing such a law as will prohibit, under severe
penalties, the circulation in the southern states, through the mail, of
incendiary publications intended to instigate the slaves to
insurrection."[] in the senate john c. calhoun resisted this
recommendation, taking the position that it belonged to the states and
not to congress to determine what is and what is not calculated to
disturb their security. he expressed the fear that if congress might
determine what papers were incendiary, and as such prohibit their
circulation through the mail, it might also determine what were not
incendiary and enforce their circulation.[]
some thirty years later congress passed the first of a series of acts to
exclude from the mails publications designed to defraud the public or
corrupt its morals. in the pioneer case of ex parte jackson,[] the
[pg ]court sustained the exclusion of circulars relating to lotteries on the
general ground that "the right to designate what shall be carried
necessarily involves the right to determine what shall be
excluded."[] the leading fraud order case, decided in , holds to
the same effect.[] pointing out that it is "an indispensable adjunct
to a civil government," to supply postal facilities, the court restated
its premise that the "legislative body in thus establishing a postal
service, may annex such conditions to it as it chooses."[] later
cases appear to have qualified these sweeping declarations. in upholding
requirements that publishers of newspapers and periodicals seeking
second-class mailing privileges file complete information regarding
ownership, indebtedness and circulation and that all paid advertisements
in such publications be marked as such, the court emphasized that these
provisions were reasonably designed to safeguard the second-class
privilege from exploitation by mere advertising publications. chief
justice white warned that the court by no means intended to imply that
it endorsed the government's "broad contentions concerning the existence
of arbitrary power through the classification of the mails, or by way of
condition ***"[] again, in milwaukee social democratic publishing
co. v. burleson,[] where the court sustained an order of the
postmaster general excluding from the second-class privilege a newspaper
which he found to have systematically published matter banned by the
espionage act of , the claim of absolute power in congress to
withhold this privilege was sedulously avoided. more recently, when
reversing an order denying the second-class privilege to a mailable
publication because of the poor taste and vulgarity of its contents, on
the ground that the postmaster general exceeding his statutory
authority, justice douglas assumed, in the opinion of the court, "that
congress has a broad power of classification and need not open
second-class mail to publications of all types."[]
in the cases just reviewed the mails were closed to particular types of
communication which were deemed to be harmful. a much broader power of
exclusion was asserted in the public utility holding company act of
.[] to induce compliance with the regulatory requirements of
that act, congress denied the privilege of using the mails for any
purpose to holding companies which failed to obey that law, irrespective
of the character of the material to be carried. viewing the matter
realistically, the supreme court treated this provision [pg ]as a penalty.
while it held this statute constitutional because the regulations whose
infractions were thus penalized were themselves valid,[] it declared
that "congress may not exercise its control over the mails to enforce a
requirement which lies outside its constitutional province,
in determining the extent to which state laws may impinge upon persons
or corporations whose services are utilized by congress in executing its
postal powers, the task of the supreme court has been to determine
whether particular measures are consistent with the general policies
indicated by congress. broadly speaking, the court has approved
regulations which have a trivial or remote relation to the operation of
the postal service, while disallowing those which constitute a serious
impediment to it. thus a state statute which granted to one company an
exclusive right to operate a telegraph business in the state was found
to be incompatible with a federal law which, in granting to any
telegraph company the right to construct its lines upon post roads, was
interpreted as a prohibition of state monopolies in a field which
congress was entitled to regulate in the exercise of its combined power
over commerce and post roads.[] an illinois statute which, as
construed by the state courts, required an interstate mail train to make
a detour of seven miles in order to stop at a designated station, also
was held to be an unconstitutional interference with the power of
congress under this clause.[] but a minnesota statute which required
intrastate trains to stop at county seats was found to be
unobjectionable.[] local laws classifying postal workers with
railroad employees for the purpose of determining a railroad's liability
for personal injuries,[] or subjecting a union of railway mail
clerks to a general law forbidding any "labor organization" to deny any
person membership because of his race, color or creed,[] have been
held not to conflict with national legislation or policy in this field.
despite the interference pro tanto with the performance of a federal
function, a state may arrest a postal employee charged with murder while
he is engaged in carrying out his official duties,[] but it cannot
punish a person for operating a mail truck over its highways without
procuring a driver's license from state authorities.[]
[pg ]
clause . the congress shall have power *** to promote the progress
of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and
inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and
discoveries.
copyrights and patents
this clause is the foundation upon which the national patent and
copyright laws rest, although it uses neither of those terms. so far as
patents are concerned, modern legislation harks back to the statute of
monopolies of , whereby parliament endowed inventors with the sole
right to their inventions for fourteen years.[] copyright law, in
turn, traces back to the statute of  which secured to authors of
books the sole right of publishing them for designated periods.[]
congress was not, however, by this provision, vested with anything akin
to the royal prerogative in the creation and bestowal of monopolistic
privileges. its power is limited as to subject matter, and as to the
purpose and duration of the rights granted. only the writings and
discoveries of authors and inventors may be protected, and then only to
the end of promoting science and the useful arts.[] while congress
may grant exclusive rights only for a limited period, it may extend the
term upon the expiration of the period originally specified, and in so
doing may protect the rights of purchasers and assignees.[] the
copyright and patent laws do not have, of their own force, any
extraterritorial operation.[]
the protection afforded by acts of congress under this clause is limited
to new and useful inventions,[] and while a patentable invention is
a mental achievement,[] yet for an idea to be patentable it must
have first taken physical form.[] despite the fact that the
constitution uses the term "discovery" rather than "invention," a patent
may not issue for the discovery of a hitherto unknown phenomenon of
nature; "if there is to be invention from such a discovery, it must come
from the application of the law of nature to a new and useful
end."[] conversely, the mental processes which are thus applied must
display "more ingenuity *** than the work of a mechanic skilled in the
art";[] and while combination patents have been at times
[pg ]sustained,[] the accumulation of old devices is patentable "only
when the whole in some way exceeds the sum of its parts."[] the
court's insistence on the presence of "inventive genius" as the test of
patentability goes far back and has been reiterated again and again in
slightly varying language,[] although it seems to have had little
effect on the point of view of the patent office.[]
[pg ]
the standard of patentability is a constitutional standard, and the
question of the validity of a patent is a question of law.[]
congress may authorize the issuance of a patent for an invention by a
special, as well as by general law, provided the question as to whether
the patentees device is in truth an invention is left open to
investigation under the general law.[] the function of the
commissioner of patents in issuing letters patent is deemed to be
quasi-judicial in character. hence an act granting a right of appeal
from the commission to the court of appeals for the district of columbia
is not unconstitutional as conferring executive power upon a judicial
body.[]
the leading case bearing on the nature of the rights which congress is
authorized to secure is that of wheaton v. peters. wheaton charged
peters with having infringed his copyright on the twelve volumes of
"wheaton's reports" wherein are reported the decisions of the united
states supreme court for the years from  to  inclusive. peters's
defense turned on the proposition that inasmuch as wheaton had not
complied with all of the requirements of the act of congress, his
alleged copyright was void. wheaton, while denying this assertion of
fact, further contended that the statute was only intended to secure
him in his pre-existent rights at common law. these at least, he
claimed, the court should protect. a divided court held in favor of
peters on the legal question. it denied, in the first place, that there
was any principle of the common law which protected an author in the
sole right to continue to publish a work once published. it denied, in
the second place, that there is any principle of law, common or
otherwise, which pervades the union except such as are embodied in the
constitution and the acts of congress. nor, in the third place, it held,
did the word "securing" in the constitution recognize the alleged common
law principle which wheaton invoked. the exclusive right which congress
is authorized to secure to authors and inventors owes its existence
solely to the acts of congress securing it,[] from which it follows
that the rights granted by a patent or copyright are subject to such
qualifications and limitations as congress, in its unhampered
consultation of the public interest, sees fit to impose.[]
[pg ]in giving to authors the exclusive right to dramatize any of their
works, congress did not exceed its powers under this clause. even as
applied to pantomime dramatization by means of silent motion pictures,
the act was sustained against the objection that it extended the
copyright to ideas rather than to the words in which they were
clothed.[] but the copyright of the description of an art in a book
was held not to lay a foundation for an exclusive claim to the art
itself. the latter can be protected, if at all, only by letters
patent.[] since copyright is a species of property distinct from the
ownership of the equipment used in making copies of the matter
copyrighted, the sale of a copperplate under execution did not pass any
right to print and publish the map which the copperplate was designed to
produce.[] a patent right may, however, be subjected, by bill in
equity, to payment of a judgment debt of the patentee.[]
letters patent for a new invention or discovery in the arts confer upon
the patentee an exclusive property in the patented invention which
cannot be appropriated or used by the government without just
compensation.[] congress may, however, modify rights under an
existing patent, provided vested property rights are not thereby
impaired,[] but it does not follow that it may authorize an inventor
to recall rights which he has granted to others or reinvest in him
rights of property which he had previously conveyed for a valuable and
fair consideration.[] furthermore, the rights which the present
statutes confer are subject to the anti-trust acts, though it can be
hardly said that the cases in which the court has endeavored to draw the
line between the rights claimable by patentees and the kind of
monopolistic privileges which are forbidden by those acts exhibit entire
consistency in their holdings.[]
[pg ]
nor do the patent laws displace the police or taxing powers of the
states. whatever rights are secured to inventors must be enjoyed in
subordination to the general authority of the state over all property
within its limits. a statute of kentucky requiring the condemnation of
illuminating oils which were inflammable at less than  degrees
fahrenheit, was held not to interfere with any right secured by the
patent laws, although the oil for which the patent was issued could not
be made to comply with state specifications.[] in the absence of
federal legislation, a state may prescribe reasonable regulations for
the transfer of patent rights so as to protect its citizens from fraud.
hence a requirement of state law that the words "given for a patent
right" appear on the face of notes given in payment for such right is
not unconstitutional.[] royalties received from patents or
copyrights are subject to a nondiscriminating state income tax, a
holding to the contrary in  having been subsequently
overruled.[]
in the famous trade-mark cases,[] decided in , the supreme court
held void acts of congress which, in apparent reliance upon this clause,
extended the protection of the law to trade-marks registered in the
patent office. "the ordinary trade-mark" said justice miller for the
court, "has no necessary relation to invention or discovery"; nor is it
to be classified "under the head of writings of authors." it does not
"depend upon novelty, invention, discovery, or any work of the
brain."[] not many years later the court, again speaking through
justice miller, ruled that a photograph may be constitutionally
copyright,[] while still more recently a circus poster was held to
be entitled to the same protection. in answer to the objection of the
circuit court that a lithograph which "has no other use than that of a
mere advertisement *** (would not be within) the meaning of the
constitution," justice holmes summoned forth the shades of velasquez,
whistler, rembrandt, ruskin, degas, and others in support of the
proposition that it is not for the courts to attempt to judge the worth
of pictorial illustrations outside the narrowest and most obvious
limits.[]
[pg ]
clause . the congress shall have power *** to constitute tribunals
inferior to the supreme court; see article iii, p. .
clause . the congress shall have power *** to define and punish
piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offences against
the law of nations.
piracies, felonies, and offenses against the law of nations
"when the united states ceased to be a part of the british empire, and
assumed the character of an independent nation, they became subject to
that system of rules which reason, morality, and custom had established
among civilized nations of europe, as their public law. *** the
faithful observance of this law is essential to national character,
***"[] these words of chancellor kent expressed the view of the
binding character of international law which was generally accepted at
the time the constitution was adopted. during the revolutionary war,
congress took cognizance of all matters arising under the law of nations
and professed obedience to that law.[] under the articles of
confederation, it was given exclusive power to appoint courts for the
trial of piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, but no
provision was made for dealing with offenses against the law of
nations.[] the draft of the constitution submitted to the convention
of  by its committee of detail empowered congress "to declare the
law and punishment of piracies and felonies committed on the high seas,
and the punishment of counterfeiting the coin of the united states, and
of offences against the law of nations."[] in the debate on the
floor of the convention the discussion turned on the question as to
whether the terms, "felonies" and the "law of nations," were
sufficiently precise to be generally understood. the view that these
terms were often so vague and indefinite as to require definition
eventually prevailed and congress was authorized to define as well as
punish piracies, felonies and offenses against the law of nations.[]
the fact that the constitutional convention considered it necessary to
give congress authority to define offenses against the law of nations
does not mean that in every case congress must undertake [pg ]to codify that
law or mark its precise boundaries before prescribing punishments for
infractions thereof. an act punishing "the crime of piracy, as defined
by the law of nations" was held to be an appropriate exercise of the
constitutional authority to "define and punish" the offense, since it
adopted by reference the sufficiently precise definition of
international law.[] similarly, in ex parte quirin,[] the court
found that by the reference in the fifteenth article of war to
"offenders or offenses that *** by the law of war may be triable by
such military commissions ***," congress had "exercised its authority
to define and punish offenses against the law of nations by sanctioning,
within constitutional limitations, the jurisdiction of military
commissions to try persons for offenses which, according to the rules
and precepts of the law of nations, and more particularly the law of
war, are cognizable by such tribunals."[] where, conversely,
congress defines with particularity a crime which is "an offense against
the law of nations," the law is valid, even if it contains no recital
disclosing that it was enacted pursuant to this clause. thus the duty
which the law of nations casts upon every government to prevent a wrong
being done within its own dominion to another nation with which it is at
peace, or to the people thereof, was found to furnish a sufficient
justification for the punishment of the counterfeiting within the united
states, of notes, bonds and other securities of foreign
governments.[]
since this clause contains the only specific grant of power to be found
in the constitution for the punishment of offenses outside the
territorial limits of the united states, a lower federal court held in
[] that the general grant of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction
by article iii, section , could not be construed as extending either
the legislative or judicial power of the united states to cover offenses
committed on vessels outside the united states but not on the high seas.
reversing that decision, the supreme court held that this provision
"cannot be deemed to be a limitation on the powers, either legislative
or judicial, conferred on the national government by article iii, §.
the two clauses are the result of separate steps independently taken in
the convention, by which the jurisdiction in admiralty, previously
divided between the confederation and the states, was transferred to the
national government. it would be a surprising result, and one plainly
not anticipated by the framers or justified by principles which ought to
govern the interpretation of a constitution [pg ]devoted to the
redistribution of governmental powers, if part of them were lost in the
process of transfer. to construe the one clause as limiting rather than
supplementing the other would be to ignore their history, and without
effecting any discernible purpose of their enactment, to deny to both
the states and the national government powers which were common
attributes of sovereignty before the adoption of the constitution. the
result would be to deny to both the power to define and punish crimes of
less gravity than felonies committed on vessels of the united states
while on the high seas, and crimes of every grade committed on them
while in foreign territorial waters."[] within the meaning of this
section an offense is committed on the high seas even where the vessel
on which it occurs is lying at anchor on the road in the territorial
waters of another country.[]
clauses , , , and . the congress shall have power ***:
to declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules
concerning captures on land and water.
to raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use
shall be for a longer term than two years.
to provide and maintain a navy.
to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval
forces.
the war power
three different views regarding the source of the war power found
expression in the early years of the constitution and continued to vie
for supremacy for nearly a century and a half. writing in the
federalist,[] hamilton elaborated the theory that the war power is
an aggregate of the particular powers granted by article i, section .
not many years later, in , the argument was advanced that the war
power of the national government is an attribute of sovereignty and
hence not dependent upon the affirmative grants of the written
constitution.[] chief justice marshall appears to have taken a still
different view, namely that the power to wage war is implied from the
power to declare it. in mcculloch v. maryland[] he listed the
power "to declare and conduct a war"[] as one of the "enumerated
powers" from which the authority to charter the bank of the united
[pg ]states was deduced. during the era of the civil war the two latter
theories were both given countenance by the supreme court. speaking for
four justices in ex parte milligan, chief justice chase described the
power to declare war as "necessarily" extending "to all legislation
essential to the prosecution of war with vigor and success, except such
as interferes with the command of the forces and conduct of
campaigns."[] in another case, adopting the terminology used by
lincoln in his message to congress on july , ,[] the court
referred to "the war power" as a single unified power.[]
thereafter we find the phrase, "the war power," being used by both chief
justice white[] and chief justice hughes,[] the former declaring
the power to be "complete and undivided."[] not until  however
did the court explain the logical basis for imputing such an inherent
power to the federal government. in united states v. curtiss-wright
export corp.,[] the reasons for this conclusion were stated by
justice sutherland as follows: "as a result of the separation from great
britain by the colonies acting as a unit, the powers of external
sovereignty passed from the crown not to the colonies severally, but to
the colonies in their collective and corporate capacity as the united
states of america. even before the declaration, the colonies were a unit
in foreign affairs, acting through a common agency—namely the
continental congress, composed of delegates from the thirteen colonies.
that agency exercised the powers of war and peace, raised an army,
created a navy, and finally adopted the declaration of independence.
*** it results that the investment of the federal government with the
powers of external sovereignty did not depend upon the affirmative
grants of the constitution. the power to declare and wage war, to
conclude peace, to make treaties, to maintain diplomatic relations with
other sovereignties, if they had never been mentioned in the
constitution, would have vested in the federal government as necessary
concomitants of nationality."[]
[pg ]
in the more recent case of lichter v. united states,[] on the
other hand, the court speaks of the "war powers" of congress. upholding
the renegotiation act, it declared that: "in view of this power 'to
raise and support armies, ***' and the power granted in the same
article of the constitution 'to make all laws which shall be necessary
and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, ***' the
only question remaining is whether the renegotiation act was a law
'necessary and proper for carrying into execution' the war powers of
congress and especially its power to support armies."[] in a
footnote it listed the preamble, the necessary and proper clause, the
provisions authorizing congress to lay taxes and provide for the common
defense, to declare war, and to provide and maintain a navy, together
with the clause designating the president as commander in chief of the
army and navy, as being "among the many other provisions implementing
the congress and the president with powers to meet the varied demands of
war, ***"[]
in the first draft of the constitution presented to the convention of
 by its committee of detail congress was empowered "to make
war."[] on the floor of the convention according to madison's
journal "mr. madison and mr. gerry, moved to insert 'declare' striking
out 'make' war; leaving to the executive the power to repel sudden
attacks"[] and their motion was adopted. when the bey of tripoli
declared war upon the united states in  a sharp debate was
precipitated as to whether a formal declaration of war by congress was
requisite to create the legal status of war. jefferson sent a squadron
of frigates to the mediterranean to protect our commerce but its mission
was limited to defense in the narrowest sense of the term. after one of
the vessels in this squadron had been engaged by, and had defeated, a
tripolitan cruiser, the latter was permitted to return home. jefferson
defended this course in a message to congress saying, "unauthorized by
the constitution, without the sanction of congress, to go beyond the
line of defence, the vessel being disabled from committing further
hostilities, was liberated with its crew."[] hamilton promptly
espoused a different interpretation of the power given to congress to
declare war. "it is the peculiar and exclusive province of congress," he
declared "when the nation is at peace to change that state into a
state of war; whether from calculations of policy, or from provocations,
or injuries received; in other words, it belongs to congress only to go
to war. but when a foreign nation declares or openly and avowedly makes
war upon the united states, they are then by the very fact already at
war, and any declaration on the part of congress [pg ]is nugatory; it is at
least unnecessary."[] apparently congress shared the view that a
formal declaration of war was unnecessary. it enacted a statute which
authorized the president to instruct the commanders of armed vessels of
the united states to "seize and make prize of all vessels, goods and
effects, belonging to the bey of tripoli, ***; and also to cause to be
done all such other acts of precaution or hostility as the state of
war will justify, ***"[]
sixty years later the supreme court, in sustaining the blockade of the
southern ports which lincoln had instituted in april , at a time
when congress was not in session, adopted virtually the same line of
reasoning as hamilton had advanced. "this greatest of civil wars" said
the court "was not gradually developed *** it *** sprung forth
suddenly from the parent brain, a minerva in the full panoply of war.
the president was bound to meet it in the shape it presented itself,
without waiting for congress to baptize it with a name; and no name
given to it by him or them could change the fact."[] this doctrine
was sharply challenged by a powerful minority of the court on the ground
that while the president could unquestionably adopt such measures as the
statutes permitted for the enforcement of the laws against insurgents,
congress alone could stamp an insurrection with the character of war and
thereby authorize the legal consequences which ensue a state of
war.[] inasmuch as the court finally conceded that the blockade had
been retroactively sanctioned by congress, that part of its opinion
dealing with the power of the president, acting alone, was really
obiter. but a similar opinion was voiced by chief justice chase on
behalf of a unanimous court, after the war was over. in freeborn v.
the "protector,"[] it became necessary to ascertain the exact dates
on which the war began and ended in order to determine whether the
statute of limitation had run against the asserted claim. to answer this
question the chief justice said that "it is necessary, therefore, to
refer to some public act of the political departments of the government
to fix the dates; and, for obvious reasons, those of the executive
department, which may be, and, in fact, was, at the commencement of
hostilities, obliged to act during the recess of congress, must be
taken. the proclamation of intended blockade by the president may
therefore be assumed as marking the first of these dates, and the
proclamation that the war had closed, as marking the second."[]
[pg ]
the power to raise and maintain armed forces
the clauses of the constitution which give congress authority "to raise
and support armies, to provide and maintain a navy" and so forth, were
not inserted for the purpose of endowing the national government with
power to do these things, but rather to designate the department of
government which should exercise such powers. moreover, they permit
congress to take measures essential to the national defense in time of
peace as well as during a period of actual conflict. that these
provisions grew out of the conviction that the executive should be
deprived of the "sole power of raising and regulating fleets and armies"
which blackstone attributed to the king under the british
constitution,[] was emphasized by story in his commentaries. he
wrote: "our notions, indeed, of the dangers of standing armies, in time
of peace, are derived in a great measure from the principles and
examples of our english ancestors. in england, the king possessed the
power of raising armies in the time of peace according to his own good
pleasure. and this prerogative was justly esteemed dangerous to the
public liberties. upon the revolution of , parliament wisely
insisted upon a bill of rights, which should furnish an adequate
security for the future. but how was this done? not by prohibiting
standing armies altogether in time of peace; but (as has been already
seen) by prohibiting them without the consent of parliament. this is
the very proposition contained in the constitution; for congress can
alone raise armies; and may put them down, whenever they choose."[]
prompted by the fear of standing armies to which story alluded, the
framers inserted the limitation that "no appropriation of money to that
use shall be for a longer term than two years." in  the question
arose whether this provision would be violated if the government
contracted to pay a royalty for use of a patent in constructing guns and
other equipment where the payments were likely to continue for more than
two years. solicitor-general hoyt ruled that such a contract would be
lawful; that the appropriations limited by the constitution "are those
only which are to raise and support armies in the strict sense of the
word 'support,' and that the inhibition of that clause does not extend
to appropriations for the various means which an army may use in
military operations, or which are deemed necessary for the common
defense, ***"[] relying on this earlier opinion, [pg ]attorney
general clark ruled in  that there was "no legal objection to a
request to the congress to appropriate funds to the air force for the
procurement of aircraft and aeronautical equipment to remain available
until expended."[]
by the national security act of [] there was established within
the national military establishment "an executive department to be known
as the department of the air force" which was made coordinate with the
departments of the army and the navy. shortly after the passage of this
act a joint resolution was offered in the house of representatives,
proposing an amendment to the constitution whereby congress would be
authorized to "provide and maintain an air force and to make rules for
the government and regulation thereof," and the president would be
designated as commander in chief of the air force.[] apparently in
the belief that the broad sweep of the war power warranted the creation
of the air force, without a constitutional amendment, congress took no
action on this proposal.
the constitutions adopted during the revolutionary war by at least nine
of the states sanctioned compulsory military service.[] towards the
end of the war of , conscription of men for the army was proposed by
james monroe, then secretary of war, but opposition developed and peace
came before the bill could be enacted.[] in  a compulsory draft
law was adopted and put into operation without being challenged in the
federal courts.[] not so the selective service act of . this
measure was attacked on the grounds that it tended to deprive the states
of the right to "a well-regulated militia," that the only power of
congress to exact compulsory service was the power to provide for
calling forth the militia for the three purposes specified in the
constitution, which did not comprehend service abroad, and finally that
the compulsory draft imposed involuntary servitude in violation of the
thirteenth amendment. the supreme court rejected all of these
contentions. it held that the powers of the states with respect to the
militia were exercised in subordination to the paramount power of the
national government to raise and support armies, and that the power of
congress to mobilize an army was distinct from its authority to provide
for calling the militia and was not qualified or in any wise limited
thereby.[] before the united states entered the first world war, the
court had anticipated the objection that compulsory military service
would violate the thirteenth amendment and had answered it in the
following words: "it introduced no novel [pg ]doctrine with respect of
services always treated as exceptional, and certainly was not intended
to interdict enforcement of those duties which individuals owe to the
state, such as services in the army, militia, on the jury, etc. the
great purpose in view was liberty under the protection of effective
government, not the destruction of the latter by depriving it of
essential powers."[] accordingly, in the selective draft law
cases[] it dismissed the objection under that amendment as a
contention that was "refuted by its mere statement."[]
congress has a plenary and exclusive power to determine the age at which
a soldier or seaman shall be received, the compensation he shall be
allowed and the service to which he shall be assigned. this power may be
exerted to supersede parents' control of minor sons who are needed for
military service. where the statute which required the consent of
parents for enlistment of a minor son did not permit such consent to be
qualified, their attempt to impose a condition that the son carry war
risk insurance for the benefit of his mother was not binding on the
government.[] since the possession of government insurance payable
to the person of his choice, is calculated to enhance the morale of the
serviceman, congress may permit him to designate any beneficiary he
desires, irrespective of state law, and may exempt the proceeds from the
claims of creditors.[] to safeguard the health and welfare of the
armed forces, congress may authorize the suppression of houses of ill
fame in the vicinity of the places where such forces are
stationed.[]
under its power to make rules for the government and regulation of the
land and naval forces, congress may provide for the trial and punishment
of military and naval offenses in the manner practiced by civilized
nations. this authority is independent of the judicial power conferred
by article iii.[] "cases arising in the land and naval forces" are
expressly excepted from the provision of the fifth amendment requiring
presentment by a grand jury for capital or infamous and by implication
they are also excepted from amendment [pg ]vi,[] which relates to the
trial of criminal offenses. also the fifth amendment's provision against
double-jeopardy apparently does not apply to military courts.[] a
statute which provided that offenses not specifically mentioned therein
should be punished "according to the laws and customs of such cases at
sea" was held sufficient to give a naval court-martial jurisdiction to
try a seaman of the united states navy for the unspecified offense of
attempted desertion.[] in habeas corpus proceedings a court can
consider only whether the military tribunal had jurisdiction to act in
the case under consideration.[] the acts of a court-martial, within
the scope of its jurisdiction and duty, cannot be controlled or reviewed
in the civil courts, by a writ of prohibition or otherwise.[]
war legislation
the american revolution affords many precedents for extensive and
detailed regulation of the nation's economy in time of war. but since
the resolves of congress under the articles of confederation were in
practical effect mere recommendations to the state legislatures, it was
the action of the latter which made these policies effective. on
november , , for example, congress recommended to the states that
they take steps "to regulate and ascertain the price of labour,
manufactures, [and] internal produce."[] a month later the same body
further recommended "to the respective legislatures of the united
states, forthwith to enact laws, appointing suitable persons to seize
and take, for the use of the continental army of the said states, all
woolen cloths, blankets, linens, shoes, stockings, hats, and other
necessary articles of clothing, ***"[] responding to such
appeals, or acting on their own initiative, the state legislatures
enacted measure after measure which entrenched upon the normal life of
the community very drastically. laws were passed forbidding the
distillation of whiskey and other spirits in order to conserve grain
supplies;[] fixing prices of labor and commodities, sometimes in
greatest detail;[] levying requisitions upon the inhabitants for
supplies needed by the army;[] and so on. in one instance a statute
authorized the erection of an arms manufactory for the united
states;[] in another, negro slaves were impressed for labor on
fortifications.[] the fact that all this legislation came from the
state legislatures whereas the war power was attributed to the "united
states in congress assembled" [pg ]served to obscure the fact that the
former was really an outgrowth of the latter.
the most pressing economic problem of the civil war was that of finance.
when congress found itself unable to raise money to pay the soldiers in
the field, it authorized the issuance of treasury notes which, although
not redeemable in specie, were made legal tender in payment of private
debts. upon its first consideration of this measure, the supreme court
held it unconstitutional. it concluded that even if the circulation of
such notes was facilitated by giving them the quality of legal tender,
that result did not suffice to make the expedient an appropriate and
plainly adapted means for the execution of the power to declare and
carry on war.[] three of the seven justices then constituting the
court dissented from this decision,[] and it was reversed within a
little more than a year, after two vacancies in the membership of the
court had been filled. one of the grounds relied upon by the new
majority to sustain the statute was that the exigencies of war justified
its enactment under the necessary and proper clause.[]
in meeting the strain which world war i put on our national resources of
men and material, the economic activities of the people were directed or
restricted by the government on a scale previously unparalleled. the
most sweeping measure of control was the lever food and fuel control
act,[] which authorized the president to regulate by license the
importation, manufacture, storage, mining or distribution of
necessaries; to requisition foods, feeds, and fuels; to take over and
operate factories, packinghouses, pipelines, mines or other plants; to
fix a minimum price for wheat; to limit, regulate or prohibit the use of
food materials in the production of alcoholic beverages; and to fix the
price of coal and coke and to regulate the production, sale and
distribution thereof. other statutes clothed him with power to determine
priority in car service,[] to license trade with the enemy and his
allies,[] and to take over and operate the rail and water
[pg ]transportation system,[] and the telephonic and telegraphic
communication systems,[] of the country.
several of these world war i measures were still on the statute books
when world war ii broke out. moreover, in the period of preparation
preceding the latter, congress had enacted the priorities act of may ,
[] which gave the president power to allocate any material where
necessary to facilitate the defense effort. by the second war powers
act,[] passed early in , the authority to allocate materials was
extended to facilities. these two acts furnished the statutory
foundation for the extensive system of consumer rationing administered
by the office of price administration, as well as for the comprehensive
control of industrial materials and output which was exercised by the
war production board. under the emergency price control act[] the
office of price administration regulated the price of almost all
commodities, as well as the rentals for housing accommodations in scores
of defense rental areas. the war labor disputes act[] permitted the
president to commandeer plants which were closed by strikes.
while the validity of several of the measures just reviewed was assailed
on one constitutional ground or another, the general power of congress
to regulate their subject matter in time of war was not disputed. not
until the government sought to recover excessive profits realized on war
contracts did the supreme court have occasion to affirm the broad
authority of the national government to mobilize the industrial
resources of the nation in time of war. using the power of congress to
conscript men for the armed forces as a measure of its power to regulate
industry, the court sustained the legislation, saying: "the
renegotiation act was developed as a major wartime policy of congress
comparable to that of the selective service act. the authority of
congress to authorize each of them sprang from its war powers. ***
with the advent of *** [global] warfare, mobilized property in the
form of equipment and supplies became as essential as mobilized
manpower. mobilization of effort extended not only to the uniformed
armed services but to the entire population. both acts were a form of
mobilization. the language of the [pg ]constitution authorizing such
measures is broad rather than restrictive. *** [it] *** places
emphasis upon the supporting as well as upon the raising of armies. the
power of congress as to both is inescapably express, not merely
implied."[]
while insisting that, "in peace or in war it is essential that the
constitution be scrupulously obeyed, and particularly that the
respective branches of the government keep within the powers assigned to
each,"[] the supreme court has recognized that in the conduct of a
war delegations of power may be valid which would not be admissible in
other circumstances. the cases in which this issue has been raised have
been few in number. in one, the selective draft law cases,[] the
objection was dismissed without discussion. in a second, the
price-fixing authority exercised by the office of price administration
during the second world war, was, on the issue of delegation of power,
sustained by reference to peace time precedents.[] where the war
power has been the basis of decision, two different theories concerning
its significance can be recognized. the first is that since the war
power is an inherent power shared by the legislative and executive
departments rather than an enumerated power granted to the former,
congress does not delegate legislative power when it authorizes the
president to exercise the war power in a prescribed manner. opposed to
this is the view that the right of congress to delegate power to the
president is limited in this as in other cases but that where the
validity of the delegation depends upon whether or not too great a
latitude of discretion has been conferred upon the executive, the
existence of a state of war is a factor to be considered in determining
whether the delegation in the particular case is necessary and hence
permissible.
the idea that a delegation of discretion in the exercise of the war
power stands on a different footing than delegation of authority to levy
a tax is implicit in justice bradley's opinion in hamilton v.
dillin.[] the plaintiffs in that case contended that the sum they
were required to pay for the privileges of buying cotton in the south
was a tax, which, since it was imposed by the secretary of the treasury,
was invalid because the taxing power was not susceptible of delegation
to the executive department. to this argument the court replied: "it is
hardly necessary, under the view we have taken of the character of the
regulations in question, ***, to discuss the question of [pg ]the
constitutionality of the act of july th, , regarded as authorizing
such regulations. ***, the power of the government to impose such
conditions upon commercial intercourse with an enemy in time of war
*** does not belong to the same category as the power to levy and
collect taxes, duties, and excises. it belongs to the war powers of the
government ***."[]
the mergence of legislative and executive in wartime
both theories receive countenance in different passages in the opinion
of chief justice stone in hirabayashi v. united states.[] in
disposing of the contention that the curfew imposed upon a citizen of
japanese descent involved an invalid delegation of legislative power,
the chief justice said: "the question then is not one of congressional
power to delegate to the president the promulgation of the executive
order, but whether, acting in cooperation, congress and the executive
have constitutional authority to impose the curfew restriction here
complained of. ***, we conclude that it was within the constitutional
power of congress and the executive arm of the government to prescribe
this curfew order for the period under consideration and that its
promulgation by the military commander involved no unlawful delegation
of legislative power. *** where, as in the present case, the standard
set up for the guidance of the military commander, and the action taken
and the reasons for it, are in fact recorded in the military orders, so
that congress, the courts and the public are assured that the orders, in
the judgment of the commander, conform to the standards approved by the
president and congress, there is no failure in the performance of the
legislative function."[] he went on to say, however, that: "the
essentials of [the legislative] *** function are the determination by
congress of the legislative policy and its approval of a rule of conduct
to carry that policy into execution. the very necessities which attend
the conduct of military operations in time of war in this instance as in
many others preclude congress from holding committee meetings to
determine whether there is danger, before it enacts legislation to
combat the danger."[]
doctrine of lichter v. united states
a similar ambiguity is found in lichter v. united states,[] but on
the whole the opinion seems to espouse the second theory, as the
following excerpts indicate: "a constitutional power implies a power of
delegation of authority under it sufficient to effect its
purposes.[pg ]—this power is especially significant in connection with
constitutional war powers under which the exercise of broad discretion
as to methods to be employed may be essential to an effective use of its
war powers by congress. the degree to which congress must specify its
policies and standards in order that the administrative authority
granted may not be an unconstitutional delegation of its own legislative
power is not capable of precise definition.[] *** thus, while the
constitutional structure and controls of our government are our guides
equally in war and in peace, they must be read with the realistic
purposes of the entire instrument fully in mind. in , in the early
stages of total global warfare, the exercise of a war power such as the
power 'to raise and support armies, ***' and 'to provide and maintain
a navy; ***,' called for the production by us of war goods in
unprecedented volume with the utmost speed, combined with flexibility of
control over the product and with a high degree of initiative on the
part of the producers. faced with the need to exercise that power, the
question was whether it was beyond the constitutional power of congress
to delegate to the high officials named therein the discretion contained
in the original renegotiation act of april , , and the amendments
of october , . we believe that the administrative authority there
granted was well within the constitutional war powers then being put to
their predestined uses."[]
to some indeterminate extent the power to wage war embraces the power to
prepare for it and the further power to deal with the problem of
adjustment after hostilities have ceased. in his commentaries, justice
story wrote as follows with specific reference to the question of
preparation for war: "'it is important also to consider, that the surest
means of avoiding war is to be prepared for it in peace. *** how could
a readiness for war in time of peace be safely prohibited, unless we
could in like manner prohibit the preparations and establishments of
every hostile nation? the means of security can be only regulated by the
means and the danger of attack. *** it will be in vain to oppose
constitutional barriers to the impulse of self-preservation.'"[]
authoritative judicial recognition of the power is found in ashwander
v. tennessee valley authority,[] where, in sustaining the power of
the government to construct and operate wilson dam and the power plant
connected with it, pursuant to the national defense act of june ,
,[] the court said: "while the district court found that there
is no intention to use the nitrate plants or the hydroelectric units
installed at wilson dam for the production of war materials in time of
peace, 'the [pg ]maintenance of said properties in operating condition and
the assurance of an abundant supply of electric energy in the event of
war, constitute national defense assets.' this finding has ample
support."[]
atomic energy act
by far the most significant example of legislation adopted at a time
when no actual "shooting war" was in progress, with the object of
providing for the national defense, is the atomic energy act of
.[] that law establishes an atomic energy commission of five
members which is empowered to conduct through its own facilities, or by
contracts with, or loans to private persons, research and developmental
activity relating to nuclear processes, the theory and production of
atomic energy and the utilization of fissionable and radioactive
materials for medical, industrial and other purposes. the act further
provides that the commission shall be the exclusive owner of all
facilities (with minor exceptions) for the production of fissionable
materials; that all fissionable material produced shall become its
property; that it shall allocate such materials for research and
developmental activities, and shall license all transfer of source
materials. the commission is charged with the duty of producing atomic
bombs, bomb parts, and other atomic military weapons at the direction of
the president. patents relating to fissionable materials must be filed
with the commission, the "just compensation" payable to the owners to be
determined by a patent compensation board designated by the commission
from among its employees.
the war power "is not limited to victories in the field. *** it
carries with it inherently the power to guard against the immediate
renewal of the conflict, and to remedy the evils which have arisen from
its rise and progress."[] accordingly, the supreme court held in
 that it was within the competence of congress to deduct from the
period limited by statute for the bringing of an action the time during
which plaintiff had been unable to prosecute his suit in consequence of
the civil war. this principle was given a much broader application after
the first world war in hamilton v. kentucky distilleries and wine
co.,[] where the war time prohibition act adopted after the signing
of the armistice was upheld as an appropriate measure for increasing war
efficiency. it was conceded that the measure was valid when enacted,
since the mere cessation of hostilities did not end the war or terminate
the war powers of congress. the plaintiff contended however that in
october , when the suit was brought, the [pg ]war emergency had in fact
passed, and that the law was therefore obsolete. inasmuch as the treaty
of peace had not yet been concluded and other war activities had not
been brought to a close, the court said it was "unable to conclude" that
the act had ceased to be valid. but in  it held upon the facts that
we judicially know that the rent control law for the district of
columbia, which had previously been upheld,[] had ceased to operate
because the emergency which justified it had come to an end.[] a
similar issue was present after world war ii in woods v. miller,[]
where the supreme court reversed a decision of a lower court to the
effect that the authority of congress to regulate rents by virtue of the
war power ended with the presidential proclamation terminating
hostilities on december , . this decision was coupled with a
warning that: "we recognize the force of the argument that the effects
of war under modern conditions may be felt in the economy for years and
years, and that if the war power can be used in days of peace to treat
all the wounds which war inflicts on our society, it may not only
swallow up all other powers of congress but largely obliterate the ninth
and the tenth amendments as well. there are no such implications in
today's decision."[] in , a sharply divided court further ruled
that the power which congress has conferred upon the president to deport
enemy aliens in time of a declared war was not exhausted when the
shooting war stopped. speaking for the majority of five, justice
frankfurter declared: "it is not for us to question a belief by the
president that enemy aliens who were justifiably deemed fit subjects for
internment during active hostilites [sic] do not lose their potency for
mischief during the period of confusion and conflict which is
characteristic of a state of war even when the guns are silent but the
peace of peace has not come."[]
private rights in wartime
although, broadly speaking, the constitutional provisions designed for
the protection of individual rights are operative in war as well as in
peace, the incidents of war repeatedly give rise to situations in which
judicially enforceable constitutional restraints are inapplicable. in
the first place persons in enemy territory are entirely beyond the reach
of constitutional limitations. they are subject, in [pg ]relation to the war
powers of the national government, to the laws of war as interpreted and
applied by congress and by the president as commander in chief. to the
question: "what is the law which governs an army invading an enemy's
country?" the court gave the following answer in dow v. johnson:[]
"it is not the civil law of the invaded country; it is not the civil law
of the conquering country: it is military law,—the law of war,—and its
supremacy for the protection of the officers and soldiers of the army,
when in service in the field in the enemy's country, is as essential to
the efficiency of the army as the supremacy of the civil law at home,
and, in time of peace, is essential to the preservation of
liberty."[]
that substantially the same rule, resting on the same considerations,
applies in the field of active military operations, was assumed by all
members of the court in ex parte milligan.[] there the court held
that the trial by a military commission of a civilian charged with acts
of disloyalty committed in a part of the country which was remote from
the theatre of military operations, and in which the civil courts were
open and functioning, was invalid under the fifth and sixth amendments.
although unanimous in holding that the military tribunal lacked
jurisdiction to try the case, the court divided, five-to-four, as to the
grounds of the decision. the point on which the justices differed was
which department of the government had authority to say with finality
what regions lie within the theatre of military operation. claiming this
as a function of the courts, the majority held that the theatre of war
did not embrace an area in which the civil courts were open and
functioning.[] the minority argued that this was a question to be
determined by congress.[] all rejected the argument of the
government that the president's determination was conclusive in the
absence of restraining legislation. a similar result was reached in
duncan v. kahanamoku[] where, upon an examination of the
circumstances existing in hawaii after pearl harbor, a divided court
found that the authority which congress had granted to the territorial
governor to declare martial law "in case of rebellion or invasion, or
imminent danger thereof," did not warrant the trial of civilians by
military tribunals.
the position of enemy property was dealt with by chief justice marshall
in the early case of brown v. united states.[] here it was held
that the mere declaration of war by congress does not effect a
[pg ]confiscation of enemy property situated within the territorial
jurisdiction of the united states, but the right of congress by further
enactment to subject such property to confiscation was asserted in the
most positive terms. being an exercise of the war powers of the
government, such confiscation is not affected by the restrictions of the
fifth and sixth amendments. since it has no relation to the personal
guilt of the owner, it is immaterial whether the property belongs to an
alien, a neutral, or even to a citizen of the united states. the whole
doctrine of confiscation is built upon the foundation that it is an
instrument of coercion, which, by depriving an enemy of property within
the reach of his power, whether within his territory or without it,
impairs his ability to resist the confiscating government, while at the
same time it furnishes to that government means for carrying on the war.
any property which the enemy can use, either by actual appropriation, or
by the exercise of control over the owner, no matter what his
nationality, is a proper subject of confiscation. congress may provide
for immediate seizure of property which the president or his agent
determines to be enemy property, leaving the question of enemy ownership
to be settled later at the suit of a claimant. for these reasons the
confiscation act of ,[] and the trading with the enemy act of
 and amendments thereto, were held to be within the power of
congress to "make rules concerning captures on land and water."[]
the power of congress with respect to prizes is plenary; no one can have
any interest in prizes captured except by permission of congress.[]
nevertheless, since international law is a part of our law, the court
will administer it so long as it has not been modified by treaty or by
legislative or executive action. thus, during the civil war, the court
found that the confiscation act of , and the supplementary act of
, which, in authorizing the condemnation of vessels, made provision
for the protection of interests of loyal citizens, merely created a
municipal forfeiture and did not override or displace the law of prize.
it decided, therefore, that when a vessel was liable to condemnation
under either law, the government was at liberty to proceed under the
more stringent rules of international law, with the result that the
citizen would be deprived of the benefit of the protective provisions of
the statute.[] similarly, when cuban ports were blockaded during the
spanish-american war, the court held, over the vigorous dissent of three
of its members, that the rule [pg ]of international law exempting unarmed
fishing vessels from capture was applicable in the absence of any treaty
provision, or other public act of the government in relation to the
subject.[]
in enforcing the requirement of due process of law in its modern
expanded sense of "reasonable law" the court has recognized that a war
emergency may justify legislation which would otherwise be an
unconstitutional invasion of private rights. shortly after the first
world war, it sustained, by a narrow margin, a rent control law for the
district of columbia, which not merely limited the rents which might be
charged but which also gave the existing tenants the right to continue
in occupancy of their dwellings at their own option, provided they paid
rent and performed other stipulated conditions. the court, while
conceding that ordinarily such legislation would transcend
constitutional limitations, declared that "a public exigency will
justify the legislature in restricting property rights in land to a
certain extent without compensation. *** a limit in time, to tide over
a passing trouble, well may justify a law that could not be upheld as a
permanent change."[] during world war ii an apartment house owner
who complained that the rentals allowed by the office of price
administration did not afford a "fair return" on the property was told
by the court that, "a nation which can demand the lives of its men and
women in the waging of *** war is under no constitutional necessity of
providing a system of price control *** which will assure each
landlord a 'fair return' on his property."[] moreover, such rentals
may be established without a prior hearing because "national security
might not be able to afford the luxuries of litigation and the long
delays which preliminary hearings traditionally have entailed. ***
where congress has provided for judicial review after the regulations or
orders have been made effective it has done all that due process under
the war emergency requires."[] the more specific clauses of the bill
of rights yield less readily, however, to the impact of a war emergency.
in united states v. cohen grocery company,[] the court held that a
statute which penalized the making of "'any unjust or unreasonable rate
or charge in handling *** any necessaries,'" was void on the ground
that it set up no "ascertainable standard of guilt" and so was
"repugnant to the fifth and sixth amendments *** which require due
process of law and that persons accused of crime shall be adequately
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation."[]
[pg ]
that the power of congress to punish seditious utterances in time of war
is limited by the first amendment was assumed by the supreme court in
the series of cases[] in which it affirmed convictions for violation
of the espionage act of .[] but in the famous opinion of justice
holmes in schenck v. united states,[] it held that: "when a nation
is at war many things that might be said in time of peace are such a
hindrance to its effort that their utterance will not be endured so long
as men fight and that no court could regard them as protected by any
constitutional right."[] a state also has power to make it unlawful
to advocate that citizens of the state should not assist in prosecuting
a war against public enemies of the united states.[] the most
drastic restraint of personal liberty imposed during world war ii was
the detention and relocation of the japanese residents of the western
states, including those who were native-born citizens of the united
states. when various phases of this program were challenged, the court
held that in order to prevent espionage and sabotage, the freedom of
movement of such persons could be restricted by a curfew order,[]
even by a regulation excluding them from a defined area,[] but that
a citizen of japanese ancestry whose loyalty was concerned could not be
detained against her will in a relocation camp.[]
the status of alien enemies was first considered in connection with the
passage of the alien act of ,[] whereby the president was
authorized to deport any alien or to license him to reside within the
united states at any place to be designated by the president. critics of
the measure conceded its constitutionality so far as enemy aliens were
concerned, because, as madison wrote, "the constitution having expressly
delegated to congress the power to declare war against any nation, and,
of course, to treat it and all its members as enemies."[] the
substance of this early law was reenacted during the first world war.
under it the president is authorized, in time of war, to prescribe "the
manner and degree of the restraint to which [alien enemies] shall be
subject and in what cases, and upon what [pg ]security their residence shall
be permitted," or to provide for their removal from the united
states.[] this measure was held valid in ludecke v. watkins.[]
an often-cited dictum uttered shortly after the mexican war asserted the
right of an owner to compensation for property destroyed to prevent its
falling into the hands of the enemy, or for that taken for public
use.[] in united states v. russell,[] decided following the
civil war, a similar conclusion was based squarely on the fifth
amendment, although the case did not necessarily involve the point.
finally, in united states v. pacific railroad,[] also a civil war
case, the court held that the united states was not responsible for the
injury or destruction of private property by military operations, but
added that it did not have in mind claims for property of loyal citizens
which was taken for the use of the national forces. "in such cases," the
court said, "it has been the practice of the government to make
compensation for the property taken. ***, although the seizure and
appropriation of private property under such circumstances by the
military authorities may not be within the terms of the constitutional
clauses."[] meantime, however, in , a committee of the house of
representatives, in an elaborate report on war claims growing out of the
civil war, had voiced the opinion that the fifth amendment embodied the
distinction between a taking of property in the course of military
operations or other urgent military necessity, and other takings for war
purposes, and required compensation of owners in the latter class of
cases.[] in determining what constitutes just compensation for
property requisitioned for war purposes during world war ii, the court
has assumed that the fifth amendment is applicable to such
takings.[]
[pg ]
clause . the congress shall have power *** to provide for calling
forth the militia to execute the laws of the union, suppress
insurrections and repel invasions.
clause . the congress shall have power *** to provide for
organizing, arming, and disciplining, the militia, and for governing
such part of them as may be employed in the service of the united
states, reserving to the states respectively, the appointment of the
officers, and the authority of training the militia according to the
discipline prescribed by congress.
the militia clauses
the states as well as congress may prescribe penalties for failure to
obey the president's call of the militia. they also have a concurrent
power to aid the national government by calls under their own authority,
and in emergencies may use the militia to put down armed
insurrection.[] the federal government may call out the militia in
case of civil war; its authority to suppress rebellion is found in the
power to suppress insurrection and to carry on war.[] the act of
february , ,[] which delegated to the president the power to
call out the militia, was held constitutional.[] a militiaman who
refused to obey such a call was not "employed in the service of the
united states so as to be subject to the article of war," but was liable
to be tried for disobedience of the act of .[]
the power of congress over the militia "being unlimited, except in the
two particulars of officering and training them, ***, it may be
exercised to any extent that may be deemed necessary by congress. ***
the power of the state government to legislate on the same subjects,
having existed prior to the formation of the constitution, and not
having been prohibited by that instrument, it remains with the states,
subordinate nevertheless to the paramount law of the general government,
***"[] under the national defense act of ,[] the militia,
which hitherto had been an almost purely state [pg ]institution, was brought
under the control of the national government. the term "militia of the
united states" was defined to comprehend "all able-bodied male citizens
of the united states and all other able-bodied males who have ***
declared their intention to become citizens of the united states,"
between the ages of eighteen and forty-five. the act reorganized the
national guard, determined its size in proportion to the population of
the several states, required that all enlistments be for "three years in
service and three years in reserve," limited the appointment of officers
to those who "shall have successfully passed such tests as to ***
physical, moral and professional fitness as the president shall
prescribe," and authorized the president in certain emergencies to
"draft into the military service of the united states to serve therein
for the period of the war unless sooner discharged, any and all members
of the national guard and national guard reserve," who thereupon should
"stand discharged from the militia."
clause . congress shall have power *** to exercise exclusive
legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district (not exceeding
ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular states, and the
acceptance of congress, become the seat of the government of the united
states, and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the
consent of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be, for
the erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dock-yards, and other
needful buildings;—and
the seat of government
the jurisdiction of the united states over the district of columbia
vested on the first monday of december, .[] by the act of
february , ,[] the district was divided into two counties and
in the following year the city of washington was erected into a
municipality.[] the present form of government dates from ; all
legislative powers with respect to district affairs are retained by
congress, while an executive board of three commissioners vested with
ordinance powers is appointed by the president.[] as a municipal
corporation, the district has the legal capacity to sue and be
sued.[] but the district commissioners are merely administrative
officers, having only the ministerial powers given them by statute;
accordingly they were [pg ]found to have no power to submit a claim against
the district to arbitration.[]
in ceding the territory which became the district of columbia, both
maryland and virginia provided that the united states should not acquire
any right of property in the soil except by transfer by the individual
owner. this proviso was held not to prevent the federal government from
exercising the power of eminent domain within the district.[] under
the agreement made between the original proprietors of the land on which
the city of washington was laid out, and the commissioners appointed by
the president to survey, define and locate the district for the seat of
government, the united states became the owner in fee of the streets of
the city although the trustees never carried out their agreement to
convey them.[] both the right of dominion and of property of
navigable waters and of the soil under them in the district, which
originally had been granted by charles i, king of england to the lord
proprietary of maryland, and to which maryland succeeded upon the
american revolution, became vested in the united states by the cession
from maryland.[]
originally the district of columbia embraced the maximum area permitted
by the constitution. in , however, congress authorized a referendum
on the question of retroceding alexandria county to virginia, and
declared that jurisdiction should be relinquished to that state if a
majority of the voters in the county voted in favor of the change. the
proposal was approved, whereupon, without any further action by
congress, virginia declared the county annexed and resumed full
jurisdiction over it. thirty years later, in a suit to recover taxes
paid to the state, the supreme court called the retrocession "a
violation of the constitution" but held that since congress had
recognized the transfer as a settled fact, a resident of the county was
estopped from challenging it.[]
[pg ]
under the act of july , ,[] which provided for the
establishment of the seat of government, state laws were continued in
operation until congress created a government for the district. the
supreme court intimated that this was "perhaps, only declaratory of a
principle which would have been in full operation without such
declaration."[] in  congress declared that the laws of virginia
and maryland "as they now exist, shall be and continue in force" in the
respective portions of the district ceded by those states.[] the
only effect of the cession upon individuals was to terminate their state
citizenship and the jurisdiction of the state governments over
them;[] contract obligations were not affected,[] and liens on
property for debt were continued.[]
chief justice marshall ruled in the early case of hepburn v.
ellzey[] that the district of columbia is not a state within the
meaning of the diversity of citizenship clause of article iii. this view
was consistently adhered to for nearly a century and a half in the
interpretation of later acts of congress regulating the jurisdiction of
federal courts.[] in , however, congress expressly authorized
those courts to take jurisdiction of nonfederal controversies between
residents of the district of columbia and citizens of a state. by a
five-to-four decision that statute was held constitutional, but the
justices who voted to sustain it were not in agreement as to the grounds
of the decision.[] three found it to be an appropriate exercise of
the power of congress to legislate for the district of columbia without
reference to article iii.[] six members of the court rejected this
theory, but two of the six joined in upholding the act on another ground
which seven of their brethren considered untenable,—namely, that
hepburn v. ellzey was erroneously decided and that the district of
columbia should be deemed to be a "state" within the meaning of article
iii, section .[]
[pg ]it is not disputed that the district is a part of "the united states,"
and that its residents are entitled to the privilege of trial by jury,
whether in civil or criminal cases,[] and of presentment by a grand
jury.[] legislation which is restrictive of the rights of liberty
and property in the district must find justification in facts adequate
to support like legislation by a state in the exercise of its police
power.[]
congress possesses over the district of columbia the blended powers of a
local and national legislature.[] even when legislating for the
district, congress remains the legislature of the union, with the result
that it may give its enactments nation-wide operations so far as is
"necessary and proper" in order to make them locally effective. as was
pointed out in cohens v. virginia,[] if a felon escapes from the
state in which the crime was committed, the government of such state
cannot pursue him into another state and there apprehend him, "but must
demand him from the executive power of that other state." on the other
hand, a felon escaping from the district of columbia or any other place
subject to the exclusive power of congress, may be apprehended by the
national government anywhere in the united states. "and the reason,"
declared chief justice marshall, "is, that congress is not a local
legislature, but exercises this particular power, [of exclusive
legislation], like all its other powers, in its high character, as the
legislature of the union."[]
persons and property within the district of columbia are subject to
taxation by congress under both the first and seventeenth clauses of
this section. a general tax levied throughout the united states may be
applied to the district of columbia upon the same conditions [pg ]as
elsewhere;—e.g., if a direct tax, it must be levied in proportion to
the census.[] but in laying taxes for district purposes only,
"congress, like any state legislature unrestricted by constitutional
provisions, may its discretion wholly exempt certain classes of property
from taxation, or may tax them at a lower rate than other
property."[] it is no impediment to the exercise of either power
that residents of the district lack the suffrage and have politically no
voice in the expenditure of the money raised by taxation.[]
congress may delegate to municipal authorities legislative functions
which are strictly local in character.[] it may confer upon them the
power to improve or repair streets, to assess adjacent property
therefor,[] and to regulate public markets.[] it may confirm
assessments previously made by the district government without authority
of law.[] but in stoutenburgh v. hennick,[] the court held
that congress would not, and did not intend to, delegate to the district
the power to impose a license tax on commercial agents who offered
merchandise for sale by sample, since such a license amounted to a
regulation of interstate commerce.
in its capacity as a local legislature congress may create courts for
the district of columbia and may confer upon them powers and duties
which lie outside the judicial power vested in "constitutional" courts.
on appeal from an order of the district public utilities commission, a
court for the district of columbia may be empowered to modify
valuations, rates and regulations established by the commission and to
make such orders as in its judgment the commission should have made. but
inasmuch as the issuance of such orders is a legislative as
distinguished from a judicial function, the provision for an appeal from
them to the supreme court was held unconstitutional.[]
despite the fact that congress, acting under this clause, imposed
nonjudicial duties upon the supreme court and the court of appeals [pg ]for
the district of columbia, those tribunals were held to be constitutional
courts, established under article iii, with the result that the
compensation of the judges thereof may not be diminished during their
continuance in office.[] since the courts established for the
district are courts of the united states, their judgments stand upon the
same footing, so far as concerns the obligations created by them, as
domestic judgments of the states, wherever rendered and wherever sought
to be enforced.[]
authority over places purchased
this clause has been broadly construed to cover all structures necessary
for carrying on the business of the national government.[] it
includes post offices,[] a hospital and a hotel located in a
national park,[] and locks and dams for the improvement of
navigation.[] but it does not cover lands acquired for forests,
parks, ranges, wild life sanctuaries or flood control.[]
nevertheless the supreme court has held that a state may convey, and
that congress may accept, either exclusive or qualified jurisdiction
over property acquired within the geographical limits of a state, for
purposes other than those enumerated in clause .[]
after exclusive jurisdiction over lands within a state has been ceded to
the united states, congress alone has the power to punish crimes
committed within the ceded territory.[] private property located
thereon is not subject to taxation by the state,[] nor can state
statutes enacted subsequent to the transfer have any operation
therein.[] but the local laws in force at the date of cession which
are protective of private rights continue in force until abrogated by
congress.[]
a state may qualify its cession of territory by a condition that
jurisdiction shall be retained by the united states only so long as the
place is used for specified purposes.[] such a provision operates
[pg ]prospectively and does not except from the grant that portion of a
described tract which is then used as a railroad right of way.[] in
, the court upheld the jurisdiction of the united states to try a
person charged with murder on a military reservation, over the objection
that the state had ceded jurisdiction only over such portions of the
area as were used for military purposes, and that the particular place
on which the murder was committed was used solely for farming. the court
held that the character and purpose of the occupation having been
officially established by the political department of the government, it
was not open to the court to inquire into the actual uses to which any
portion of the area was temporarily put.[] a few years later,
however, it ruled that the lease to a city, for use as a market, of a
portion of an area which had been ceded to the united states for a
particular purpose, suspended the exclusive jurisdiction of the united
states.[]
recently the question arose whether the united states retains
jurisdiction over a place which was ceded to it unconditionally after it
has abandoned the use of the property for governmental purposes and
entered into a contract for the sale thereof to private persons.
minnesota asserted the right to tax the equitable interest of the
purchaser in such land, and the supreme court upheld its right to do so.
the majority assumed that "the government's unrestricted transfer of
property to nonfederal hands is a relinquishment of the exclusive
legislative power."[] in separate concurring opinions chief justice
stone and justice frankfurter reserved judgment on the question of
territorial jurisdiction.[]
for more than a century the supreme court kept alive, by repeated
dicta,[] the doubt expressed by justice story "whether congress are
by the terms of the constitution, at liberty to purchase lands for
forts, dockyards, etc., with the consent of a state legislature, where
such consent is so qualified that it will not justify the 'exclusive
legislation' of congress there. it may well be doubted if such consent
be not utterly void."[] but when the issue was squarely presented in
, the court ruled that where the united states purchases property
within a state with the consent of the latter, it is valid for the state
to convey, and for the united states to accept, "concurrent
jurisdiction" over such land, the state reserving to itself the right to
execute process "and such other jurisdiction and authority over the same
as is not inconsistent with the jurisdiction ceded to the united
states."[] [pg ]the holding logically renders the second half of clause
 superfluous. in a companion case, the court ruled further that even
if a general state statute purports to cede exclusive jurisdiction, such
jurisdiction does not pass unless the united states accepts it.[]
clause . the congress shall have power *** to make all laws which
shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing
powers, and all other powers vested by this constitution in the
government of the united states, or in any department or officer
thereof.
the coefficient or elastic clause
that this clause is an enlargement, not a constriction, of the powers
expressly granted to congress, that it enables the lawmakers to select
any means reasonably adapted to effectuate those powers, was established
by marshall's classic opinion in mcculloch v. maryland.[] "let the
end be legitimate," he wrote, "let it be within the scope of the
constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly
adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the
letter and spirit of the constitution, are constitutional."[]
moreover, this provision gives congress a share in the responsibilities
lodged in other departments, by virtue of its right to enact legislation
necessary to carry into execution all powers vested in the national
government. conversely, where necessary for the efficient execution of
its own powers, congress may delegate some measure of legislative power
to other departments.[]
[pg ]
practically every power of the national government has been expanded in
some degree by the coefficient clause. under its authority congress has
adopted measures requisite to discharge the treaty obligations of the
nation;[] it has organized the federal judicial system and has
enacted a large body of law defining and punishing crimes. effective
control of the national economy has been made possible by the authority
to regulate the internal commerce of a state to the extent necessary to
protect and promote interstate commerce.[] likewise the right of
congress to utilize all known and appropriate means for collecting the
revenue, including the distraint of property for federal taxes,[]
and its power to acquire property needed for the operation of the
government by the exercise of the power of eminent domain,[] have
greatly extended the range of national power. but the widest application
of the necessary and proper clause has occurred in the field of monetary
and fiscal controls. inasmuch as the various specific powers granted by
article i, section , do not add up to a general legislative power over
such matters, the court has relied heavily upon this clause in
sustaining the comprehensive control which congress has asserted over
this subject.[]
although the only crimes which congress is expressly authorized to
punish are piracies, felonies on the high seas, offenses against the law
of nations, treason and counterfeiting of the securities and current
coin of the united states, its power to create, define and punish crimes
and offenses whenever necessary to effectuate the objects of the federal
government is universally conceded.[] illustrative of the offenses
which have been punished under this power are the alteration of
registered bonds;[] the bringing of counterfeit bonds into the
country;[] conspiracy to injure prisoners in custody of a united
states marshal;[] impersonation of a federal officer with intent to
defraud;[] conspiracy to injure a citizen in the free exercise or
enjoyment of any right or privilege secured by the constitution or laws
of the united states;[] the receipt by government officials of
contributions from government employees for political purposes;[]
advocating, etc., the overthrow of the government by force.[] part i
of title  of the united states code comprises more than  sections
defining penal offenses against the united states.
[pg ]
as an appropriate means for executing "the great powers, to lay and
collect taxes; to borrow money; to regulate commerce; to declare and
conduct a war; and to raise and support armies ***" congress may
incorporate banks and kindred institutions.[] moreover, it may
confer upon them private powers which, standing alone, have no relation
to the functions of the federal government, if those privileges are
essential to the effective operation of such corporations.[] where
necessary to meet the competition of state banks, congress may authorize
national banks to perform fiduciary functions, even though, apart from
the competitive situation, federal instrumentalities might not be
permitted to engage in such business.[] the court will not undertake
to assess the relative importance of the public and private functions of
a financial institution which congress has seen fit to create. it
sustained the act setting up the federal farm loan banks to provide
funds for mortgage loans on agricultural land against the contention
that the right of the secretary of the treasury, which he had not
exercised, to use these banks as depositaries of public funds, was
merely a pretext for chartering these banks for private purposes.[]
reinforced by the necessary and proper clause, the powers "'to lay and
collect taxes, to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and
general welfare of the united states,' and 'to borrow money on the
credit of the united states and to coin money and regulate the value
thereof ***'";[] have been held to give congress virtually
complete control over money and currency. a prohibitive tax on the
[pg ]notes of state banks;[] the issuance of treasury notes impressed
with the quality of legal tender in payment of private debts[] and
the abrogation of clauses in private contracts which called for payment
in gold coin,[] were sustained as appropriate measures for carrying
into effect some or all of the foregoing powers.
in addition to the creation of banks, congress has been held to have
authority to charter a railroad corporation,[] or a corporation to
construct an interstate bridge,[] as instrumentalities for promoting
commerce among the states, and to create corporations to manufacture
aircraft[] or merchant vessels[] as incidental to the war power.
inasmuch as the constitution "delineated only the great outlines of the
judicial power ***, leaving the details to congress, *** the
distribution and appropriate exercise of the judicial power must ***
be made by laws passed by congress, ***"[] as a necessary and
proper provision for the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred by
article iii, section  congress may direct the removal from a state to a
federal court of a criminal prosecution against a federal officer for
acts done under color of federal law,[] and may authorize the
removal before trial of civil cases arising under the laws of the united
states.[] it may prescribe the effect to be given to judicial
proceedings of the federal courts,[] and may make all laws necessary
for carrying into execution the judgments of federal courts.[] when
a territory is admitted as a state, congress may designate the court to
which the records of the territorial courts shall be transferred, and
may prescribe the mode for enforcement and review of judgments rendered
by those courts.[] in the exercise of other powers conferred by the
constitution, apart from article iii, congress may create legislative
courts and "clothe them with functions deemed essential or helpful in
carrying those powers into execution."[]
[pg ]
this clause enables congress to pass special laws to require other
departments of the government to prosecute or adjudicate particular
claims, whether asserted by the government itself or by private persons.
in ,[] congress adopted a joint resolution directing the
president to cause suit to be instituted for the cancellation of certain
oil leases alleged to have been obtained from the government by fraud,
and to prosecute such other actions and proceedings, civil and criminal,
as were warranted by the facts. this resolution also authorized the
appointment of special counsel to have charge of such litigation.
private acts providing for a review of an order for compensation under
the longshoreman's and harbor workers' compensation act,[] or
conferring jurisdiction upon the court of claims to hear and determine
certain claims of a contractor against the government, in conformity
with directions given by congress, after that court had denied recovery
on such claims, have been held constitutional.[]
congress may implement the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction conferred
upon the federal courts by revising and amending the maritime law which
existed at the time the constitution was adopted, but in so doing, it
cannot go beyond the reach of that jurisdiction.[] this power cannot
be delegated to the states; hence acts of congress which purported to
make state workmen's compensation laws applicable to maritime cases were
held unconstitutional.[]
[pg ]
section . clause . the migration or importation of such
persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper to admit,
shall not be prohibited by the congress prior to the year one thousand
eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may be imposed on such
importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.
powers denied to congress
this section of the constitution (containing eight clauses restricting
or prohibiting legislation affecting the importation of slaves, the
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, the enactment of bills of
attainder or ex post facto laws, the levying of taxes on exports, the
granting of preference to ports of one state over another, the granting
of titles of nobility, etc.,) is devoted to restraints upon the power of
congress and of the national government,[] and in no respect affects
the states in the regulation of their domestic affairs.[]
the above clause, which sanctioned the importation of slaves by the
states for twenty years after the adoption of the constitution, when
considered with the section requiring escaped slaves to be returned to
their masters (art. iv, §, cl. ), was held by chief justice taney in
scott v. sanford,[] to show conclusively that such persons and
their descendants were not embraced within the term "citizen" as used in
the constitution. today is interesting only as an historical curiosity.
clause . the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be
suspended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public
safety may require it.
purpose of the writ
this section, which restricts only the federal government and not the
states,[] is the only place in the constitution where the writ of
habeas corpus is mentioned. the framers took for granted that the
courts of the united states would be given jurisdiction to issue this,
the greatest of the safeguards of personal liberty embodied in the
common law, and the judiciary act of [] provided for the
issuance of the writ according to "the usages and principles of law." at
common [pg ]law the purpose of such a proceeding was to obtain the
liberation of persons who were imprisoned without just cause.[]
while the supreme court conceded at an early date that the authority of
the federal courts to entertain petitions for habeas corpus derived
solely from acts of congress,[] a narrow majority recently asserted
the right to expand the scope of the writ by judicial interpretation and
to sanction its use for a purpose unknown to the common law, i.e., to
bring a prisoner into court to argue his own appeal. speaking for the
majority justice murphy declared that: "however, we do not conceive that
a circuit court of appeals, in issuing a writ of habeas corpus under
§ of the judicial code, is necessarily confined to the precise forms
of that writ in vogue at the common law or in the english judicial
system. section  says that the writ must be agreeable to the usages
and principles of 'law,' a term which is unlimited by the common law or
the english law. and since 'law' is not a static concept, but expands
and develops as new problems arise, we do not believe that the forms of
the habeas corpus writ authorized by § are only those recognized
in this country in , when the original judiciary act containing the
substance of this section came into existence."[]
errors which may be corrected on habeas corpus
the writ of habeas corpus provides a remedy for jurisdictional and
constitutional errors at the trial without limit as to time.[] it
may be used to correct errors of that order made by military as well as
by civil courts.[] under the common law and the act  car. ii c. 
(), where a person was detained pursuant to a conviction by a court
having jurisdiction of the subject matter, habeas corpus was available
only if a want of jurisdiction appeared on the face of the record of the
court which convicted him. a showing in a return to a writ that the
prisoner was held under final process based upon a judgment of a court
of competent jurisdiction closed the inquiry.[] under the judiciary
act of [] the same rule obtained.[] but by the act of
february , ,[] congress extended the writ to all persons
restrained of their liberty in violation of the constitution or a law or
treaty of the united states, and required the court to ascertain the
facts and to "dispose of the party as law and justice require." this
gave the prisoner a right to have a judicial inquiry in a court of the
united states into the very truth and substance of the causes of his
detention. the supreme court has said that there is "no doubt of the
authority of the congress to thus liberalize the common law procedure on
habeas corpus ***" .[]
[pg ]
habeas corpus not a substitute for appeal
since the writ of habeas corpus is appellate in nature, congress may
confer jurisdiction to issue it upon the supreme court as well as upon
the inferior federal courts.[] the proceeding may not, however, be
used as a substitute for an appeal or writ of error.[] but if
special circumstances make it advantageous to use this writ in aid of a
just disposition of a cause pending on appeal it may be used for that
purpose.[] where facts dehors the record, which are not open to
consideration upon appeal, are alleged to show a denial of
constitutional rights, a judicial hearing must be granted to ascertain
the truth or falsity of the allegations.[]
issuance of the writ
on application for a writ of habeas corpus, the court may either issue
the writ, and, on the return, dispose of the case, or it may waive the
issuing of the writ and consider whether, upon the facts presented in
the petition, the prisoner, if brought before it, could be
discharged.[] the proceeding may not be used to secure an
adjudication of a question which, if determined in the prisoner's favor,
could not result in his immediate release.[] a discharge of a
prisoner on habeas corpus is granted only in the exercise of a sound
judicial discretion.[] while the strict doctrine of res judicata
does not apply to this proceeding,[] the court may, in its
discretion, dismiss a petition for habeas corpus where the ground on
which it is sought had been alleged in a prior application, but the
evidence to support it had been unjustifiably withheld for use on a
second attempt if the first failed.[] where the government did not
deny the allegation in a prisoner's fourth petition for habeas corpus,
but sought dismissal of the proceedings on the ground that the prisoner
had abused the writ, the prisoner was held to be entitled to a hearing
to determine whether the charge of abusive use of the writ was well
founded.[]
[pg ]
suspension of the privilege
a critical question under this section is who determines with finality
whether the circumstances warrant suspension of the privilege of the
writ. in england the writ may be suspended only by act of
parliament,[] and in an early case chief justice marshall asserted
that the decision as to when public safety calls for this drastic action
depends "on political considerations, on which the legislature is to
decide."[] at the beginning of the civil war lincoln authorized the
commanding general of the army of the united states to suspend the writ
along any military line between philadelphia and washington.[] in ex
parte merryman,[] chief justice taney strongly denounced the
president's action and reasserted the proposition that only congress
could suspend the writ. attorney general bates promptly challenged
taney's opinion. noting that in ex parte bollman, marshall did "not
speak of suspending the privilege of the writ, but of suspending the
powers vested in the court by the act," he took the position that the
constitutional provision was itself the equivalent of an act of
parliament.[] thereafter, by an express provision of the act of
march , , congress declared, "that, during the present rebellion,
the president of the united states, whenever, in his judgment, the
public safety may require it, is authorized to suspend the privilege of
the writ of habeas corpus in any case throughout the united states, or
any part thereof."[] the validity of this statute was assumed in ex
parte milligan,[] but a narrow majority of the court declared that
the suspension of the writ did not authorize the arrest of any one, but
simply denied to one arrested the privilege of the writ in order to
obtain his liberty.[]
clause . no bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.
historically, the term "bills of attainder" was applied to "such special
acts of the legislature as inflict capital punishment upon persons
supposed to be guilty of high offences, such as treason and felony,
without any conviction in the ordinary course of judicial proceedings."
[pg ]an act which inflicted a milder degree of punishment was called a bill
of pains and penalties.[] within the meaning of the constitution,
however, bills of attainder include bills of pains and penalties.[]
as interpreted by the supreme court, this clause prohibits all
legislative acts, "no matter what their form, that apply either to named
individuals or to easily ascertainable members of a group in such a way
as to inflict punishment on them without a judicial trial ***"[]
two acts of congress—one which required attorneys practicing in the
federal courts to take an oath that they had never given aid to persons
engaged in hostility to the united states,[] and another which
prohibited the payment of compensation to certain named government
employees who have been charged with subversive activity,[]—have
been held unconstitutional on the ground that they amounted to bills of
attainder.
definition
at the time the constitution was adopted, many persons understood the
terms ex post facto laws, to "embrace all retrospective laws, or laws
governing or controlling past transactions, whether *** of a civil or
a criminal nature."[] but in the early case of calder v.
bull,[] the supreme court decided that the phrase, as used in the
constitution, applies only to penal and criminal statutes. but although
it is inapplicable to retroactive legislation of any other kind,[]
the constitutional prohibition may not be evaded by giving a civil form
to a measure which is essentially criminal.[] every law which makes
criminal an act which was innocent when done, or which inflicts a
greater punishment than the law annexed to the crime when committed, is
an ex post facto law within the prohibition of the constitution.[]
a prosecution under a temporary statute which was extended before the
date originally set for its expiration does not offend this provision
even though it is instituted subsequent to the extension of the
statute's duration for a violation committed prior thereto.[] since
this provision has no application to crimes committed outside the
jurisdiction of the united states against the laws of a foreign country,
it is immaterial in extradition proceedings whether the foreign law is
ex post facto or not.[]
[pg ]
what constitutes punishment
an act of congress which prescribed as a qualification for practice
before the federal courts an oath that the attorney had not participated
in the rebellion was found unconstitutional since it operated as a
punishment for past acts.[] but a statute which denied to
polygamists the right to vote in a territorial election, was upheld even
as applied to a person who had not practiced polygamy since the act was
passed, because the law did not operate as an additional penalty for the
offense of polygamy but merely defined it as a disqualification of a
voter.[] a deportation law authorizing the secretary of labor to
expel aliens for criminal acts committed before its passage is not ex
post facto since deportation is not a punishment.[] likewise an act
permitting the cancellation of naturalization certificates obtained by
fraud prior to the passage of the law was held not to impose a
punishment but simply to deprive the alien of his ill-gotten
privileges.[]
change in place or mode of trial
a change of the place of trial of an alleged offense after its
commission, is not an ex post facto law. if no place of trial was
provided when the offense was committed, congress may designate the
place of trial thereafter.[] a law which alters the rule of evidence
to permit a person to be convicted upon less or different evidence than
was required when the offense was committed is invalid,[] but a
statute which simply enlarges the class of persons who may be competent
to testify in criminal cases is not ex post facto as applied to a
prosecution for a crime committed prior to its passage.[]
clause . no capitation, or other direct, tax shall be laid, unless in
proportion to the census or enumeration herein before directed to be
taken.
the hylton case
the crucial problem under this section is to distinguish "direct" from
other taxes. in its opinion in pollock v. farmers' loan and [pg ]trust
co., we find the court declaring: "it is apparent *** that the
distinction between direct and indirect taxation was well understood by
the framers of the constitution and those who adopted it."[] against
this confident dictum may be set the following brief excerpt from
madison's notes on the convention: "mr. king asked what was the precise
meaning of direct taxation? no one answered."[] the first case to
come before the court on this issue was hylton v. united states,[]
which was decided early in . congress had levied, according to the
rule of uniformity, a specific tax upon all carriages, for the
conveyance of persons, which shall be kept by, or for any person, for
his own use, or to be let out for hire, or for the conveying of
passengers. in a fictitious statement of facts, it was stipulated that
the carriages involved in the case were kept exclusively for the
personal use of the owner and not for hire. the principal argument for
the constitutionality of the measure was made by hamilton, who treated
it as an "excise tax,"[] while madison both on the floors of
congress and in correspondence attacked it as "direct" and so void,
inasmuch as it was levied without apportionment.[] the court, taking
the position that the direct tax clause constituted in practical
operation an exception to the general taxing powers of congress, held
that no tax ought to be classified as "direct" which could not be
conveniently apportioned, and on this basis sustained the tax on
carriages as one on their "use" and therefore an "excise." moreover,
each of the judges advanced the opinion that the direct tax clause
should be restricted to capitation taxes and taxes on land, or that at
most, it might cover a general tax on the aggregate or mass of things
which generally pervade all the states, especially if an assessment
should intervene; while justice paterson, who had been a member of the
federal convention, testified to his recollection that the principal
purpose of the provision had been to allay the fear of the southern
states lest their negroes and lands should be subjected to a specific
tax.[]
from the hylton to the pollock case
the result of the hylton case was not challenged until after the civil
war. a number of the taxes imposed to meet the demands of that war were
assailed during the postwar period as direct taxes, but [pg ]without result.
the court sustained successively as "excises" or "duties," a tax on an
insurance company's receipts for premiums and assessments;[] a tax
on the circulating notes of state banks,[] an inheritance tax on
real estate,[] and finally a general tax on incomes.[] in the
last case, the court took pains to state that it regarded the term
"direct taxes" as having acquired a definite and fixed meaning-to-wit,
capitation taxes, and taxes on hand.[] then, almost one hundred
years after the hylton case, the famous case of pollock v. farmers'
loan and trust company[] arose under the income tax act of
.[] undertaking to correct "a century of error" the court held,
by a vote of five-to-four, that a tax on income from property was a
direct tax within the meaning of the constitution and hence void because
not apportioned according to the census.
restriction of the pollock decision
the pollock decision encouraged taxpayers to challenge the right of
congress to levy by the rule of uniformity numerous taxes which had
always been reckoned to be excises. but the court evinced a strong
reluctance to extend the doctrine to such exactions. purporting to
distinguish taxes levied "because of ownership" or "upon property as
such" from those laid upon "privileges,"[] it sustained as "excises"
a tax on sales on business exchanges;[] a succession tax which was
construed to fall on the recipients of the property transmitted, rather
than on the estate of the decedent,[] and a tax on manufactured
tobacco in the hands of a dealer, after an excise tax had been paid by
the manufacturer.[] again, in thomas v. united states,[] the
validity of a stamp tax on sales of stock certificates was sustained on
the basis of a definition of "duties, imposts and excises." these terms,
according to the chief justice, "were used comprehensively to cover
customs and excise duties imposed on importation, consumption,
manufacture and sale of certain commodities, privileges, particular
business transactions, vocations, occupations and the like."[] on
the same day it ruled, in spreckels sugar refining co. v.
mcclain,[] that an exaction denominated a special excise tax imposed
on the business of refining sugar and measured by the gross receipts
thereof, was in truth an excise and hence properly levied by the rule of
uniformity. the lesson of flint v. stone tracy co.[] is the same.
here what was in form an income tax was sustained as a tax on the
privilege of doing business as a corporation, the value of the privilege
being measured by the income, including income from investments.
similarly, in stanton v. baltic mining co.[] a tax on the annual
production of mines was held [pg ]to be "independently of the effect of the
operation of the sixteenth amendment *** not a tax upon property as
such because of its ownership, but a true excise levied on the results
of the business of carrying on mining operations."[]
a convincing demonstration of the extent to which the pollock decision
had been whittled down by the time the sixteenth amendment was adopted
is found in billings v. united states.[] in challenging an annual
tax assessed for the year  on the use of foreign built yachts—a
levy not distinguishable in substance from the carriage tax involved in
the hylton case as construed by the supreme court-counsel did not even
suggest that the tax should be classed as a direct tax. instead, he
based his argument that the exaction constituted a taking of property
without due process of law upon the premise that it was an excise, and
the supreme court disposed of the case upon the same assumption.
in  the court cast aside the distinction drawn in knowlton v.
moore between the right to transmit property on the one hand and the
privilege of receiving it on the other, and sustained an estate tax as
an excise. "upon this point" wrote justice holmes for a unanimous court,
"a page of history is worth a volume of logic."[] this proposition
being established, the court has had no difficulty in deciding that the
inclusion in the computation of the estate tax of property held as joint
tenants,[] or as tenants by the entirety,[] or the entire value
of community property owned by husband and wife,[] or the proceeds
of insurance upon the life of the decedent,[] did not amount to
direct taxation of such property. similarly it upheld a graduated tax on
gifts as an excise, saying that it was "a tax laid only upon the
exercise of a single one of those powers incident to ownership, the
power to give the property owned to another."[] in vain did justice
sutherland, speaking for himself and two associates, urge that "the
right to give away one's property is as fundamental as the right to sell
it or, indeed, to possess it."[]
[pg ]
miscellaneous
the power of congress to levy direct taxes is not confined to the states
which are represented in that body. such a tax may be levied in
proportion to population in the district of columbia.[] a penalty
imposed for nonpayment of a direct tax is not a part of the tax itself
and hence is not subject to the rule of apportionment. accordingly, the
supreme court sustained the penalty of fifty percent which congress
exacted for default in the payment of the direct tax on land in the
aggregate amount of twenty million dollars which was levied and
apportioned among the states during the civil war.[]
clause . no tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any
state.
this prohibition applies only to the imposition of duties on goods by
reason of exportation.[] the word "export" signifies goods exported
to a foreign country, not to an unincorporated territory of the united
states.[] a general tax laid on all property alike, including that
intended for export, is not within the prohibition, if it is not levied
on goods in course of exportation nor because of their intended
exportation.[] where the sale to a commission merchant for a foreign
consignee was consummated by delivery of the goods to an exporting
carrier, the sale was held to be a step in the exportation and hence
exempt from a general tax on sales of such commodity.[] the giving
of a bond for exportation of distilled liquor is not the commencement of
exportation so as to exempt from an excise tax spirits which were not
exported pursuant to such bond.[] a tax on the income of a
corporation derived from its export trade is not a tax on "articles
exported" within the meaning of the constitution.[]
[pg ]
stamp taxes
a stamp tax imposed on foreign bills of lading,[] charter
parties,[] or marine insurance policies,[] is in effect a tax or
duty upon exports, and so void; but an act requiring the stamping of all
packages of tobacco intended for export in order to prevent fraud was
held not to be forbidden as a tax on exports.[]
clause . no preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or
revenue to the ports of one state over those of another: nor shall
vessels bound to, or from, one state, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay
duties in another.
the limitations imposed by this section were designed to prevent
preferences as between ports on account of their location in different
states. they do not forbid such discriminations as between individual
ports. acting under the commerce clause, congress may do many things
which benefit particular ports and which incidentally result to the
disadvantage of other ports in the same or neighboring states. it may
establish ports of entry, erect and operate lighthouses, improve rivers
and harbors, and provide structures for the convenient and economical
handling of traffic.[] a rate order of the interstate commerce
commission which allowed an additional charge to be made for ferrying
traffic across the mississippi to cities on the east bank of the river
was sustained over the objection that it gave an unconstitutional
preference to ports in texas.[] although there were a few early
intimations that this clause was applicable to the states as well as to
congress,[] the supreme court declared emphatically in  that
state legislation was unaffected by it.[] after more than a century
the court confirmed, over the objection that this clause was offended,
the power which the first congress had exercised[] in sanctioning
the continued supervision and regulation of pilots by the states.[]
alaska is not deemed to be a state within the meaning of this
clause.[]
[pg ]
clause . no money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence
of appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of
the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published
from time to time.
this clause is a limitation upon the power of the executive department
and does not restrict congress in appropriating moneys in the
treasury.[] that body may recognize and pay a claim of an equitable,
moral or honorary nature. where it directs a specific sum to be paid to
a certain person, neither the secretary of the treasury nor any court
has discretion to determine whether the person is entitled to receive
it.[] in making appropriations to pay claims arising out of the
civil war, the court held that it was lawful to provide that certain
persons, i.e., those who had aided the rebellion, should not be paid out
of the funds made available by the general appropriation, but that such
persons should seek relief from congress.[] the court has also
recognized that congress has a wide discretion as to the extent to which
it shall prescribe details of expenditures for which it appropriates
funds and has approved the frequent practice of making general
appropriations of large amounts to be allotted and expended as directed
by designated government agencies. citing as an example the act of june
, [] where all moneys received from the sale and disposal of
public lands in a large number of states and territories were set aside
as a special fund to be expended under the direction of the secretary of
the interior upon such projects as he determined to be practicable and
advisable for the reclamation of arid and semi-arid lands within those
states and territories, the court declared: "the constitutionality of
this delegation of authority has never been seriously questioned."[]
[pg ]
no officer of the federal government is authorized to pay a debt due
from the united states, whether reduced to judgment or not, without an
appropriation for that purpose.[] after the civil war, a number of
controversies arose out of attempts by congress to restrict the payment
of the claims of persons who had aided the rebellion, but had thereafter
received a pardon from the president. the supreme court held that
congress could not prescribe the evidentiary effect of a pardon in a
proceeding in the court of claims for property confiscated during the
civil war,[] but that where the confiscated property had been sold
and the proceeds paid into the treasury, a pardon did not of its own
force authorize the restoration of such proceeds.[] it was within
the competence of congress to declare that the amounts due to persons
thus pardoned should not be paid out of the treasury and that no general
appropriation should extend to their claims.[]
clause . no title of nobility shall be granted by the united states:
and no person holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall,
without the consent of the congress, accept of any present, emolument,
office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any king, prince, or
foreign state.
in  the attorney general of the united states ruled that: "a
minister of the united states abroad is not prohibited by the
constitution from rendering a friendly service to a foreign power, even
that of negotiating a treaty for it, provided he does not become an
officer of that power, but the acceptance of a formal commission, as
minister plenipotentiary, creates an official relation between the
individual thus commissioned and the government which in this way
accredits him as its representative, which is prohibited by this clause
of the constitution."[]
[pg ]
section . no state shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or
confederation; grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit
bills of credit; make any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in
payment of debts; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law
impairing the obligation of contracts, or grant any title of nobility.
powers denied to the states
at the time of the civil war this clause was one of the provisions upon
which the court relied in holding that the confederation formed by the
seceding states could not be recognized as having any legal
existence.[] today, its practical significance lies in the
limitations which it implies upon the power of the states to deal with
matters having a bearing upon international relations. in the early case
of holmes v. jennison,[] chief justice taney invoked it as a
reason for holding that a state had no power to deliver up a fugitive
from justice to a foreign state. recently the kindred idea that the
responsibility for the conduct of foreign relations rests exclusively
with the federal government prompted the court to hold that, since the
oil under the three mile marginal belt along the california coast might
well become the subject of international dispute and since the ocean,
including this three mile belt, is of vital consequence to the nation in
its desire to engage in commerce and to live in peace with the world,
the federal government has paramount rights in and power over that belt,
including full dominion over the resources of the soil under the water
area.[] in skiriotes v. florida,[] the court, on the other
hand, ruled that this clause did not disable florida from regulating the
manner in which its own citizens may engage in sponge fishing outside
its territorial waters. speaking for a unanimous court, chief justice
hughes declared: "when its action does not conflict with federal
legislation, the sovereign authority of the state over the conduct of
its citizens upon the high seas is analogous to the sovereign authority
of the united states over its citizens in like circumstances."[]
[pg ]
within the sense of the constitution, bills of credit signify a paper
medium of exchange, intended to circulate between individuals; and
between the government and individuals, for the ordinary purposes of
society. it is immaterial whether the quality of legal tender is
imparted to such paper. interest bearing certificates, in denominations
not exceeding ten dollars, which were issued by loan offices established
by the state of missouri, and made receivable in payment of taxes or
other moneys due to the state, and in payment of the fees and salaries
of state officers, were held to be bills of credit whose issuance was
banned by this section.[] the states are not forbidden, however, to
issue coupons receivable for taxes,[] nor to execute instruments
binding themselves to pay money at a future day for services rendered or
money borrowed.[] bills issued by state banks are not bills of
credit;[] it is immaterial that the state is the sole stockholder of
the bank,[] that the officers of the bank were elected by the state
legislature,[] or that the capital of the bank was raised by the
sale of state bonds.[]
relying on this clause, which applies only to the states and not to the
federal government,[] the supreme court has held that where the
marshal of a state court received state bank notes in payment and
discharge of an execution, the creditor was entitled to demand payment
in gold or silver.[] since, however, there is nothing in the
constitution which prohibits a bank depositor from consenting when he
draws a check, that payment may be made by draft, a state law which
provided that checks drawn on local banks should, at the option of the
bank, be payable in exchange drafts was held valid.[]
statutes passed after the civil war with the intent and result of
excluding persons who had aided the confederacy from following certain
callings, by the device of requiring them to take an oath that [pg ]they had
never given such aid, were held invalid as being bills of attainder, as
well as ex post facto laws.[]
scope of provision
this clause, like the cognate restriction imposed on the federal
government by section , relates only to penal and criminal legislation
and not to civil laws which affect private rights adversely.[] it is
directed only against legislative action and does not touch erroneous or
inconsistent decisions by the courts.[] even though a law is ex
post facto and invalid as to crimes committed prior to its enactment,
it is nonetheless valid as to subsequent offenses.[] if it mitigates
the rigor of the law in force at the time the crime was committed,[]
or if it merely penalizes the continuance of conduct which was lawfully
begun before its passage, the statute is not ex post facto. thus
measures penalizing the failure of a railroad to cut drains through
existing embankments,[] or making illegal the continued possession
of intoxicating liquors which were lawfully acquired,[] have been
held valid.
denial of future privileges to past offenders
the right to practice a profession may be denied to one who was
convicted of an offense before the statute was enacted if the offense
may reasonably be regarded as a continuing disqualification for the
profession. without offending the constitution, a statute making it a
misdemeanor to practice medicine after conviction of a felony may be
enforced against a person so convicted before the act was passed.[]
but the test oath prescribed after the civil war, whereby office
holders, teachers, or preachers were required to swear that they had not
participated in the rebellion, were held invalid on the ground that it
had no reasonable relation to fitness to perform official or
professional duties, but rather was a punishment for past
offenses.[] a similar oath required of suitors in the courts also
was held void.[]
[pg ]
changes in punishment
statutes which changed an indeterminate sentence law to require a judge
to impose the maximum sentence, whereas formerly he could impose a
sentence between the minimum and maximum;[] abolished a rule which
prevented a subsequent conviction of first-degree murder after a jury
had found the accused guilty in the second-degree by a verdict which had
been set aside;[] required criminals sentenced to death to be kept
thereafter in solitary confinement,[] or allowed a warden to fix,
within limits of one week, and keep secret the time of execution,[]
were held to be ex post facto as applied to offenses committed prior
to their enactment. but laws providing heavier penalties for new crimes
thereafter committed by habitual criminals;[] changing the
punishment from hanging to electrocution, fixing the place therefor in
the penitentiary, and permitting the presence of a greater number of
invited witnesses;[] or providing for close confinement of six to
nine months in the penitentiary, in lieu of three to six months in jail
prior to execution, and substituting the warden for the sheriff as
hangman, have been sustained.[]
changes in procedure
an accused person does not have a right to be tried in all respects in
accordance with the law in force when the crime charged was
committed.[] the mode of procedure may be changed so long as the
substantial rights of the accused are not curtailed.[] laws shifting
the place of trial from one county to another,[] increasing the
number of appellate judges and dividing the appellate court into
divisions,[] granting a right of appeal to the state,[] changing
the method of selecting and summoning jurors,[] making separate
trials for persons jointly indicted a matter of discretion for the trial
court rather than a matter of right,[] and allowing a comparison of
handwriting experts[] have been sustained over the objection that
they were ex post facto. the contrary conclusion was reached with
respect to the application to felonies committed before a territory was
admitted to the union, of the provision in the state constitution which
permitted the trial of criminal cases by a jury of eight persons,
instead of the common law jury of twelve which was guaranteed by the
sixth amendment during the period of territorial government.[]
[pg ]
definition of terms
"law."—the term comprises statutes, constitutional
provisions,[] municipal ordinances,[] and administrative
regulations having the force and operation of statutes.[] how is it
as to judicial decisions? not only does the abstract principle of the
separation of powers forbid the idea that the courts "make" law, but the
word "pass" in the above clause seems to confine it to the formal and
acknowledged methods of exercise of the law-making function.
accordingly, the court has frequently said that the clause does not
cover judicial decisions, however erroneous, or whatever their effect on
existing contract rights.[] nevertheless, there are important
exceptions to this rule which are hereinafter set forth.
status of judicial decisions.—also, while the highest state
court usually has final authority in determining the construction as
well as the validity of contracts entered into under the laws of the
state, and the national courts will be bound by their decision of such
matters, nevertheless, for reasons which are fairly obvious, this rule
does not hold when the contract is one whose obligation is alleged to
[pg ]have been impaired by state law.[] otherwise, the challenged state
authority could be vindicated through the simple device of a
modification or outright nullification by the state court of the
contract rights in issue. likewise, the highest state court usually has
final authority in construing state statutes and determining their
validity in relation to the state constitution. but this rule too has
had to bend to some extent to the supreme court's interpretation of the
obligation of contracts clause.[]
suppose the following situation: () a municipality, acting under
authority conferred by a state statute, has issued bonds in aid of a
railway company; () the validity of this statute has been sustained by
the highest state court; () later the state legislature passes an act
to repeal certain taxes to meet the bonds; () it is sustained in doing
so by a decision of the highest state court holding that the statute
authorizing the bonds was unconstitutional ab initio. in such a case
the supreme court would take an appeal from the state court and would
reverse the latter's decision of unconstitutionally because of its
effect in rendering operative the act to repeal the tax.[]
suppose further, however, that the state court has reversed itself on
the question of the constitutionality of the bonds in a suit by a
creditor for payment without there having been an act of repeal. in this
situation, as the cases stand today, the supreme court will still afford
relief if the case is one between citizens of different states, which
reaches it via a lower federal court.[] this is because in cases of
this nature the court formerly felt free to determine questions of
fundamental justice for itself. indeed, in such a case, the court has
apparently in the past regarded itself as free to pass upon the
constitutionality of the state law authorizing the bonds even though
there has been no prior decision by the highest state court sustaining
them, the idea being that contracts entered into simply on the faith of
[pg ]the presumed constitutionality of a state statute are entitled to
this protection.[]
in other words, in cases of which it has jurisdiction because of
diversity of citizenship, the court has held that the obligation of
contracts is capable of impairment by subsequent judicial decisions no
less than by subsequent statutes and that it is able to prevent such
impairment. in cases, on the other hand, of which it obtains
jurisdiction only on the constitutional ground, and by appeal from a
state court, it has always adhered in terms to the doctrine that the
word "laws" as used in article i, section , does not comprehend
judicial decisions. yet even in these cases, it will intervene to
protect contracts entered into on the faith of existing decisions from
an impairment which is the direct result of a reversal of such
decisions, but there must be in the offing, as it were, a statute of
some kind—one possibly many years older than the contract rights
involved—on which to pin its decision.[]
in  congress, through an amendment to the judicial code, endeavored
to extend the reviewing power of the supreme court to suits involving
"'*** the validity of a contract wherein it is claimed that a change
in the rule of law or construction of statutes by the highest court of a
state applicable to such contract would be repugnant to the constitution
of the united states ***'" this appeared to be an invitation to the
court to say frankly that the obligation of a contract can be impaired
as well by a subsequent decision as by a subsequent statute. the court,
however, declined the invitation in an opinion by chief justice taft
which reviewed many of the cases covered in the preceding paragraphs.
dealing with the gelpcke and adherent decisions, chief justice taft
said: "these cases were not writs of error to the supreme court of a
state. they were appeals or writs of error to federal courts where
recovery was sought upon municipal or county bonds or some other form of
contracts, the validity of which had been sustained by decisions of the
supreme court of a state prior to their execution, and had been denied
by the same court after their issue or making. in such cases the federal
courts exercising jurisdiction between citizens of different states held
themselves free to decide what the state law was, and to enforce it as
laid down by the state supreme court before the contracts were made
[pg ]rather than in later decisions. they did not base this conclusion on
article i, §, of the federal constitution, but on the state law as
they determined it, which, in diverse citizenship cases, under the third
article of the federal constitution they were empowered to do. burgess
v. seligman,  u.s.  ()."[] while doubtless this was an
available explanation in , the decision in  in erie railroad co.
v. tompkins,  u.s. , so cuts down the power of the federal courts
to decide diversity of citizenship cases according to their own notions
of "general principles of common law" as to raise the question whether
the court will not be required eventually to put gelpcke and its
companions and descendants squarely on the obligation of contracts
clause, or else abandon them.
"obligation."—a contract is analyzable into two elements: the
agreement, which comes from the parties, and the obligation which
comes from the law and makes the agreement binding on the parties. the
concept of obligation is an importation from the civil law and its
appearance in the contracts clause is supposed to have been due to james
wilson, a graduate of scottish universities and a civilian. actually the
term as used in the contracts clause has been rendered more or less
superfluous by the doctrine that the law in force when a contract is
made enters into and comprises a part of the contract itself.[]
hence the court sometimes recognizes the term in its decisions applying
the clause, sometimes ignores it. in sturges v. crowninshield,[]
decided in , marshall defines "obligation of contract" as "the law
which binds the parties to perform their agreement"; but a little later
the same year he sets forth the points presented for consideration in
trustees of dartmouth college v. woodward[] to be: ". is this
contract protected by the constitution of the united states? . is it
impaired by the acts under which the defendant holds?"[] the word
"obligation" undoubtedly does carry the implication that the
constitution was intended to protect only executory contracts—i.e.,
contracts still awaiting performance; but as is indicated in a moment,
this implication was early rejected for a certain class of contracts,
with immensely important result for the clause.
"impair."—"the obligations of a contract," says chief justice
hughes for the court in home building and loan association v.
blaisdell,[] "are impaired by a law which renders them invalid, or
releases or extinguishes them *** and impairment, ***, has been
predicated of laws which without destroying contracts derogate [pg ]from
substantial contractual rights."[] but he straight-away adds: "not
only are existing laws read into contracts in order to fix obligations
as between the parties, but the reservation of essential attributes of
sovereign power is also read into contracts as a postulate of the legal
order. the policy of protecting contracts against impairment presupposes
the maintenance of a government by virtue of which contractual relations
are worth while,—a government which retains adequate authority to
secure the peace and good order of society. this principle of
harmonizing the constitutional prohibition with the necessary residuum
of state power has had progressive recognition in the decisions of this
court."[] in short, the law from which the obligation stems must be
understood to include constitutional law and, moreover, a "progressive"
constitutional law.[]
"contracts," extended to cover public contracts.—throughout
the first century of government under the constitution, according to
benjamin f. wright, the contract clause had been considered in almost
forty per cent of all cases involving the validity of state legislation,
and of these the vast proportion involved legislative grants of one type
or other, the most important category being charters of
incorporation.[] nor does this numerical prominence of such grants
in the cases overrate their relative importance from the point of view
of public interest. the question consequently arises whether the clause
was intended to be applied solely in protection of private contracts, or
in the protection also of public grants or, more broadly, in protection
of public contracts, in short, those to which a state is party?
writing late in life, madison explained the clause by allusion to what
had occurred "in the internal administration of the states," in the
years immediately preceding the constitutional convention, in regard to
private debts. "a violation of contracts," said he, "had become familiar
in the form of depreciated paper made a legal tender, of property
substituted for money, and installment laws, and the occlusions of the
courts of justice."[] he had, in fact, written to the same effect in
the federalist, while the adoption of the constitution was
pending.[]
[pg ]the broader view of the intended purpose of the clause is,
nevertheless, not without considerable support. for one thing, the
clause departs from the comparable provision in the northwest ordinance
() in two respects: first, in the presence of the word
"obligation"; secondly, in the absence of the word "private"; and
there is good reason for believing that wilson may have been responsible
for both alterations, inasmuch as two years earlier he had denounced a
current proposal to repeal the bank of north america's pennsylvania
charter, in the following words: "if the act for incorporating the
subscribers to the bank of north america shall be repealed in this
manner, a precedent will be established for repealing, in the same
manner, every other legislative charter in pennsylvania. a pretence, as
specious as any that can be alleged on this occasion, will never be
wanting on any future occasion. those acts of the state, which have
hitherto been considered as the sure anchors of privilege and of
property, will become the sport of every varying gust of politics, and
will float wildly backwards and forwards on the irregular and impetuous
tides of party and faction."[]
furthermore, in its first important constitutional case, that of
chisholm v. georgia,[] the court ruled that its original
jurisdiction extended to an action in assumpsit brought by a citizen of
south carolina against the state of georgia. this construction of the
federal judicial power was, to be sure, promptly repealed by the
eleventh amendment, but without affecting the implication that the
contracts protected by the constitution included public contracts.
one important source of this diversity of opinion is to be found in that
ever welling spring of constitutional doctrine in early days, the
prevalence of natural law notions and the resulting vague significance
of the term "law." in sturges v. crowninshield, as we saw, marshall
defined the obligation of contracts as "the law which binds the
parties to perform their undertaking." whence, however, comes this law?
if it comes from the state alone, which marshall was later to deny even
as to private contracts,[] then it is hardly possible to hold that
the states' own contracts are covered by the clause, which manifestly
does not create an obligation for contracts but only protects such
obligation as already exists. but if, on the other hand, the law
furnishing the obligation of contracts comprises natural law and kindred
principles, as well as law which springs from state authority, then,
inasmuch as the state itself is presumably bound by such principles, the
state's own obligations, so far as harmonious with them, are covered by
the clause.
[pg ]
fletcher v. peck
fletcher v. peck,[] which was decided in , has the double
claim to fame that it was the first case in which the supreme court held
a state enactment to be in conflict with the constitution,[] and
also the first case to hold that the contracts clause protected public
grants. by an act passed on january , , the georgia legislature
directed the sale to four land companies of public lands comprising most
of what are now the states of alabama and mississippi. as soon became
known, the passage of the measure had been secured by open and wholesale
bribery. so when a new legislature took over in the winter of -,
almost its first act was to revoke the sale made the previous year.
meantime, however, the land companies had disposed of several millions
of acres of their holdings to speculators and prospective settlers, and
following the rescinding act some of these took counsel with alexander
hamilton as to their rights. in an opinion which was undoubtedly known
to the court when it decided fletcher v. peck, hamilton characterized
the repeal as contravening "the first principles of natural justice and
social policy," especially so far as it was made, "to the prejudice
*** of third persons *** innocent of the alleged fraud or
corruption; *** [moreover, he added,] the constitution of the united
states, article first, section tenth, declares that no state shall pass
a law impairing the obligations of contract. this must be equivalent to
saying no state shall pass a law revoking, invalidating, or altering a
contract. every grant from one to another, whether the grantor be a
state or an individual, is virtually a contract that the grantee shall
hold and enjoy the thing granted against the grantor, and his
representatives. it, therefore, appears to me that taking the terms of
the constitution in their large sense, and giving them effect according
to the general spirit and policy of the provisions, the revocation of
the grant by the act of the legislature of georgia may justly be
considered as contrary to the constitution of the united states, and,
therefore null. and that the courts of the united states, in cases
within their jurisdiction, will be likely to pronounce it so."[] in
the debate to which the "yazoo land frauds," as they were
contemporaneously known, gave rise in congress, hamilton's views were
quoted frequently.
so far as it invokes the obligation of contracts clause, marshall's
opinion in fletcher v. peck performs two creative acts. he recognizes
that an obligatory contract is one still to be performed—in other
[pg ]words, is an executory contract; also that a grant of land is an
executed contract—a conveyance. but, he asserts, every grant is
attended by "an implied contract" on the part of the grantor not to
claim again the thing granted. thus, grants are brought within the
category of contracts having continuing obligation and so within article
i, §. but the question still remained of the nature of this
obligation. marshall's answer to this can only be inferred from his
statement at the end of his opinion. the state of georgia, he says, "was
restrained" from the passing of the rescinding act "either by general
principles which are common to our free institutions, or by particular
provisions of the constitution of the united states."[]
new jersey v. wilson
the protection thus thrown about land grants was presently extended, in
the case of new jersey v. wilson,[] to a grant of immunity from
taxation which the state of new jersey had accorded certain indian
lands; and several years after that, in the dartmouth college
case,[] to the charter privileges of an eleemosynary corporation.
corporate charters, different ways of regarding
there are three ways in which the charter of a corporation may be
regarded. in the first place, it may be thought of simply as a license
terminable at will by the state, like a liquor-seller's license or an
auctioneer's license, but affording the incorporators, so long as it
remains in force, the privileges and advantages of doing business in the
form of a corporation. nowadays, indeed, when corporate charters are
usually issued to all legally qualified applicants by an administrative
officer who acts under a general statute, this would probably seem to be
the natural way of regarding them were it not for the dartmouth college
decision. but in  charters were granted directly by the state
legislatures in the form of special acts, and there were very few
profit-taking corporations in the country.[] the later extension of
the benefits of the dartmouth college decision t[pg ]o corporations organized
under general law took place without discussion.
secondly, a corporate charter may be regarded as a franchise
constituting a vested or property interest in the hands of the holders,
and therefore as forfeitable only for abuse or in accordance with its
own terms. this is the way in which some of the early state courts did
regard them at the outset.[] it is also the way in which blackstone
[pg ]regards them in relation to the royal prerogative, although not in
relation to the sovereignty of parliament; and the same point of view
finds expression in story's concurring opinion in dartmouth college v.
woodward, as it did also in webster's argument in that case.[]
the dartmouth college case
the third view is the one formulated by chief justice marshall in his
controlling opinion in trustees of dartmouth college v.
woodward.[] this is that the charter of dartmouth college, a purely
private institution, was the outcome and partial record of a contract
between the donors of the college, on the one hand, and the british
crown, on the other, which contract still continued in force between the
state of new hampshire, as the successor to the crown and government of
great britain, and the trustees, as successors to the donors. the
charter, in other words, was not simply a grant—rather it was the
documentary record of a still existent agreement between still existent
parties.[] taking this view, which he developed with great ingenuity
and persuasiveness, marshall was able to appeal to the obligation of
contracts clause directly, and without further use of his fiction in
fletcher v. peck of an executory contract accompanying the grant.
a difficulty still remained, however, in the requirement that a contract
must, before it can have obligation, import consideration, that is to
say, must be shown not to have been entirely gratuitous on either side.
nor was the consideration which induced the crown to grant a charter to
dartmouth college a merely speculative one. it consisted of the
donations of the donors to the important public interest of education.
fortunately or unfortunately, in dealing with this phase of the case,
marshall used more sweeping terms than were needful. "the objects for
which a corporation is created," he wrote, "are universally such as the
government wishes to promote. they are deemed beneficial to the country;
and this benefit constitutes the [pg ]consideration, and in most cases, the
sole consideration of the grant." in other words, the simple fact of the
charter having been granted imports consideration from the point of view
of the state.[] with this doctrine before it, the court in
providence bank v. billings,[] and again in charles river bridge
company v. warren bridge company,[] admitted, without discussion
of the point, the applicability of the dartmouth college decision to
purely business concerns.
classes of cases under the clause
the cases just reviewed produce two principal lines of decisions
stemming from the obligation of contracts clause: first, public grants;
second, private executory contracts. the chief category of the first
line of cases consists, in turn, of those involving corporate
privileges, both those granted directly by the states and those granted
by municipalities by virtue of authority conferred upon them by the
state;[] while private debts, inclusive of municipal debts, exhaust
for the most part the second line.
public grants
municipal corporations.—not all grants by a state constitute
"contracts" within the sense of article i, section . in his dartmouth
college decision chief justice marshall conceded that "if the act of
incorporation be a grant of political power, if it creates a civil
institution, to be employed in the administration of the government,
***, the subject is one in which the legislature of the state may act
according to its own justment," unrestrained by the
constitution[]—thereby drawing a line between "public" and
"private" corporations which remained undisturbed for more than half a
century.[] it has been subsequently held many times that municipal
corporations are mere instrumentalities of the state for the more
convenient administration of local governments, whose powers may be
enlarged, abridged, or entirely withdrawn at the pleasure of the
legislature.[] the same principle applies, moreover, to the property
rights which the municipality derives either directly or indirectly from
the state. this was first held as to the grant of a franchise to a
municipality to operate a ferry, and has since then been recognized as
the universal rule.[] as was stated in a case decided in : "the
distinction between the municipality as an agent of the state for
governmental purposes and as an organization to care for local needs in
a private or proprietary capacity," while it limits the legal liability
of municipalities for the negligent acts or omissions of its officers or
agents, does not, on the other hand, furnish ground for the application
of constitutional [pg ]restraints against the state in favor of its own
municipalities.[] thus no contract rights are impaired by a statute
removing a county seat, even though the former location was by law to be
"permanent" when the citizens of the community had donated land and
furnished bonds for the erection of public buildings.[] likewise a
statute changing the boundaries of a school district, giving to the new
district the property within its limits which had belonged to the former
district, and requiring the new district to assume the debts of the old
district, does not impair the obligation of contracts.[] nor was the
contracts clause violated by state legislation authorizing state control
over insolvent communities through a municipal finance commission.[]
public offices.—on the same ground of public agency, neither
appointment nor election to public office creates a contract in the
sense of article i, section , whether as to tenure, or salary, or
duties, all of which remain, so far as the constitution of the united
states is concerned, subject to legislative modification or outright
repeal.[] indeed there can be no such thing in this country as
property in office, although the common law sustained a different view
which sometimes found reflection in early cases.[] when, however,
services have once been rendered, there arises an implied contract that
they shall be compensated at the rate which was in force at the time
they [pg ]were rendered.[] also, an express contract between the state
and an individual for the performance of specific services falls within
the protection of the constitution. thus a contract made by the governor
pursuant to a statute authorizing the appointment of a commissioner to
conduct, over a period of years, a geological, mineralogical, and
agricultural survey of the state, for which a definite sum had been
authorized, was held to have been impaired by repeal of the
statute.[] but a resolution of a new jersey local board of education
reducing teachers' salaries for the school year -, pursuant to
an act of the legislature authorizing such action, was held not to
impair the contract of a teacher who, having served three years, was by
earlier legislation exempt from having his salary reduced except for
inefficiency or misconduct.[] similarly, it was held that an
illinois statute which reduced the annuity payable to retire teachers
under an earlier act did not violate the contracts clause, since it had
not been the intention of the earlier act to propose a contract but only
to put into effect a general policy.[] on the other hand, the right
of one, who had become a "permanent teacher" under the indiana teachers
tenure act of , to continued employment was held to be contractual
and to have been impaired by the repeal in  of the earlier
act.[]
revocable privileges versus "contracts": tax exemptions.—from
a different point of view, the court has sought to distinguish between
grants of privileges, whether to individuals or to corporations, which
are contracts and those which are mere revocable licenses, although on
account of the doctrine of presumed consideration mentioned earlier,
this has not always been easy to do. in pursuance of the precedent set
in new jersey v. wilson,[] the legislature of a state "may exempt
particular parcels of property or the property of particular persons or
corporations from taxation, either for a specified period or
perpetually, or may limit the amount or rate of taxation, to which such
property shall be subjected," and such an exemption is [pg ]frequently a
contract within the sense of the constitution. indeed this is always so
when the immunity is conferred upon a corporation by the clear terms of
its charter.[] when, on the other hand, an immunity of this sort
springs from general law, its precise nature is more open to doubt, as a
comparison of decisions will serve to illustrate.
in piqua branch of the state bank v. knoop,[] a closely divided
court held that a general banking law of the state of ohio which
provided that companies complying therewith and their stockholders
should be exempt from all but certain taxes, was, as to a bank organized
under it and its stockholders, a contract within the meaning of article
i, section . "the provision was not," the court said, "a legislative
command nor a rule of taxation until changed, but a contract stipulating
against any change, from the nature of the language used and the
circumstances under which it was adopted."[] when, however, the
state of michigan pledged itself, by a general legislative act, not to
tax any corporation, company, or individual undertaking to manufacture
salt in the state from water there obtained by boring on property used
for this purpose and, furthermore, to pay a bounty on the salt so
manufactured, it was held not to have engaged itself within the
constitutional sense. "general encouragements," said the court, "held
out to all persons indiscriminately, to engage in a particular trade or
manufacture, whether such encouragement be in the shape of bounties or
drawbacks, or other advantage, are always under the legislative control,
and may be discontinued at any time."[] so far as exemption from
taxation is concerned the difference between these two cases is
obviously slight; but the later one is unquestionable authority for the
proposition that legislative bounties are repealable at will.
furthermore, exemptions from taxation have in certain cases been treated
as gratuities repealable at will, even when conferred by specific
legislative enactments. this would seem always to be the case when the
beneficiaries were already in existence when the exemption was created
and did nothing of a more positive nature to qualify for it than to
continue in existence.[] yet the cases are not always easy [pg ]to
explain in relation to each other, except in light of the fact that the
court's wider point of view has altered from time to time.[]
vested rights.—lastly, the term "contracts" is used in the
contracts clause in its popular sense of an agreement of minds. the
clause therefore does not protect vested rights that are not referable
to such an agreement between the state and an individual, such as the
right to recovery under a judgment. the individual in question may have
a case under the fourteenth amendment, but not one under article i,
section .[]
reservation of the right to alter and repeal
so much for the meaning of the word "contract" when public grants are
meant. it is next in order to consider four principles or doctrines
whereby the court has itself broken down the force of the dartmouth
college decision in great measure in favor of state legislative power.
by the logic of the dartmouth college decision itself the state may
reserve in a corporate charter the right to "amend, alter, and repeal"
the same, and such reservation becomes a part of the contract between
the state and the incorporators, the obligation of which is accordingly
not impaired by the exercise of the right.[] later decisions
recognize that the state may reserve the right to amend, alter, and
repeal by general law, with the result of incorporating the reservation
in all charters of subsequent date.[] there is, however, a
difference between a reservation by a statute and one by constitutional
provision. while the former may be repealed as to a subsequent charter
by the specific terms thereof, the latter may not.[]
the right to reserve: when limited.—is the right which is
reserved by a state to "amend" or "alter" a charter without restriction?
when it is accompanied, as it generally is, by the right to "repeal,"
one [pg ]would suppose that the answer to this question was self-evident.
none the less, there are a number of judicial dicta to the effect that
this power is not without limit, that it must be exercised reasonably
and in good faith, and that the alterations made must be consistent with
the scope and object of the grant, etc.[] such utterances amount,
apparently, to little more than an anchor to windward, for while some of
the state courts have applied tests of this nature to the disallowance
of legislation, it does not appear that the supreme court of the united
states has ever done so.[]
quite different is it with the distinction pointed out in the cases
between the franchises and privileges which a corporation derives from
its charter and the rights of property and contract which accrue to it
in the course of its existence. even the outright repeal of the former
does not wipe out the latter or cause them to escheat to the state. the
primary heirs of the defunct organization are its creditors; but
whatever of value remains after their valid claims are met goes to the
former shareholders.[] by the earlier weight of authority, on the
other hand, persons who contract with companies whose charters are
subject to legislative amendment or repeal do so at their own risk: any
"such contracts made between individuals and the corporation do not vary
or in any manner change or modify the relation between the state and the
corporation in respect to the right of the state to alter, modify, or
amend such a charter, ***"[] but later holdings becloud this
rule.[]
[pg ]corporations as persons subject to the law.—but suppose the
state neglects to reserve the right to amend, alter, or repeal—is it,
then, without power to control its corporate creatures? by no means.
private corporations, like other private persons, are always presumed to
be subject to the legislative power of the state; from which it follows
that immunities conferred by charter are to be treated as exceptions to
an otherwise controlling rule. this principle was recognized by chief
justice marshall in the case of providence bank v. billings,[] in
which he held that in the absence of express stipulation or reasonable
implication to the contrary in its charter, the bank was subject to the
taxing power of the state, notwithstanding that the power to tax is the
power to destroy.
corporations and the police power.—and of course the same
principle is equally applicable to the exercise by the state of its
police powers. thus, in what was perhaps the leading case before the
civil war, the supreme court of vermont held that the legislature of
that state had the right, in furtherance of the public safety, to
require chartered companies operating railways to fence in their tracks
and provide cattle yards. in a matter of this nature, said the court,
corporations are on a level with individuals engaged in the same
business, unless, from their charter, they can prove the contrary.[]
since then the rule has been applied many times in justification of
state regulation of railroads,[] and even of the application of a
state prohibition law to a company which had been chartered expressly to
manufacture beer.[]
[pg ]
the strict construction of public grants
long, however, before the cases last cited were decided, the principle
which they illustrate had come to be powerfully reinforced by two
others, the first of which is that all charter privileges and immunities
are to be strictly construed as against the claims of the state; or as
it is otherwise often phrased, "nothing passes by implication in a
public grant."
the charles river bridge case.—the leading case is that of the
charles river bridge company v. warren bridge company,[] which was
decided shortly after chief justice marshall's death by a substantially
new court. the question at issue was whether the charter of the
complaining company, which authorized it to operate a toll bridge, stood
in the way of the state's permitting another company of later date to
operate a free bridge in the immediate vicinity. inasmuch as the first
company could point to no clause in its charter which specifically
vested it with an exclusive right, the court held the charter of the
second company to be valid on the principle just stated. justice story,
who remained from the old bench, presented a vigorous dissent, in which
he argued cogently, but unavailingly, that the monopoly claimed by the
charles river bridge company was fully as reasonable an implication from
the terms of its charter and the circumstances surrounding its
concession as perpetuity had been from the terms of the dartmouth
college charter and the environing transaction.
the court was in fact making new law, because it was looking at things
from a new point of view. this was the period when judicial recognition
of the police power began to take on a doctrinal character. it was also
the period when the railroad business was just beginning. chief justice
taney's opinion evinces the influence of both these developments. the
power of the state to provide for its own internal happiness and
prosperity was not, he asserted, to be pared away by mere legal
intendments; nor was its ability to avail itself of the lights of modern
science to be frustrated by obsolete interests such as those of the old
turnpike companies, the charter privileges of which, he apprehended,
might easily become a bar to the development of transportation along new
lines.[]
applications of the strict construction rule.—the rule of
strict construction has been reiterated by the court many times. a [pg ]good
illustration is afforded by the following passage from its opinion in
blair v. chicago,[] decided nearly seventy years after the charles
river bridge case: "legislative grants of this character should be in
such unequivocal form of expression that the legislative mind may be
distinctly impressed with their character and import, in order that the
privileges may be intelligently granted or purposely withheld. it is a
matter of common knowledge that grants of this character are usually
prepared by those interested in them, and submitted to the legislature
with a view to obtain from such bodies the most liberal grant of
privileges which they are willing to give. this is one among many
reasons why they are to be strictly construed. *** 'the principle is
this, that all rights which are asserted against the state must be
clearly defined, and not raised by inference or presumption; and if the
charter is silent about a power, it does not exist. if, on a fair
reading of the instrument, reasonable doubts arise as to the proper
interpretation to be given to it, those doubts are to be solved in favor
of the state; and where it is susceptible of two meanings, the one
restricting and the other extending the powers of the corporation, that
construction is to be adopted which works the least harm to the
state.'"[]
strict construction of tax exemptions.—an excellent
illustration of the operation of the rule in relation to tax exemptions
is furnished by the derivative doctrine that an immunity of this
character must be deemed as intended solely for the benefit of the
corporation receiving it and hence may not, in the absence of express
permission by the state, be passed on to a successor.[] thus, where
two companies, each exempt from taxation, were permitted by the
legislature to consolidate the new corporation was held to be subject to
taxation.[] again, a statute which granted a corporation all "the
rights and privileges" of an earlier corporation was held not to confer
the latter's "immunity" from taxation.[] yet again, a legislative
authorization of the transfer by one corporation to another of the
former's "estate, property, right, privileges, and franchises" was held
not to clothe the later company with the earlier one's exemption from
taxation.[]
[pg ]furthermore, an exemption from taxation is to be strictly construed
even in the hands of one clearly entitled to it. so the exemption
conferred by its charter on a railway company was held not to extend to
branch roads constructed by it under a later statute.[] also, a
general exemption of the property of a corporation from taxation was
held to refer only to the property actually employed in its
business.[] also, the charter exemption of the capital stock of a
railroad from taxation "for ten years after completion of the said road"
was held not to become operative until the completion of the road.[]
so also the exemption of the campus and endowment fund of a college was
held to leave other lands of the college, though a part of its
endowment, subject to taxation.[] likewise, provisions in a statute
that bonds of the state and its political subdivisions are not to be
taxed and shall not be taxed were held not to exempt interest on them
from taxation as income of the owners.[]
strict construction and the police power.—the police power,
too, has frequently benefited from the doctrine of strict construction,
although, for a reason pointed out below, this recourse is today seldom,
if ever, necessary in this connection. some of the more striking cases
may be briefly summarized. the provision in the charter of a railway
company permitting it to set reasonable charges still left the
legislature free to determine what charges were reasonable.[] on the
other hand, when a railway agreed to accept certain rates for a
specified period, it thereby foreclosed the question of the
reasonableness of such rates.[] the grant to a company of the right
to supply a city with water for twenty-five years was held not to
prevent a similar concession to another company by the same city.[]
the promise by a city in the charter of a water company not to make a
similar grant to any other person or corporation was held not to prevent
the city itself from engaging in the business.[] a municipal
concession to a water company which was to run for thirty years and
which was accompanied by the provision that the "said company shall
charge the following rates," was held not to prevent the city from
reducing such rates.[] but more broadly, the grant to a municipality
of the power to regulate the charges of public service companies was
held not to bestow the right to contract away this power.[] indeed,
any claim by a private corporation that it received the rate-making
power from a municipality must survive a two-fold challenge: first, as
to the right of the municipality under its charter to make such a grant;
secondly, as to whether it has actually done so; and in both respects
[pg ]an affirmative answer must be based on express words and not on
implication.[]
the doctrine of inalienable state powers
the second of the doctrines mentioned above whereby the principle of the
subordination of all persons, corporate and individual alike, to the
legislative power of the state has been fortified, is the doctrine that
certain of the state's powers are inalienable, and that any attempt by a
state to alienate them, upon any consideration whatsoever, is ipso
facto void, and hence incapable of producing a "contract" within the
meaning of article i, section . one of the earliest cases to assert
this principle occurred in new york in . the corporation of the city
of new york, having conveyed certain lands for the purposes of a church
and cemetery together with a covenant for quiet enjoyment, later passed
a by-law forbidding their use as a cemetery. in denying an action
against the city for breach of covenant, the state court said the
defendants "had no power as a party, [to the covenant] to make a
contract which should control or embarrass their legislative powers and
duties."[]
the eminent domain power inalienable.—the supreme court first
applied similar doctrine in  in a case involving a grant of
exclusive right to construct a bridge at a specified locality.
sustaining the right of the state of vermont to make a new grant to a
competing company, the court held that the obligation of the earlier
exclusive grant was sufficiently recognized in making just compensation
[pg ]for it; and that corporate franchises, like all other forms of
property, are subject to the overruling power of eminent domain.[]
this reasoning was reinforced by an appeal to the theory of state
sovereignty, which was held to involve the corollary of the
inalienability of all the principal powers of a state.
the subordination of all charter rights and privileges to the power of
eminent domain has been maintained by the court ever since; not even an
explicit agreement by the state to forego the exercise of the power will
avail against it.[] conversely, the state may revoke an improvident
grant of the public petitionary without recourse to the power of eminent
domain, such a grant being inherently beyond the power of the state to
make. so when the legislature of illinois in  devised to the
illinois central railroad company, its successors and assigns, the
state's right and title to nearly a thousand acres of submerged land
under lake michigan along the harbor front of chicago, and four years
later sought to repeal the grant, the court, in a four-to-three
decision, sustained an action by the state to recover the lands in
question. said justice field, speaking for the majority: "such
abdication is not consistent with the exercise of that trust which
requires the government of the state to preserve such waters for the use
of public. the trust devolving upon the state for the public, and which
can only be discharged by the management and control of property in
which the public has an interest, cannot be relinquished by a transfer
of the property. *** any grant of the kind is necessarily revocable,
and the exercise of the trust by which the property was held by the
state can be resumed at any time."[] the case affords an interesting
commentary on fletcher v. peck.[]
the taxing power not inalienable.—on the other hand, repeated
endeavors to subject tax exemptions to the doctrine of inalienability
though at times supported by powerful minorities on the bench, have
always failed.[] as recently as january, , the court ruled that
the georgia railway company was entitled to seek an injunction in the
federal courts against an attempt by georgia's revenue commission to
compel it to pay ad valorem taxes contrary to the terms of its special
charter issued in . to the argument that this was a suit contrary to
the eleventh amendment it returned the answer that the immunity from
federal jurisdiction created by the amendment "does not extend to
individuals who act as officers without constitutional authority."[]
[pg ]the police power; when inalienable.—the leading case involving
the police power is stone v. mississippi,  u.s. , decided in
. in  the legislature of mississippi chartered a company to
which it expressly granted the power to conduct a lottery. two years
later the state adopted a new constitution which contained a provision
forbidding lotteries; and a year later the legislature passed an act to
put this provision into effect. in upholding this act and the
constitutional provision on which it was based, the court said: "the
power of governing is a trust committed by the people to the government,
no part of which can be granted away. the people, in their sovereign
capacity, have established their agencies for the preservation of the
public health and the public morals, and the protection of public and
private rights," and these agencies can neither give away nor sell their
discretion. all that one can get by a charter permitting the business of
conducting a lottery "is suspension of certain governmental rights in
his favor, subject to withdrawal at will."[]
the court shortly afterward applied the same reasoning in a case in
which was challenged the right of louisiana to invade the exclusive
privilege of a corporation engaged in the slaughter of cattle in new
orleans by granting another company the right to engage in the same
business. although the state did not offer to compensate the older
company for the lost monopoly, its action was sustained on the ground
that it had been taken in the interest of the public health.[] when,
however, the city of new orleans, in reliance on this precedent, sought
to repeal an exclusive franchise which it had granted a company for
fifty years to supply gas to its inhabitants, the court interposed its
veto, explaining that in this instance neither the public health, the
public morals, nor the public safety was involved.[]
later decisions, nonetheless, apply the principle of inalienability
broadly. to quote from one: "it is settled that neither the 'contract'
clause nor the 'due process' clause has the effect of overriding the
power to the state to establish all regulations that are reasonably
necessary to secure the health, safety, good order, comfort, or general
welfare of the community; that this power can neither be abdicated nor
bargained away, and is inalienable even by express grant; and all
contract and property rights are held subject to its fair
exercise."[] [pg ]today, indeed, it scarcely pays a company to rely upon
its charter privileges or upon special concessions from a state in
resisting the application to it of measures claiming to have been
enacted by the police power thereof. for if this claim is sustained by
the court, the obligation of the contract clause will not avail; while
if it is not, the due process of law clause of the fourteenth amendment
will furnish a sufficient reliance. that is to say, the discrepancy
which once existed between the court's theory of an overriding police
power in these two adjoining fields of constitutional law is today
apparently at an end. indeed, there is usually no sound reason why
rights based on public grant should be regarded as more sacrosanct than
rights which involve the same subject matter but are of different
provenience.
private contracts
scope of the term.—the term "private contracts" is, naturally,
not all-inclusive. a judgment, though granted in favor of a creditor, is
not a contract in the sense of the constitution;[] nor is
marriage.[] and whether a particular agreement is a valid contract
is a question for the courts, and finally for the supreme court, when
the protection of the contract clause is invoked.[]
source of the obligation.—the question of the nature and
source of the obligation of a contract, which went by default in
fletcher v. peck and the dartmouth college case, with such vastly
important consequences, had eventually to be met and answered by the
court in connection with private contracts. the first case involving
such a contract to reach the supreme court was sturges v.
crowninshield[] in which a debtor sought escape behind a state
insolvency act of later date than his note. the act was held
inoperative; [pg ]but whether this was because of its retroaction in this
particular case or for the broader reason that it assumed to excuse
debtors from their promises, was not at the time made clear. as noted
earlier, chief justice marshall's definition on this occasion of the
obligation of a contract as the law which binds the parties to perform
their undertakings was not free from ambiguity, owing to the uncertain
connotation of the term law.
ogden v. saunders.—these obscurities were finally
cleared up for most cases in ogden v. saunders,[] in which the
temporal relation of the statute and the contract involved was exactly
reversed—the former antedating the latter. marshall contended, but
unsuccessfully, that the statute was void, inasmuch as it purported to
release the debtor from that original, intrinsic obligation which always
attaches under natural law to the acts of free agents. "when," he wrote,
"we advert to the course of reading generally pursued by american
statesmen in early life, we must suppose that the framers of our
constitution were intimately acquainted with the writings of those wise
and learned men whose treatises on the laws of nature and nations have
guided public opinion on the subjects of obligation and contract," and
that they took their views on these subjects from those sources. he also
posed the question of what would happen to the obligation of contracts
clause if states might pass acts declaring that all contracts made
subsequently thereto should be subject to legislative control.[]
for the first and only time majority of the court abandoned the chief
justice's leadership. speaking by justice washington it held that the
obligation of private contracts is derived from the municipal law—state
statutes and judicial decisions—and that the inhibition of article i,
section , is confined to legislative acts made after the contracts
affected by them, with one exception. for by a curiously complicated
line of reasoning it was also held in this same case that when the
creditor is a nonresident, then a state may not by an insolvent law
rights under a contract, albeit one of later date.
with the proposition established that the obligation of a private
contract comes from the municipal law in existence when the contract
is made, a further question presents itself, namely, what part of the
municipal law is referred to? no doubt, the law which determines the
validity of the contract itself is a part of such law. also, the law
which interprets the terms used in the contract, or which supplies
certain terms when others are used; as for instance, constitutional
provisions or statutes which determine what is "legal tender" for the
[pg ]payment of debts; or judicial decisions which construe the term "for
value received" as used in a promissory note, and so on. in short, any
law which at the time of the making of a contract goes to measure the
rights and duties of the parties to it in relation to each other enters
into its obligation.
remedy a part of the obligation
suppose, however, that one of the parties to a contract fails to live up
to his obligation as thus determined. the contract itself may now be
regarded as at an end; but the injured party, nevertheless, has a new
set of rights in its stead, those which are furnished him by the
remedial law, including the law of procedure. in the case of a mortgage,
he may foreclose; in the case of a promissory note, he may sue; in
certain cases, he may demand specific performance. hence the further
question arises, whether this remedial law is to be considered a part of
the law supplying the obligation of contracts. originally, the
predominating opinion was negative, since as we have just seen, this law
does not really come into operation until the contract has been broken.
yet it is obvious that the sanction which this law lends to contracts is
extremely important—indeed, indispensable. in due course it became the
accepted doctrine that that part of the law which supplies one party to
a contract with a remedy if the other party does not live up to his
agreement, as authoritatively interpreted, entered into the "obligation
of contracts" in the constitutional sense of this term, and so might not
be altered to the material weakening of existing contracts. in the
court's own words, "nothing can be more material to the obligation than
the means of enforcement. without the remedy the contract may, indeed,
in the sense of the law, be said not to exist, and its obligation to
fall within the class of those moral and social duties which depend for
their fulfillment wholly upon the will of the individual. the ideas of
validity and remedy are inseparable, ***"[]
establishment of the rules.—this rule was first definitely
announced in  in the case of bronson v. kinzie.[] here an
illinois mortgage giving the mortgagee an unrestricted power of sale in
case of the mortgagor's fault was involved, along with a later act of
the legislature which required mortgaged premises to be sold for not
less than two-thirds of the appraised value, and allowed the mortgagor a
year after the sale to redeem them. it was held that the statute, in
altering the preexisting remedies to such an extent, violated the
constitutional prohibition, and hence was void. the year following a
like ruling was made in the case of mccracken v. hayward[] as to a
statutory provision that personal property should not be sold under
execution for less than two-thirds of its appraised value.
[pg ]qualifications of the rule.—but the rule illustrated by these
cases does not signify that a state may make no changes in its remedial
or procedural law which affect existing contracts. "provided," the court
has said, "a substantial or efficacious remedy remains or is given, by
means of which a party can enforce his rights under the contract, the
legislature may modify or change existing remedies or prescribe new
modes of procedure."[] thus states are constantly remodelling their
judicial systems and modes of practice unembarrassed by the obligation
of contracts clause.[] the right of a state to abolish imprisonment
for debt was early asserted.[] again the right of a state to shorten
the time for the bringing of actions has been affirmed even as to
existing causes of action, but with the proviso added that a reasonable
time must be left for the bringing of such actions.[] on the other
hand, a statute which withdrew the judicial power to enforce
satisfaction of a certain class of judgments by mandamus was held
invalid.[] in the words of the court: "every case must be determined
upon its own circumstances;"[] and it later added: "in all such
cases the question becomes, ***, one of reasonableness, and of that
the legislature is primarily the judge."[]
[pg ]the municipal bond cases.—there is one class of cases
resulting from the doctrine that the law of remedy constitutes a part of
the obligation of a contract to which a special word is due. this
comprises cases in which the contracts involved were municipal bonds.
while a city is from one point of view but an emanation from the
government's sovereignty and an agent thereof, when it borrows money it
is held to be acting in a corporate or private capacity, and so to be
suable on its contracts. furthermore, as was held in the leading case of
von hoffman v. quincy,[] "where a state has authorized a municipal
corporation to contract and to exercise the power of local taxation to
the extent necessary to meet its engagements, the power thus given
cannot be withdrawn until the contract is satisfied." in this case the
court issued a mandamus compelling the city officials to levy taxes for
the satisfaction of a judgment on its bonds in accordance with the law
as it stood when the bonds were issued.[] nor may a state by
dividing an indebted municipality among others enable it to escape its
obligations. in such a case the debt follows the territory, and the duty
of assessing and collecting taxes to satisfy it devolves upon the
succeeding corporations and their officers.[] but where a municipal
organization has ceased practically to exist through the vacation of its
offices, and the government's function is exercised once more by the
state directly, the court has thus far found itself powerless to
frustrate a program of repudiation.[] however, there is no reason
why the state should enact the role of particeps criminis in an
attempt to relieve its municipalities of the obligation to meet their
honest debts. thus in , during the great depression, new jersey
created a municipal finance commission with power to assume control over
its insolvent municipalities. to the complaint of certain bondholders
that this legislation impaired the contract obligations of their
debtors, the court, speaking by justice frankfurter, pointed out that
the practical value of an unsecured claim against a city is "the
effectiveness of the city's taxing power," which the legislation under
review was designed to conserve.[]
[pg ]
private contracts and the police power
the increasing subjection of public grants to the state's police power
has been previously pointed out. that purely private contracts should be
in any stronger situation in this respect would obviously be anomalous
in the extreme. in point of fact, the ability of private parties to
curtail governmental authority by the easy devise of contracting with
one another is, with an exception to be noted, even less than that of
the state to tie its own hands by contracting away its own powers. so,
when it was contended in an early pennsylvania case, than an act
prohibiting the issuance of notes by unincorporated banking associations
was violative of the obligation of contracts clause because of its
effect upon certain existing contracts of members of such associations,
the state supreme court answered: "but it is said, that the members had
formed a contract between themselves, which would be dissolved by the
stoppage of their business; and what then? is that such a violation of
contracts as is prohibited by the constitution of the united states?
consider to what such a construction would lead. let us suppose, that in
one of the states there is no law against gaming, cock-fighting,
horse-racing or public masquerades, and that companies should be formed
for the purpose of carrying on these practices; ***" would the
legislature then be powerless to prohibit them? the answer returned, of
course, was no.[]
the prevailing doctrine is stated by the supreme court of the united
states in the following words: "it is the settled law of this court that
the interdiction of statutes impairing the obligation of contracts does
not prevent the state from exercising such powers as are vested in it
for the promotion of the common weal, or are necessary for the general
good of the public, though contracts previously entered into between
individuals may thereby be affected. *** in other words, that parties
by entering into contracts may not estop the legislature from enacting
laws intended for the public good."[]
[pg ]so, in an early case we find a state recording act upheld as applying to
deeds dated before the passage of the act.[] later cases have
brought the police power in its more customary phases into contact with
private, as well as with public contracts. lottery tickets, valid when
issued, were necessarily invalidated by legislation prohibiting the
lottery business;[] contracts for the sale of beer, valid when
entered into, were similarly nullified by a state prohibition law;[]
and contracts of employment were modified by later laws regarding the
liability of employers and workmen's compensation.[] likewise a
contract between plaintiff and defendant did not prevent the state from
making the latter a concession which rendered the contract
worthless;[] nor did a contract as to rates between two railway
companies prevent the state from imposing different rates;[] nor did
a contract between a public utility company and a customer protect the
rates agreed upon from being superseded by those fixed by the
state.[] similarly, a contract for the conveyance of water beyond
the limits of a state did not prevent the state from prohibiting such
conveyance.[]
emergency legislation.—but the most striking exertions of the
police power touching private contracts, as well as other private
interests, within recent years have been evoked by war and economic
depression. thus in world war i the state of new york enacted a statute
which, declaring that a public emergency existed, forbade the
enforcement of covenants for the surrender of the possession of premises
on the expiration of leases, and wholly deprived for a period owners of
dwellings, including apartment and tenement houses, within the city of
new york and contiguous counties of possessory remedies for the eviction
from their premises of tenants in possession when the law took effect,
providing the latter were able and willing to pay a reasonable rent. in
answer to objections leveled against this legislation on the basis of
the obligation of contracts clause, the court said: "but contracts are
made subject to this exercise of the power of the state when otherwise
justified, as we have held this to be."[] in a subsequent case,
however, the court added that, while the declaration [pg ]by the legislature
of a justifying emergency was entitled to great respect, it was not
conclusive; that a law "depending upon the existence of an emergency or
other certain state of facts to uphold it may cease to operate if the
emergency ceases or the facts change," and that whether they have
changed was always open to judicial inquiry.[]
individual rights versus public welfare.—summing up the result
of the cases above referred to, chief justice hughes, speaking for the
court in home building and loan association v. blaisdell,[]
remarked in : "it is manifest from this review of our decisions that
there has been a growing appreciation of public needs and of the
necessity of finding ground for a rational compromise between individual
rights and public welfare. the settlement and consequent contraction of
the public domain, the pressure of a constantly increasing density of
population, the interrelation of the activities of our people and the
complexity of our economic interests, have inevitably led to an
increased use of the organization of society in order to protect the
very bases of individual opportunity. where, in earlier days, it was
thought that only the concerns of individuals or of classes were
involved, and that those of the state itself were touched only remotely,
it has later been found that the fundamental interests of the state are
directly affected; and that the question is no longer merely that of one
party to a contract as against another, but of the use of reasonable
means to safeguard the economic structure upon which the good of all
depends. *** the principle of this development is, *** [he added]
that the reservation of the reasonable exercise of the protective power
of the states is read into all contracts ***."[]
evaluation of the clause today
yet it should not be inferred that the obligation of contracts clause is
today totally moribund even in times of stress. as we have just seen it
still furnishes the basis for some degree of judicial review as to the
substantiality of the factual justification of a professed exercise by a
state legislature of its police power; and in the case of legislation
affecting the remedial rights of creditors, it still affords a solid and
palpable barrier against legislative erosion. nor is this surprising in
view of the fact that, as we have seen, such rights were foremost [pg ]in
the minds of the framers of the clause. the court's attitude toward
insolvency laws, redemption laws, exemption laws, appraisement laws and
the like has always been that they may not be given retroactive
operation;[] and the general lesson of these earlier cases is
confirmed by the court's decisions between  and  in certain
cases involving state moratorium statutes. in home building and loan
association v. blaisdell,[] the leading case, a closely divided
court sustained the minnesota moratorium act of april , , which,
reciting the existence of a severe financial and economic depression for
several years and the frequent occurrence of mortgage foreclosure sales
for inadequate prices, and asserting that these conditions had created
an economic emergency calling for the exercise of the state's police
power, authorized its courts to extend the period for redemption from
foreclosure sales for such additional time as they might deem just and
equitable, although in no event beyond may , . the act also left
the mortgagor in possession during the period of extension, subject to
the requirement that he pay a reasonable rental for the property as
fixed by the court, at such time and in such manner as should be
determined by the court. contemporaneously, however, less carefully
drawn statutes from missouri and arkansas, acts which were less
considerate of creditor's rights, were set aside as violative of the
contracts clause.[] "a state is free to regulate the procedure in
its courts even with reference to contracts already made," said justice
cardozo for the court, "and moderate extensions of the time for pleading
or for trial will ordinarily fall within the power so reserved. a
different situation is presented when extensions are so piled up as to
make the remedy a shadow. *** what controls our judgment at such times
is the underlying reality rather than the form or label. the changes of
remedy now challenged as invalid are to be viewed in combination, with
the cumulative significance that each imparts to all. so viewed they are
seen to be an oppressive and unnecessary destruction of nearly all the
incidents that give attractiveness and value to collateral
security."[] on the other hand, in the most recent of this category
of cases, the court gave its approval to an extension by the state of
new york of its moratorium legislation. while recognizing that business
conditions had improved, the court was of the opinion that there was
reason to believe that "'the sudden termination of the legislation which
has damned up normal liquidation of these mortgages for more than eight
years might well result in an emergency more acute than that which the
original legislation was intended to alleviate.'"[]
[pg ]and meantime the court had sustained legislation of the state of new
york under which a mortgagee of real property was denied a deficiency
judgment in a foreclosure suit where the state court found that the
value of the property purchased by the mortgagee at the foreclosure sale
was equal to the debt secured by the mortgage.[] "mortgagees," the
court said, "are constitutionally entitled to no more than payment in
full. *** to hold that mortgagees are entitled under the contract
clause to retain the advantages of a forced sale would be to dignify
into a constitutionally protected property right their chance to get
more than the amount of their contracts. *** the contract clause does
not protect such a strategical, procedural advantage."[]
statistical data pertinent to the clause
the obligation of contracts clause attained the high point of its
importance in our constitutional law in the years immediately following
the civil war.[] between  and  there were twenty cases in
which state acts were held invalid under the clause, of which twelve
involved public contracts. during the next fifteen years, which was the
period of waite's chief justiceship, twenty-nine cases reached the court
in which state legislation was set aside under the clause. twenty-four
of these involved public contracts. the decline of the importance of the
clause as a title in constitutional law began under chief justice fuller
( to ). during this period less than % of the cases involving
the validity of state legislation involved this rubric. in twenty-eight
of these cases, of which only two involved private contracts, the
statute involved was set aside. during chief justice white's term (
to ) the proportion of contract cases shrank to %, and in that of
chief justice taft, to %.[]
in recent years the clause has appeared to undergo something of a
revival, not however as a protection of public grants, but as a
protection of private credits. during the depression, which began in
 and deepened in , state legislatures enacted numerous
[pg ]moratorium statutes, and beginning with home loan association v.
blaisdell, which was decided in , the court was required to pass
upon several of these. at the same time the clause was, in effect,
treated by the court in two important cases as interpretive of the due
process clause, amendment v, and thus applied indirectly as a
restriction on the power of congress.[] but this emergence of the
clause into prominence was a flash in the pan. during the last decade
hardly a case a term involving the clause has reached the court,
counting even those in which it is treated as a tail to the due process
of law kite.[] the reason for this declension has been twofold:
first, the subordination of public grants to the police power; secondly,
the expansion of the due process clause, which has largely rendered it a
fifth wheel to the constitutional law coach.
clause . no state shall, without the consent of the congress, lay any
imposts or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely
necessary for executing it's inspection laws: and the net produce of all
duties and imposts, laid by any state on imports or exports, shall be
for the use of the treasury of the united states; and all such laws
shall be subject to the revision and controul of the congress.
scope
only articles imported from or exported to a foreign country, or "a
place over which the constitution has not extended its commands with
respect to imports and their taxation," e.g., the philippine [pg ]islands,
are comprehended by the terms "imports" and "exports,"[] goods
brought from another state are not affected by this section.[] to
determine how long imported wares remain under the protection of this
clause, the supreme court enunciated the original package doctrine in
the leading case of brown v. maryland.[] "when the importer has so
acted upon the thing imported," wrote chief justice marshall, "that it
has become incorporated and mixed up with the mass of property in the
country, it has, perhaps, lost its distinctive character as an import,
and has become subject to the taxing power of the state; but while
remaining the property of the importer, in his warehouse, in the
original form or package in which it was imported, a tax upon it is too
plainly a duty on imports, to escape the prohibition in the
constitution."[] a box, case or bale in which separate parcels of
goods have been placed by the foreign seller is regarded as the original
package, and upon the opening of such container for the purpose of using
the separate parcels, or of exposing them for sale, each parcel loses
its character as an import and becomes subject to taxation as a part of
the general mass of property in the state.[] imports for manufacture
cease to be such when the intended processing takes place,[] or when
the original packages are broken.[] where a manufacturer imports
merchandise and stores it in his warehouse in the original packages,
that merchandise does not lose its quality as an import, at least so
long as it is not required to meet such immediate needs.[] the
purchaser of imported goods is deemed to be the importer if he was the
efficient cause of the importation, whether the title to the goods
vested in him at the time of shipment, or after its arrival in this
country.[] a state franchise tax measured by properly apportioned
gross receipts may be imposed upon a railroad company in respect of the
company's receipts for services in handling imports and exports at its
marine terminal.[]
privilege taxes
a state law requiring importers to take out a license to sell imported
goods amounts to an indirect tax on imports and hence is
unconstitutional.[] likewise, a franchise tax upon foreign
corporations engaged in importing nitrate and selling it in the original
packages,[] [pg ]a tax on sales by brokers[] and auctioneers[]
of imported merchandise in original packages, and a tax on the sale of
goods in foreign commerce consisting of an annual license fee plus a
percentage of gross sales,[] have been held invalid. on the other
hand, pilotage fees,[] a tax upon the gross sales of a purchaser
from the importer,[] a license tax upon dealing in fish which,
through processing, handling, and sale, have lost their distinctive
character as imports,[] an annual license fee imposed on persons
engaged in buying and selling foreign bills of exchange,[] and a tax
upon the right of an alien to receive property as heir, legatee, or
donee of a deceased person[] have been held not to be duties on
imports or exports.
property taxes
property brought into the united states from without is immune from ad
valorem taxation so long as it retains its character as an
import,[] but the proceeds of the sale of imports, whether in the
form of money or notes, may be taxed by a state.[] a property tax
levied on warehouse receipts for whiskey exported to germany was held
unconstitutional as a tax on exports.[]
inspection laws
inspection laws "are confined to such particulars as, in the estimation
of the legislature and according to the customs of trade, are deemed
necessary to fit the inspected article for the market, by giving the
purchaser public assurance that the article is in that condition, and of
that quality, which makes it merchantable and fit for use or
consumption."[] in turner v. maryland[] the supreme court
listed as recognized elements of inspection laws, the "quality of the
article, form, capacity, dimensions, and weight of package, mode of
putting up, and marking and branding of various kinds, ***" .[] it
sustained as an inspection law a charge for storage and inspection
imposed upon every hogshead of tobacco grown in the state and intended
[pg ]for export, which the law required to be brought to a state warehouse
to be inspected and branded. the court has cited this section as a
recognition of a general right of the states to pass inspection laws,
and to bring, within their reach articles of interstate, as well as of
foreign, commerce.[] but on the ground that, "it has never been
regarded as within the legitimate scope of inspection laws to forbid
trade in respect to any known article of commerce, irrespective of its
condition and quality, merely on account of its intrinsic nature and the
injurious consequences of its use or abuse," it held that a state law
forbidding the importation of intoxicating liquors into the state could
not be sustained as an inspection law.[] since the adoption of the
twenty-first amendment, such state legislation is valid whether
classified as an inspection law or not.
clause . no state shall, without the consent of congress, lay any duty
of tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war in time of peace, enter into
any agreement or compact with another state, or with a foreign power, or
engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as
will not admit of delay.
the prohibition against tonnage duties embraces all taxes and duties,
regardless of their name or form, whether measured by the tonnage of the
vessel or not, which are in effect charges for the privilege of
entering, trading in, or lying in a port.[] but it does not extend
to charges made by state authority, even if graduated according to
tonnage,[] for services rendered to the vessel, such as pilotage,
towage, charges for loading and unloading cargoes, wharfage, or
storage.[] for the purpose of determining wharfage charges, it is
immaterial whether the wharf was built by the state, a municipal
corporation or an individual; where the wharf is owned by a city, the
fact that the city realized a profit beyond the amount expended does not
render the toll objectionable.[] the services of harbor masters for
which fees are allowed must be actually rendered, and a law permitting
harbor masters or port wardens to impose a fee in all cases is
void.[] a state may not levy a tonnage duty to defray the expenses
of its quarantine system,[] but it may exact a fixed fee for
examination of all vessels passing quarantine.[] a state license fee
for ferrying on a navigable [pg ]river is not a tonnage tax, but rather is a
proper exercise of the police power, and the fact that a vessel is
enrolled under federal law does not exempt it.[] in the state
tonnage tax cases,[] an annual tax on steamboats measured by their
registered tonnage was held invalid despite the contention that it was a
valid tax on the steamboat as property.
this provision contemplates the use of the state's military power to put
down an armed insurrection too strong to be controlled by civil
authority;[] and the organization and maintenance of an active state
militia is not a keeping of troops in time of peace within the
prohibition of this clause.[]
background of clause
except for the single limitation that the consent of congress must be
obtained, the original inherent sovereign rights of the states to make
compacts with each other was not surrendered under the
constitution.[] "the compact," as the supreme court has put it,
"adapts to our union of sovereign states the age-old treaty-making power
of independent sovereign nations."[] in american history the compact
technique can be traced back to the numerous controversies which arose
over the ill-defined boundaries of the original colonies. these disputes
were usually resolved by negotiation, with the resulting agreement
subject to approval by the crown.[] when the political ties with
britain were broken the articles of confederation provided for appeal
to [pg ]congress in all disputes between two or more states over boundaries
or "any cause whatever"[] and required the approval of congress for
any "treaty confederation or alliance" to which a state should be a
party.[] the framers of the constitution went further. by the first
clause of this section they laid down an unqualified prohibition against
"any treaty, alliance or confederation"; and by the third clause they
required the consent of congress for "any agreement or compact." the
significance of this distinction was pointed out by chief justice taney
in holmes v. jennison.[] "as these words ('agreement or compact')
could not have been idly or superfluously used by the framers of the
constitution, they cannot be construed to mean the same thing with the
word treaty. they evidently mean something more, and were designed to
make the prohibition more comprehensive. *** the word 'agreement,'
does not necessarily import and direct any express stipulation; nor is
it necessary that it should be in writing. if there is a verbal
understanding, to which both parties have assented, and upon which both
are acting, it is an 'agreement.' and the use of all of these terms,
'treaty,' 'agreement,' 'compact,' show that it was the intention of the
framers of the constitution to use the broadest and most comprehensive
terms; and that they anxiously desired to cut off all connection or
communication between a state and a foreign power; and we shall fail to
execute that evident intention, unless we give to the word 'agreement'
its most extended signification; and so apply it as to prohibit every
agreement, written or verbal, formal or informal, positive or implied,
by the mutual understanding of the parties."[] but in virginia v.
tennessee,[] decided more than a half century later, the court
shifted position, holding that the unqualified prohibition of compacts
and agreements between states without the consent of congress did not
apply to agreements concerning such minor matters as adjustments of
boundaries, which have no tendency to increase the political powers of
the contractant states or to encroach upon the just supremacy of the
united states. this divergence of doctrine may conceivably have
interesting consequences.[]
[pg ]
subject matter of interstate compacts
for many years after the constitution was adopted, boundary disputes
continued to predominate as the subject matter of agreements among the
states. since the turn of the twentieth century, however, the interstate
compact has been used to an increasing extent as an instrument for state
cooperation in carrying out affirmative programs for solving common
problems. the execution of vast public undertakings, such as the
development of the port of new york by the port authority created by
compact between new york and new jersey, flood control, the prevention
of pollution, and the conservation and allocation of water supplied by
interstate streams, are among the objectives accomplished by this
means.[] another important use of this device was recognized by
congress in the act of june , ,[] whereby it consented in
advance to agreements for the control of crime. the first response to
this stimulus was the crime compact of , providing for the
supervision of parolees and probationers, to which forty-five states had
given adherence by .[] subsequently congress has authorized, on
varying conditions, compacts touching the production of tobacco, the
conservation of natural gas, the regulation of fishing in inland waters,
the furtherance of flood and pollution control, and other matters.
moreover, since  at least thirty-six states, beginning with new
jersey, have set up permanent commissions for interstate cooperation,
which have led to the formation of a council of state governments
("cosgo" for short), the creation of special commissions for the study
of the crime problem, the problem of highway safety, the trailer
problem, problems created by social security legislation, etc., and the
framing of uniform state legislation for dealing with some of
these.[]
consent of congress
the constitution makes no provision as to the time when the consent of
congress shall be given or the mode or form by which it shall be
signified.[] while the consent will usually precede the compact or
agreement, it may be given subsequently where the agreement relates to a
matter which could not be well considered until its nature is fully
developed.[] the required consent is not necessarily an expressed
consent; it may be inferred from circumstances.[] it is sufficiently
indicated, when not necessary to be made in advance, by the approval of
proceedings taken under it.[] the consent of congress [pg ]may be
granted conditionally "upon terms appropriate to the subject and
transgressing no constitutional limitations."[] and in a recent
instance it has not been forthcoming at all. in sipuel v. board of
regents,[] decided in , the supreme court ruled that the equal
protection clause of amendment xiv requires a state maintaining a law
school for white students to provide legal education for a negro
applicant, and to do so as soon as it does for applicants of any other
group. shortly thereafter the governors of  southern states convened
to canvass methods for meeting the demands of the court. there resulted
a compact to which  state legislatures have consented and by which a
board of control for southern regional education is set up. although
some early steps were taken toward obtaining congress's consent to the
agreement, the effort was soon abandoned, but without affecting the
cooperative educational program, which to date has not been extended to
the question of racial segregation.[] finally, congress does not, by
giving its consent to a compact, relinquish or restrict its own powers,
as for example, its power to regulate interstate commerce.[]
grants of franchise to corporation by two states
it is competent for a railroad corporation organized under the laws of
one state, when authorized so to do by the consent of the state which
created it, to accept authority from another state to extend its
railroad into such state and to receive a grant of powers to own and
control, by lease or purchase, railroads therein, and to subject itself
to such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the second state.
such legislation on the part of two or more states is not, in the
absence of inhibitory legislation by congress, regarded as within the
constitutional prohibition of agreements or compacts between
states.[]
legal effect of interstate compacts
whenever, by the agreement of the states concerned and the consent of
congress, an interstate compact comes into operation, it has the same
effect as a treaty between sovereign powers. boundaries [pg ]established by
such compacts become binding upon all citizens of the signatory states
and are conclusive as to their rights.[] private rights may be
affected by agreements for the equitable apportionment of the water of
an interstate stream, without a judicial determination of existing
rights.[] valid interstate compacts are within the protection of the
obligation of contracts clause and specific enforcement of them is
within the original jurisdiction of the supreme court.[] congress
also has authority to compel compliance with such a compact.[]
nor may a state read herself out of a compact which she has ratified and
to which congress has consented by pleading that under the state's
constitution as interpreted by the highest state court she had lacked
power to enter into such an agreement and was without power to meet
certain obligations thereunder. the final construction of the state
constitution in such a case rests with the supreme court.[]
notes
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] see pp. -.
[]  wheat. at .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  story, commentaries, §. see also ibid. §§ and
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. at .
[] ibid. .
[] prigg v. pennsylvania,  pet. , , -
[] juilliard v. greenman,  u.s. , - ().
see also justice bradley's concurring opinion in knox v. lee, 
wall. ,  ().
[] united states v. jones,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. kagama,  u.s.  ().
[] fong yue ting v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] hines v. davidowitz et al.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , -,  passim. for anticipations of
this conception of the powers of the national government in the field of
foreign relations, see penhallow v. doane,  dall. , , 
(); also ibid.  and  (argument of counsel); also chief
justice taney's opinion in holmes v. jennison,  pet. , -
[] locke, second treatise on government, chapter xi §
[] ibid. , .
[] wayman v. southard,  wheat.  ().
[] the brig aurora,  cr.  ().
[] wayman v. southard,  wheat. ,  ().
[] sunshine anthracite coal co. v. adkins,  u.s. ,
 (); united states v. rock royal co-operative,  u.s. ,
[] united states v. rock royal co-operative,  u.s. ,
[] schechter poultry corp. v. united states,  u.s. ,
 (); opp cotton mills v. administrator,  u.s. , 
(); american power & light co. v. securities & exchange comm., 
u.s. , ,  (). cf. wichita r. & l. co. v. public
utilities comm.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] new york cent. securities corp. v. united states, 
[] federal radio commission v. nelson bros. bond & mortgage
co.,  u.s. ,  (); national broadcasting co. v. united
states,  u.s. ,  (); federal communications commission v.
pottsville broadcasting co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lichter v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] panama refining co. v. ryan,  u.s.  ();
schechter poultry corp. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. rock royal co-operative,  u.s. 
(); sunshine anthracite coal co. v. adkins,  u.s.  ();
bowles v. willingham,  u.s. ,  (); yakus v. united
states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] fahey v. mallonee,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ex parte kollock,  u.s.  ().
[] buttfield v. stranahan,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. grimaud,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. shreveport grain & elevator co., 
[] currin v. wallace,  u.s.  ().
[] avent v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. rock royal co-operative,  u.s. 
[] yakus v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] bowles v. willingham,  u.s.  ().
[] sunshine anthracite coal co. v. adkins,  u.s. ,
[] hirabayashi v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
korematsu v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] fahey v. mallonee,  u.s.  ().
[] mulford v. smith,  u.s.  ().
[] interstate commerce comm'n. v. goodrich transit co., 
[] although reversing the decision of the state supreme court
that rates fixed by the commission were not subject to judicial review,
the supreme court implicitly sanctioned the exercise of rate-making
power by such bodies. chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. minnesota, 
[] hampton & co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
[] state of minnesota v. chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. 
minn. ,  ().
[] interstate commerce commission v. louisville & n.r. co.,
 u.s.  (); new york v. united states,  u.s. , -
() and cases cited therein. see also new york et al. v. united
states,  u.s.  ().
[] union bridge co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] first nat. bank v. fellows, ex rel. union trust co., 
[] mahler v. eby,  u.s.  (); united states ex rel.
tisi v. tod,  u.s.  ().
[] new york central securities corp. v. united states, 
[] federal radio comm'n. v. nelson bros. bond & mortgage
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] national broadcasting co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[]  stat. , as amended,  u.s.c. § et seq.
[] brannan v. stark,  u.s.  (). justice black,
with whom justices reed and douglas concurred, dissented, saying: "in
striking down these provisions of the secretary's order, the court has
departed from many principles it has previously announced in connection
with its supervision over administrative agents. under these principles,
the court would refrain from setting aside administrative findings of
fact when supported by substantial evidence; we would give weight to the
interpretation of a statute by its administrators; when, administrators
have interpreted broad statutory terms, such, as here involved, we would
recognize that it is our duty to accept this interpretation even though
it was not 'the only reasonable one' or the one 'we would have reached
had the question arisen in the first instance in judicial proceedings.'
unemployment comm'n v. aragon,  u.s. ,  ()." ibid. .
[] jackson v. roby,  u.s.  (); erhardt v.
boaro,  u.s.  (); butte city water co. v. baker,  u.s.
[] st. louis, i.m. & s.r. co. v. taylor,  u.s. , 
[] currin v. wallace,  u.s.  (); united states v.
rock royal co-operative,  u.s. ,  ().
[] currin v. wallace,  u.s. , ,  ().
[]  cr.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] hampton jr. & co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] ibid. -.—united states v. chemical foundation,
 u.s.  () presented the anomalous situation of the united states
suing to set aside a sale of alien property sold by one of its agents,
the alien property custodian, by authority of the president. the
government contended that statute under which the sale was made was
unconstitutional because, in giving the president full power of
disposition of the property, it delegated legislative power to the
president. declaring that "it was peculiarly within the province of the
commander-in-chief to know the facts and to determine what disposition
should be made of enemy properties in order effectively to carry on the
war," the court affirmed a decree dismissing the suit. ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] white house digest of provisions of law which would become
operative upon proclamation of a national emergency by the president.
the digest is dated december , . it was released to the press on
december th.  f.r. .
[] united states v. grimaud,  u.s.  ().
[] steuart & bros. inc. v. bowles,  u.s. , 
[] united states v. eaton,  u.s.  ().
[] steuart & bros. inc. v. bowles,  u.s.  ().
[] kraus & bros. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] landis, constitutional limitations on the congressional
power of investigation,  harvard law review, , - ().
[]  annals of congress,  ().
[] in , secretary of the treasury, oliver wolcott, jr.,
addressed a letter to the house of representatives advising them of his
resignation from office and inviting an investigation of his office.
such an inquiry was made.  annals of congress - ().
[]  cong. deb.  ().
[]  cong. deb.  ().
[] h.r. rep. no. , th cong., d sess., ser. no. , ,
[] cong. globe, th cong. st sess. - ().
[]  cong. deb. , , ,  ().
[] ibid. . see also harriman v. interstate commerce
commission,  u.s.  (); smith v. interstate commerce
commission,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] in re chapman,  u.s.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] in re chapman,  u.s. , - ().
[] united states v. bryan,  u.s. ,  ();
united states v. fleischman,  u.s.  ().
[] christoffel v. united states,  u.s. , , 
[] minor v. happersett,  wall. ,  ();
breedlove v. suttles,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte yarbrough,  u.s.  (); wiley v.
sinkler,  u.s. ,  (); swafford v. templeton,  u.s. 
(); united states v. classic,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. classic,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. mosley,  u.s.  (); united
states v. saylor,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. classic,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. mosley,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c. § (), superseded
by  stat.  ();  u.s.c. § (supp. ii,  ed.).
[] united states v. mosley,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. saylor,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. bathgate,  u.s.  (). see
also united states v. gradwell,  u.s.  ().
[] sen. rep. , th cong., st sess. ();  cong.
rec. - ().
[] no. lx.
[] hinds' precedents of the house of representatives, i:
[] ibid. -.
[] hinds' precedents of the house of representatives, i:
[]  cong. rec.  ().
[] hinds' precedents of the house of representatives, i:
[] ibid. §§-.
[] the part of this clause relating to the mode of
apportionment of representative among the several states, was changed by
the fourteenth amendment, § (p. ) and as to taxes on incomes
without apportionment, by the sixteenth amendment (p. ).
[] legal tender cases,  wall. ,  ().
[]  stat.  (). this same act penalizes refusal to
cooperate properly with the census taker by answering his questions and
in other ways.  u.s.c. .
[] the senate is a "continuing body"—mcgrain v.
daugherty,  u.s. , - ().
[]  stat.  (). this requirement was dropped in 
( stat. , -) but was renewed in  ( stat. ). see
also joel francis paschal, the house of representatives "grand
depository of the democratic principle", spring  issue of law and
contemporary problems (duke university school of law), -.
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ();  stat.
[]  stat.  ().
[] united states v. reese,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte siebold,  u.s.  (); ex parte clarke,
 u.s.  (); united states v. gale,  u.s.  ().
[] smiley v. holm,  u.s.  (); koenig v. flynn,
 u.s.  (); carroll v. becker,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat. ,  ().
[] wood v. broom,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. -.
[] ex parte yarbrough,  u.s. ,  (); united
states v. mosley,  u.s.  (); united states v. saylor, 
[] in re coy,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte siebold,  u.s.  (); ex parte clarke,
 u.s.  (); united states v. gale,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. wurzbach,  u.s.  ().
[] newberry v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. classic,  u.s. ,  ().
[] barry v. united states ex rel. cunningham,  u.s.
[] in re loney,  u.s.  ().
[] cannon's precedents of the house of representatives, vi:
§§-,  (). cf. newberry v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] barry v. united states ex rel. cunningham,  u.s.
[] ibid. .
[] hinds' precedents of the house of representatives, iv:
[] ibid. -.
[] rule v.
[] hinds' precedents of the house of representatives, iv:
§- (); cannon's precedents of the house of representatives,
[] united states v. ballin,  u.s. ,  (). it is,
of course, by virtue of its power to determine "rules of its
proceedings" that the senate enables its members to prevent the
transaction of business by what are termed "filibusters". the question
has been raised whether the rules which support a filibuster are
constitutionally compatible with the clause in the preceding section: "a
majority of each [house] shall constitute a quorum to do business".
see franklin burdette, filibustering in the senate (princeton
university press, ), , , -, -, -, -. the
senate is "a continuing body". mcgrain v. daugherty,  u.s. ,
- (). hence its rules remain in force from congress to
congress except as they are changed from time to time, whereas those of
the house are readopted at the outset of each new congress.
[] title , §.
[]  u.s. at -, citing field v. clark,  u.s. ,
- (); united states v. ballin,  u.s. ,  (); and
other cases.
[] burton v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] in re chapman,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] i story, constitution, §, quoted with approval in
field v. clark,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. ballin,  u.s. ,  ().
[] field v. clark,  u.s.  (); flint v. stone
tracy co.,  u.s. ,  (). a parallel rule holds in the case
of a duly authenticated official notice to the secretary of state that a
state legislature has ratified a proposed amendment to the constitution.
leser v. garnett,  u.s. ,  (); see also coleman v.
miller,  u.s.  (). in christoffel v. united states,  u.s.
 (), a sharply divided court ruled that, in a case brought under
the perjury statute of the district of columbia (§- of the d.c.
code) for alleged perjurious testimony before a committee of the house
of representatives, the trial court erred in charging the jury that it
was free to ignore testimony that less than a quorum of the committee
was in attendance when the alleged perjury was committed. four justices
dissented; and curiously enough only four of the majority were present
when the opinion was delivered, the fifth being indisposed. remarks
justice jackson in his concurring opinion in united states v. bryan
( u.s.  ()), in which the ruling in christoffel was held to be
inapplicable: "it is ironic that this interference with legislative
procedures was promulgated by exercise within the court of the very
right of absentee participation denied to congressmen." ibid. . it
seems unlikely that the christoffel decision seriously undermines field
v. clark.
[] page v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] long v. ansell,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. cooper,  dall.  ().
[] williamson v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] kilbourn v. thompson,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid.
[]  mass.  ().
[] kilbourn v. thompson,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] justice frankfurter for the court in tenney v.
brandhove,  u.s. ,  (). justice douglas dissented: "*** i
do not agree that all abuses of legislative committees are solely for
the legislative body to police. we are dealing here with a right
protected by the constitution—the right of free speech. the charge
*** is that a legislative committee brought the weight of its
authority down on respondent for exercising his right of free speech.
reprisal for speaking is as much an abridgment as a prior restraint. if
a committee departs so far from its domain [as?] to deprive a citizen of
a right protected by the constitution, i can think of no reason why it
should be immune". ibid. . see also barsky v. united states, 
f. (d)  (); certiorari denied,  u.s.  ().
[] hinds' precedents of the house of representatives, i:
§ (); cannon's precedents of the house of representatives, vi:
[] hinds' precedents of the house of representatives, i:
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] the situation gave rise to the case of ex parte albert
levitt, petitioner,  u.s.  (). this was the case in which the
court declined to pass upon the validity of justice black's appointment.
it seems curious that the court, in rejecting petitioner's application,
did not point out that it was being asked to assume original
jurisdiction contrary to the decision in marbury v. madison,  cr. 
[] i story, constitution, §.
[] twin city nat. bank v. nebeker,  u.s.  ().
[] millard v. roberts,  u.s.  ().
[] flint v. stone tracy co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] rainey v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] la abra silver mining co. v. united states,  u.s.
[] edwards v. united states,  u.s.  (). on one
occasion in , delay in presentation of a bill enabled the president
to sign it  days after the adjournment of congress. schmeckebier,
approval of bills after adjournment of congress,  american political
science review  ().
[] gardner v. collector,  wall.  ().
[] ibid. . see also burgess v. salmon,  u.s. ,
[] matthews v. zane,  wheat. ,  ().
[] lapeyre v. united states,  wall. ,  ().
[] okanogan indians v. united states,  u.s. 
[] wright v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri p.r. co. v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall. , ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] th cong., d sess., s. doc. ; hinds' precedents of
the house of representatives, iv: § ().
[] see e.g., lend lease act of march ,  ( stat.
); first war powers act of december ,  ( stat. ); emergency
price control act of january ,  ( stat. ); stabilization act
of october ,  ( stat. ); war labor disputes act of june ,
 ( stat. ).
[] reorganization act of june ,  ( stat. ).
[] reorganization act of april ,  ( stat. ).
[] hollingsworth v. virginia,  dall.  ().
[] license tax cases,  wall. ,  ().
[] brushaber v. union pac. r.r.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  wall.  ().
[] graves v. o'keefe,  u.s.  ().
[] veazie bank v. fenno,  wall.  ().
[] united states v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  wall. 
[]  wheat.  ().
[] indian motorcycle co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] snyder v. bettman,  u.s. ,  ().
[] south carolina v. united states,  u.s.  ().
see also ohio v. helvering,  u.s.  ().
[] greiner v. lewellyn,  u.s.  ().
[] wheeler lumber bridge & supply co. v. united states,
[] university of illinois v. united states,  u.s. 
[] allen v. regents,  u.s.  ().
[] wilmette park district v. campbell,  u.s. 
[] metcalf v. mitchell,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. powers,  u.s.  ().
[] willcutts v. bunn,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. mountain producers corp.,  u.s. 
(), overruling burnet v. coronado oil & gas co.,  u.s. 
[] new york v. united states,  u.s. ,  (),
(concurring opinion of justice rutledge).
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] wilmette park district v. campbell,  u.s. 
[] see also article i, section , clause .
[] labelle iron works v. united states,  u.s. 
(); brushaber v. union p.r. co.,  u.s.  (); head money
cases,  u.s.  ().
[] knowlton v. moore,  u.s.  ().
[] fernandez v. wiener,  u.s.  (); riggs v.
del drago,  u.s.  (); phillips v. commissioner of internal
revenue,  u.s.  (); poe v. seaborn,  u.s. , 
[] florida v. mellon,  u.s.  ().
[] downes v. bidwell,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). the court recognized that alaska was
an incorporated territory but took the position that the situation in
substance was the same as if the taxes had been directly imposed by a
territorial legislature for the support of the local government.
[] license tax cases,  wall. ,  ().
[] united states v. yuginovich,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. constantine,  u.s. , 
[] license tax cases,  wall. ,  ().
[] felsenheld v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] in re kollock,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. doremus,  u.s.  (). cf.
nigro v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] sonzinsky v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] mccray v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] justice clark speaking for the court in united states
v. sanchez,  u.s. ,  (). see also sonzinsky v. united
states,  u.s. , - ().
[] sunshine anthracite coal co. v. adkins,  u.s. ,
 (). see also head money cases,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bailey v. drexel furniture co.,  u.s.  ();
hill v. wallace,  u.s.  (); helwig v. united states, 
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] iii writings of thomas jefferson, - (library
edition, ).
[] james francis lawson, the general welfare clause ().
[] the federalist nos.  and .
[] ibid. no. .
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] in an advisory opinion which it rendered for president
monroe at his request on the power of congress to appropriate funds for
public improvements, the court answered that such appropriations might
be properly made under the war and postal powers. see e.f.
albertsworth, "advisory functions in the supreme court,"  georgetown
l.j. , - (). monroe himself ultimately adopted the broadest
view of the spending power, from which, however, he carefully excluded
any element of regulatory or police power. see his "views of the
president of the united states on the subject of internal improvements,"
of may , ,  richardson, messages and papers of the presidents,
[] the council of state governments, federal grants-in-aid,
[]  u.s.  (). see also alabama power co. v.
ickes,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). see also cleveland v. united
states,  u.s.  ().
[] justice stone, speaking for himself and two other
justices, dissented on the ground that congress was entitled when
spending the national revenues for the "general welfare" to see to it
that the country got its money's worth thereof, and that the condemned
provisions were "necessary and proper" to that end. united states v.
butler,  u.s. , - ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] cincinnati soap co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[]  stat.  ().
[] united states v. realty co.,  u.s.  (); pope
v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cincinnati soap co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] cr.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  madison, notes on the constitutional convention, 
(hunt's ed. ).
[] ibid. .
[] legal tender cases,  wall.  (), overruling
hepburn v. griswold,  wall.  ().
[] perry v. united states,  u.s. ,  (). see
also lynch v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] prentice and egan, the commerce clause of the federal
constitution () . the balance began inclining the other way with
the enactment of the interstate commerce act in .
[]  wheat. , - (). cf. webster for the
appellant: "nothing was more complex than commerce; and in such an age
as this, no words embraced a wider field than commercial regulation.
almost all the business and intercourse of life may be connected,
incidently, more or less, with commercial regulations." (ibid. -);
also justice johnson, in his concurring opinion: "commerce, in its
simplest signification, means an exchange of goods; but in the
advancement of society, labor, transportation, intelligence, care, and
various mediums of exchange, become commodities, and enter into
commerce; the subject, the vehicle, the agent, and their various
operations, become the objects of commercial regulation. shipbuilding,
the carrying trade, and propagation of seamen, are such vital agents of
commercial prosperity, that the nation which could not legislate over
these subjects, would not possess power to regulate commerce." (ibid.
-). "it is all but impossible in our own age to sense fully its
eighteenth-century meaning (i.e., the meaning of commerce). the
eighteenth century did not separate by artificial lines aspects of a
culture which are inseparable. it had no lexicon of legalisms extracted
from the law reports in which judicial usage lies in a world apart from
the ordinary affairs of life. commerce was then more than we imply now
by business or industry. it was a name for the economic order, the
domain of political economy, the realm of a comprehensive public policy.
it is a word which makes trades, activities and interests an instrument
in the culture of a people. if trust was to be reposed in parchment, it
was the only word which could catch up into a single comprehensive term
all activities directly affecting the wealth of the nation," walton h.
hamilton and douglass adair, the power to govern, - (new york:
[] ibid. .
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] see pennsylvania v. wheeling & belmont bridge co., 
how.  (); mobile v. kimball,  u.s.  (); covington
bridge co. v. kentucky,  u.s.  (); kelley v. rhoads, 
u.s.  (); united states v. hill,  u.s.  (); edwards
v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] pensacola tel. co. v. western union tel. co.,  u.s.
,  (); international text book co. v. pigg,  u.s. , -
(); western union tel. co. v. foster,  u.s.  (); federal
radio com. v. nelson bros.,  u.s.  ().
[] swift & co. v. united states,  u.s. , -
(); dahnke-walker milling co. v. bondurant,  u.s. , -
(); stafford v. wallace,  u.s.  (); federal trade com.
v. pacific states paper trade assoc.,  u.s. , - ().
[] kidd v. pearson,  u.s.  (); oliver iron co.
v. lord,  u.s.  ().
[] paul v. virginia,  wall.  (). see also new
york l. ins. co. v. deer lodge county,  u.s.  (); new york
l. ins. co. v. cravens,  u.s. ,  (); fire assoc. of
philadelphia v. new york,  u.s.  (); bothwell v.
buckbee-mears co.,  u.s.  (); metropolitan casualty ins. co.
v. brownell,  u.s.  ().
[] federal baseball club v. national league,  u.s. 
[] blumenstock bros. v. curtis pub. co.,  u.s. 
[] williams v. fears,  u.s.  ().
a contract entered into for the erection of a factory which was to be
supervised and operated by the officers of a foreign corporation was
held not a transaction of interstate commerce in the constitutional
sense merely because of the fact that the products of the factory are
largely to be sold and shipped to other factories. diamond glue co. v.
united states glue co.,  u.s. ,  (). in browning v.
waycross,  u.s.  (), it was held that the installation of
lightning rods sold by a foreign corporation was not interstate
commerce, although provided for in the contract of purchase. similarly
in general railway signal co. v. virginia,  u.s.  (), where
a foreign corporation installed signals in virginia, bringing in
materials, supplies, and machinery from without the state, the court
held that local business was involved, separate and distinct from
interstate commerce, and subject to the licensing power of the state.
however, in an interstate contract for the sale of a complicated
ice-making plant, where it was stipulated that the parts should be
shipped into the purchaser's state and the plant there assembled and
tested under the supervision of an expert to be sent by the seller, it
was held that services of the expert did not constitute the doing of a
local business subjecting the seller to regulations of texas concerning
foreign corporations. york mfg. co. v. colley,  u.s.  ().
see also kansas city structural steel co. v. arkansas,  u.s. 
[] associated press v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] american medical association v. united states,  u.s.
 (). cf. united states v. oregon state medical society, 
[] united states v. south-eastern underwriters assoc, 
u.s.  (). the interstate character of the insurance business as
today organized and carried on is stressed, although its intrastate
elements are not overlooked. the court's business is to determine in
each case whether "the competing *** state and national interests
*** can be accommodated." ibid.  and .
[] article i, §, cl. .
[] see infra congressional regulations of production and
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] new york v. miln,  pet.  (), overturned in
henderson v. new york,  u.s.  (); license cases,  how. ,
-, ,  (); passenger cases,  how. , -, -
(); the passaic bridges,  wall.  (appendix),  (); united
states v. dewitt,  wall. ,  (); patterson v. kentucky, 
u.s. ,  (); trade-mark cases,  u.s.  (); kidd v.
pearson,  u.s.  (); illinois central r. co. v. mckendree, 
u.s.  (); keller v. united states,  u.s. , -
(); hammer v. dagenhart,  u.s.  (). see also infra.
[] united states v. wrightwood dairy co.,  u.s. ,
[] gibbons v. ogden,  wheat. , . commerce "among the
several states" does not comprise commerce of the district of columbia
nor the territories of the united states. congress's power over their
commerce is an incident of its general power over them. stoutenburgh
v. hennick,  u.s.  (); atlantic cleaners and dyers, inc.
v. united states,  u.s.  (); in re bryant,  fed. cas. no.
 (). transportation between two points in the same state, when a
large part of the route is a loop outside the state, is "commerce among
the several states." hanley v. kansas city southern r. co.,  u.s.
 (); followed in western union telegraph co. v. speight, 
u.s.  (), as to a message sent from one point to another in north
carolina via a point in virginia.
[]  wheat. , -.
[] champion v. ames (lottery case),  u.s. ,
[] brolan v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] thurlow v. massachusetts (license cases),  how. ,
[] pittsburgh & s. coal co. v. bates,  u.s. , 
[] united states v. carolene products co.,  u.s. ,
- (). see also infra.
[] the "daniel ball,"  wall. ,  ().
[] mobile county v. kimball,  u.s. , , 
[] second employers' liability cases,  u.s. , , -
[] the above case. and see infra.
[]  wheat. , ,  ().
[] pensacola teleg. co. v. western union teleg. co., 
u.s.  (). see also western union teleg. co. v. texas,  u.s.
[] ibid. . "commerce embraces appliances necessarily
employed in carrying on transportation by land and water."—chicago &
n.w.r. co. v. fuller,  wall. ,  ().
[] "no question is presented as to the power of the
congress, in its regulation of interstate commerce, to regulate radio
communications." chief justice hughes speaking for the court in federal
radio com v. nelson bros. b. & m. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
said justice stone, speaking for the court in : "appellant is thus
engaged in the business of transmitting advertising programs from its
stations in washington to those persons in other states who 'listen in'
through the use of receiving sets. in all essentials its procedure does
not differ from that employed in sending telegraph or telephone messages
across state lines, which is interstate commerce. western union teleg.
co. v. speight,  u.s.  (); new jersey bell teleph. co. v.
state bd. of taxes & assessments,  u.s.  (); cooney v.
mountain states teleph. & teleg. co.,  u.s.  (); pacific
teleph. & teleg. co. v. tax commission,  u.s.  (). in each,
transmission is effected by means of energy manifestations produced at
the point of reception in one state which are generated and controlled
at the sending point in another. whether the transmission is effected by
the aid of wires, or through a perhaps less well understood medium, 'the
ether,' is immaterial, in the light of those practical considerations
which have dictated the conclusion that the transmission of information
interstate is a form of 'intercourse,' which is commerce. see gibbons
v. ogden,  wheat. , ." fisher's blend station v. tax
commission,  u.s. , - ().
[]  how. .
[]  stat.  ().
[] pennsylvania v. wheeling & belmont bridge co.,  how.
,  (). "it is congress, and not the judicial department, to
which the constitution has given the power to regulate commerce with
foreign nations and among the several states. the courts can never take
the initiative on this subject." parkersburg & o. river transportation
co. v. parkersburg,  u.s. ,  (). see also prudential
insurance co. v. benjamin,  u.s.  (); and robertson v.
california,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall. .
[] ibid. -.
[] union bridge co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
see also monongahela bridge co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(); and wisconsin v. illinois,  u.s.  (). of collateral
interest are the following: south carolina v. georgia,  u.s. , 
(); bedford v. united states,  u.s.  (); jackson v.
united states,  u.s.  (); united states v. arizona,  u.s.
[] gibson v. united states,  u.s.  (). see
also newport & cincinnati bridge co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(); united states v. rio grande dam & irrig. co.,  u.s. 
(); united states v. chandler-dunbar water power co.,  u.s. 
(); seattle v. oregon & w.r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); economy
light & power co. v. united states,  u.s.  (); united states
v. river rouge improv. co.,  u.s. ,  (); henry ford & son
v. little falls fibre co.,  u.s.  (); united states v.
commodore park,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. cress,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. chicago, m., st. p. & p.r. co., 
u.s. ,  (); united states v. willow river power co., 
[] united states v. rio grande dam & irrig. co.,  u.s.
 (); and cf. below the discussion of united states v.
appalachian electric p. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] the "daniel ball" v. united states,  wall. 
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . "the regulation of commerce implies as much
control, as far-reaching power, over an artificial as over a natural
highway." justice brewer for the court in monongahela navigation co.
v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] congress had the right to confer upon the interstate
commerce commission the power to regulate interstate ferry rates. (new
york c. & h.r.r. co. v. board of chosen freeholders,  u.s. 
()); and to authorize the commission to govern the towing of vessels
between points in the same state but partly through waters of an
adjoining state (cornell steamboat co. v. united states,  u.s. 
()). also congress's power over navigation extends to persons
furnishing wharfage, dock, warehouse, and other terminal facilities to a
common carrier by water. hence an order of the united states maritime
commission banning certain allegedly "unreasonable practices" by
terminals in the port of san francisco, and prescribing schedules of
maximum free time periods and of minimum charges was constitutional.
(california v. united states,  u.s.  ()). the same power
also comprises regulation of the registry, enrollment, license, and
nationality of ships and vessels; the method of recording bills of sale
and mortgages thereon; the rights and duties of seamen; the limitations
of the responsibility of shipowners for the negligence and misconduct of
their captains and crews; and many other things of a character truly
maritime. see rodd v. heartt (the "lottawanna"),  wall. , 
(); providence & n.y.s.s. co. v. hill mfg. co.,  u.s. , 
(); old dominion s.s. co. v. gilmore,  u.s.  ();
o'donnell v. great lakes dredge & dock co.,  u.s.  (). see
also below article iii, §, (admiralty and maritime clause).
[] pollard v. hagan,  how.  (); shively v.
bowlby,  u.s.  (). "the shores of navigable waters, and the
soils under them, were not granted by the constitution to the united
states, but were reserved to the states respectively; and the new states
have the same rights, sovereignty, and jurisdiction over this subject as
the original states."  how. , headnote .
[] green bay & m. canal co. v. patten paper co.,  u.s.
[] ibid. -, citing kaukauna water power co. v. green
bay & m. canal co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at , .
[]  u.s. at , -.
[]  u.s. at .
[] oklahoma ex rel. phillips v. atkinson co.,  u.s.
, - passim ().
[] ashwander v. tennessee valley authority,  u.s. 
(). see infra.
[]  stat.  ().
[] thomson v. pacific railroad,  wall. ,  ();
california v. central pacific railroad,  u.s. ,  ();
cherokee nation v. southern kansas r. co.,  u.s.  (); luxton
v. north river bridge co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  (). in his first annual message (december
, ), president johnson had asked congress "to prevent any selfish
impediment [by the states] to the free circulation of men and
merchandise."  richardson, messages and papers of the presidents, .
[]  stat. ; pensacola teleg. co. v. western union
teleg. co.,  u.s. , -,  ().
[] r.s. secs. -; replaced today by the live stock
transportation act of  ( stat. ).
[]  stat.  ().
[] interstate commerce com. v. alabama midland r. co., 
u.s. ,  (). see also cincinnati, n.o. & t.p.r. co. v.
interstate commerce commission,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. .
[]  stat.  ().
[] by the federal communications act of  ( stat.
), this jurisdiction was handed over to the federal communications
commission, created by the act.
[]  stat.  §;  §. the act must today be read
in conjunction with the transportation act of  ( stat. ), which
"was intended, together with the old law, to provide a completely
integrated interstate regulatory system over motor, railroad, and water
carriers." united states v. pennsylvania r. co.,  u.s. , -
[] houston e. & w.t.r. co. v. united states (shreveport
case),  u.s.  (). forty states, through their attorneys
general, intervened in the case against the commission's order.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. . see to the same effect american express co.
v. caldwell,  u.s. ,  (); pacific teleph. & teleg. co.
v. tax commission (washington),  u.s.  (); weiss v. united
states,  u.s.  (); bethlehem steel co. v. new york labor
relations bd.,  u.s. ,  (); and united states v. walsh,
[] in north carolina v. united states,  u.s. 
(), the court disallowed as ultra vires an order of the interstate
commerce commission, setting aside state-prescribed intrastate passenger
rates, on the ground that it was unsupported by clear findings and
evidence sufficient to show its necessity.
among the various provisions of the interstate commerce commission act
that have been sustained in specific decisions are the following: a
provision penalizing shippers for obtaining transportation at less than
published rates, armour packing co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(); the so-called "commodities clause" of the hepburn act of june
, , construed as prohibiting the hauling of commodities in which
the carrier had at the time of haul a proprietary interest, united
states v. delaware & h. co.,  u.s.  (); a provision of the
same act abrogating life passes, louisville & n.r. co. v. mottley, 
u.s.  (); a provision of the same act authorizing the commission
to regulate the entire system of bookkeeping of interstate carriers,
including intrastate accounts, interstate commerce commission v.
goodrich transit co.,  u.s.  (); the "long and short haul"
clause of the interstate commerce act, united states v. atchison, t. &
s.f.r. co. (intermountain rate cases),  u.s.  (); an order of
the commission establishing the so-called uniform zone or block system
of express rates, american express co. v. south dakota ex rel.
caldwell,  u.s.  (); an order of the commission directing the
abandonment of an intrastate branch of an interstate railroad, colorado
v. united states,  u.s.  (); an order of the commission
fixing rates of a transportation company operating solely in the
district of columbia, on the ground that its carriage of passengers
constituted part of an interstate movement, united states v. capital
transit co.,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. ohio oil co. (pipe line cases), 
[] see also state corp. commission v. wichita gas co.,
 u.s.  (); eureka pipe line co. v. hallanan,  u.s. 
(); united fuel gas co. v. hallanan,  u.s.  ();
pennsylvania v. west virginia,  u.s.  (); missouri ex rel.
barrett v. kansas natural gas co.,  u.s.  ().
[] public utilities com. v. attleboro steam and electric
co.,  u.s.  (). see also utah power & light co. v. pfost,
[]  stat. .
[] the natural gas act of ,  stat. .
[] ibid. . sales to distributors by a wholesaler of
natural gas which is delivered to it from an out-of-state source are
subject to the rate-making powers of the federal power commission.
colorado-wyoming co. v. comm'n.,  u.s.  (). see also
illinois natural gas co. v. central illinois pub. serv. co.,  u.s.
 (); also federal power commission v. east ohio gas co., 
u.s. , decided january , , where it was held that a natural gas
company which, while operating exclusively in one state, sold there
directly to consumers gas transported into the state through the
interstate lines of other companies, "a natural gas company" within the
meaning of the act of , and so could be required by the commission
to keep uniform accounts and submit reports.
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. ; since amended in some respects in  (
stat. ) and  ( stat. ).
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. . as early as  laws were passed requiring
the installation of safety devices on steam vessels.  stat.  and
. along with the safety appliance acts mention should also be made of
acts requiring the use of ashpans on locomotives ( stat.  ());
the inspection of boilers ( stat.  () and  stat. 
()); the use of ladders, drawbars, etc., on cars ( stat. 
()); etc.
[]  stat. .
[] ibid. -. see also texas & p.r. co. v. rigsby, 
u.s.  (); and united states v. california,  u.s.  ().
in the latter case the intrastate railway involved was property of the
state.
[]  stat. .
[] baltimore & o.r. co. v. interstate commerce com., 
[]  stat. , disallowed in part in howard v. illinois
central r. co.,  u.s.  ();  stat. , sustained in the
second employers' liability cases (mondou v. new york, n.h. & h.r.
co.),  u.s.  ().
[] see  u.s. at -.
[] ibid. . because the injured employee must, in order to
benefit from the act, be employed at the time of his injury "in
interstate commerce," the court's application of it has given rise to
some narrow distinctions. see illinois central r. co. v. peery, 
u.s.  (); new york central r. co. v. white,  u.s. 
(); chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. harrington,  u.s.  ();
louisville & n.r. co. v. parker,  u.s.  (); illinois central
r. co. v. behrens,  u.s.  (); st. louis, s.f. & t.r. co.
v. seale,  u.s.  (); pedersen v. delaware, l. & w.r. co.,
 u.s.  (); shanks v. delaware, l. & w.r. co.,  u.s. 
(); lehigh valley r. co. v. barlow,  u.s.  (); southern
r. co. v. puckett,  u.s.  (); reed v. director general of
railroads,  u.s.  (). that congress might "legislate as to the
qualifications, duties, and liabilities of employes and others on
railway trains engaged in that [interstate] commerce," was stated by the
court in nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. alabama,  u.s. , 
[]  stat. .
[] . stat. .
[] texas & n.o.r. co. v. brotherhood of r. & s.s. clerks,
 u.s.  (). the provision of railway labor act of  (
stat. ), preventing interference by either party with organization or
designation of representatives by the other, is within the
constitutional authority of congress. similarly, "back shop" employees
of an interstate carrier, who engaged in making heavy repairs on
locomotives and cars withdrawn from service for that purpose for long
periods (an average of  days for locomotives and  days for cars),
were held to be within the terms of the act as amended in  ( stat.
). "the activities in which these employees are engaged have such a
relation to the other confessedly interstate activities of the ***
[carrier] that they are to be regarded as a part of them. all taken
together fall within the power of congress over interstate commerce."
virginian r. co. v. system federation no. ,  u.s. , 
by the adamson act of  a temporary increase in wages was imposed
upon the railways of the country in order to meet a sudden threat to
strike by important groups of their employees. the act was assailed on
the dual ground that it was not a regulation of commerce among the
states and that it was violative of the carriers' rights under the fifth
amendment. a closely divided court, speaking through chief justice
white, answered both objections by pointing to the magnitude of the
emergency which had threatened the country with commercial paralysis and
grave loss and suffering. to the familiar argument that "emergency may
not create power" (ex parte milligan,  wall.  ()), the chief
justice answered that "it may afford a reason for exerting a power
already enjoyed." a further answer to objections based on the rights of
carriers under the fifth amendment, particularly the right of "freedom
of contract," was that the situation met by the statute had arisen in
consequence of a failure to exercise these rights—a far from
satisfactory answer, as the dissent pointed out, since one element of a
right is freedom of choice regarding its use or nonuse. wilson v. new,
[]  stat. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). indeed, in a case decided in june,
, justice rutledge, speaking for a majority of the court, listed the
alton case as one "foredoomed to reversal," though the formal reversal
has never taken place. see mandeville is. farms v. american c.s.
co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. -.
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s. , - (). "slight reflection will show
that if the national power extends to all contracts and combinations in
manufacture, agriculture, mining, and other productive industries, whose
ultimate result may effect external commerce, comparatively little of
business operations and affairs would be left for state control."
[] ibid. . the doctrine of the case simmered down to the
proposition that commerce was transportation only; a doctrine which
justice harlan undertook to refute in his notable dissenting opinion:
"interstate commerce does not, therefore, consist in transportation
simply. it includes the purchase and sale of articles that are intended
to be transported from one state to another—every species of commercial
intercourse among the states and with foreign nations." (p. ). "any
combination, therefore, that disturbs or unreasonably obstructs freedom
in buying and selling articles manufactured to be sold to persons in
other states or to be carried to other states—a freedom that cannot
exist if the right to buy and sell is fettered by unlawful restraints
that crush out competition—affects, not incidentally, but directly, the
people of all the states; and the remedy for such an evil is found only
in the exercise of powers confided to a government which, this court has
said, was the government of all, exercising powers delegated by all,
representing all, acting for all. mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat. ,
." (p. ). "it is said that manufacture precedes commerce and is not
a part of it. but it is equally true that when manufacture ends, that
which has been manufactured becomes a subject of commerce; that buying
and selling succeed manufacture, come into existence after the process
of manufacture is completed, precede transportation, and are as much
commercial intercourse, where articles are bought to be carried from
one state to another, as is the manual transportation of such articles
after they have been so purchased. the distinction was recognized by
this court in gibbons v. ogden, where the principal question was
whether commerce included navigation. both the court and counsel
recognized buying and selling or barter as included in commerce. ***
the power of congress covers and protects the absolute freedom of such
intercourse and trade among the states as may or must succeed
manufacture and precede transportation from the place of purchase." (p.
-). "when i speak of trade i mean the buying and selling of articles
of every kind that are recognized articles of interstate commerce.
whatever improperly obstructs the free course of interstate intercourse
and trade, as involved in the buying and selling of articles to be
carried from one state to another, may be reached by congress, under its
authority to regulate commerce among the states." (p. ). "if the
national power is competent to repress state action in restraint of
interstate trade as it may be involved in purchases of refined sugar to
be transported from one state to another state, surely it ought to be
deemed sufficient to prevent unlawful restraints attempted to be imposed
by combinations of corporations or individuals upon those identical
purchases; otherwise, illegal combinations of corporations or
individuals may—so far as national power and interstate commerce are
concerned—do, with impunity, what no state can do." (p. ). "whatever
a state may do to protect its completely interior traffic or trade
against unlawful restraints, the general government is empowered to do
for the protection of the people of all the states—for this purpose one
people—against unlawful restraints imposed upon interstate traffic or
trade in articles that are to enter into commerce among the several
states." (p. ).
[]  u.s. .—the sherman act was applied to break up
combinations of interstate carriers in united states v. trans-missouri
freight asso.,  u.s.  (); united states v. joint-traffic
asso.,  u.s.  (); and northern securities co. v. united
states,  u.s.  (). in the first of these cases the court was
confronted with the contention that the act had been intended only for
the industrial combinations, and hence was not designed to apply to the
railroads, for whose governance the interstate commerce act had been
enacted three years prior. justice peckham answered the argument by
saying that "to exclude agreements as to rates by competing railroads
*** would leave [very] little for the act to take effect upon,"
referring in this connection to the decision in the sugar trust case,
 u.s. at .
alluding in his opinion for the court in mandeville island farms v.
american c.s. co.,  u.s.  () to the sugar trust case, justice
rutledge said: "like this one, that case involved the refining and
interstate distribution of sugar. but because the refining was done
wholly within a single state, the case was held to be one involving
'primarily' only 'production' or 'manufacturing,' although the vast part
of the sugar produced was sold and shipped interstate, and this was the
main end of the enterprise. the interstate distributing phase, however,
was regarded as being only 'incidentally,' 'indirectly,' or 'remotely'
involved; and to be 'incidental,' 'indirect,' or 'remote' was to be,
under the prevailing climate, beyond congress' power to regulate, and
hence outside the scope of the sherman act. see wickard v. filburn,
 u.s. at  et seq. ().
"the knight decision made the statute a dead letter for more than a
decade and, had its full force remained unmodified, the act today would
be a weak instrument, as would also the power of congress, to reach
evils in all the vast operations of our gigantic national industrial
system antecedent to interstate sale and transportation of manufactured
products. indeed, it and succeeding decisions, embracing the same
artificially drawn lines, produced a series of consequences for the
exercise of national power over industry conducted on a national scale
which the evolving nature of our industrialism foredoomed to reversal."
ibid. -.
[] swift & co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
[]  u.s. at -.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] loewe v. lawlor,  u.s.  (); duplex printing
press co. v. deering,  u.s.  (); coronado coal co. v.
united mine workers of america,  u.s.  (); united states v.
brime,  u.s.  (); bedford co. v. stone cutters assn., 
u.s.  (); local  v. united states,  u.s.  (); allen
bradley co. v. union,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. .
[] ibid.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -. see also lemke v. farmers' grain co.,
 u.s.  (); minnesota v. blasius,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s. at ;  u.s. at .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[] electric bond co. v. comm'n.,  u.s.  ();
north american co. v. s.e.c.,  u.s.  (); american power &
light co. v. s.e.c.,  u.s.  ().
[] "the bond and share system, including american and
electric, possesses an undeniable interstate character which makes it
properly subject, from the statutory standpoint, to the provisions of
§(b)(). this vast system embraces utility properties in no fewer
than  states, from new jersey to oregon and from minnesota to florida,
as well as in  foreign countries. bond and share dominates and
controls this system from its headquarters in new york city. *** the
proper control and functioning of such an extensive multi-state network
of corporations necessitates continuous and substantial use of the mails
and the instrumentalities of interstate commerce. only in that way can
bond and share, or its subholding companies or service subsidiary,
market and distribute securities, control and influence the various
operating companies, negotiate inter-system loans, acquire or exchange
property, perform service contracts, or reap the benefits of stock
ownership. *** moreover, many of the operating companies on the lower
echelon sell and transmit electric energy or gas in interstate commerce
to an extent that cannot be described as spasmodic or insignificant.
*** congress, of course, has undoubted power under the commerce clause
to impose relevant conditions and requirements on those who use the
channels of interstate commerce so that those channels will not be
conduits for promoting or perpetuating economic evils. *** thus to the
extent that corporate business is transacted through such channels,
affecting commerce in more states than one, congress may act directly
with respect to that business to protect what it conceives to be the
national welfare. *** it may compel changes in the voting rights and
other privileges of stockholders. it may order the divestment or
rearrangement of properties. it may order the reorganization or
dissolution of corporations. in short, congress is completely
uninhibited by the commerce clause in selecting the means considered
necessary for bringing about the desired conditions in the channels of
interstate commerce. any limitations are to be found in other sections
of the constitution. gibbons v. ogden,  wheat. , ." american power
& light co. v. s.e.c.,  u.s. , - ().
[] appalachian coals, inc. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[]  stat. .
[] ibid. . see also ibid. .
[] in united states v. sullivan,  u.s.  (), the
court interpreted the federal food, drug, and cosmetics act of  as
applying to the sale by a retailer of drugs purchased from his
wholesaler within the state nine months after their interstate shipment
had been completed. the court, speaking by justice black, cited united
states v. walsh,  u.s.  (); wickard v. filburn,  u.s.
 (); united states v. wrightwood dairy co.,  u.s. 
(); united states v. darby,  u.s.  (). the last three of
these cases are discussed below. see pp. , . justice frankfurter
dissented on the basis of federal trade commission v. bunte bros., 
u.s.  (). it is apparent that the schechter case has been
thoroughly repudiated so far as the distinction "direct" and "indirect"
effects is concerned. see also mcdermott v. wisconsin,  u.s. 
(), which preceded the schechter decision by more than two decades.
the n.i.r.a., however, was found to have several other constitutional
infirmities besides its disregard, as illustrated by the live poultry
code, of the "fundamental" distinction between "direct" and "indirect"
effects, namely, the delegation of uncanalized legislative power; the
absence of any administrative procedural safeguards; the absence of
judicial review; and the dominant role played by private groups in the
general scheme of regulation. these objections are dealt with elsewhere
in this volume. supra, pp. , , .
[]  stat  ().
[] united states v. butler,  u.s. , -,  ().
[]  stat. .
[] carter v. carter coal co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] united states v. e.c. knight co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. .
[]  u.s. at , - ().
[] national labor relations board v. fruehauf trailer co.,
 u.s.  (); national labor relations board v. friedman-harry
marks clothing co.,  u.s.  ().
[] national labor relations board v. fainblatt,  u.s.
[] see santa cruz fruit packing co. v. national labor
relations board,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat. .
[] united states v. darby,  u.s. ,  ().
[] see ibid. , , .
[] ibid. -.
[] owen j. roberts, the court and the constitution, the
oliver wendell holmes lectures , (harvard university press ),
[] the act provided originally that "for the purposes of
this act an employee shall be deemed to have been engaged in the
production of goods if such employee was employed *** in any process
or occupation necessary to the production thereof, in any state." by 
stat.  (), "necessary to the production thereof" becomes
"directly essential to the production thereof." the effect of this
change, which has not yet registered itself in judicial decision, seems
likely to be slight, in view of the power, which the act gives the
administrator to lay down "such terms and conditions" as he "finds
necessary to carry out the purposes of" his orders to prevent their
evasion or circumvention. see gemsco, inc. v. walling,  u.s. 
(). the employees involved in the following cases have been held to
be covered by the act:
() operating and maintenance employees of the owner of a loft building,
space in which is rented to persons producing goods principally for
interstate commerce (kirschbaum v. walling,  u.s.  ());
() an employee of an interstate motor transportation company, who acted
as rate clerk and performed other incidental duties (overnight motor co.
v. missel,  u.s.  ());
() members of a rotary drilling crew, engaged within a state, as
employees of an independent contractor, in partially drilling oil wells,
a portion of the products from which later moved in interstate commerce
(warren-bradshaw co. v. hall,  u.s.  ());
() employees of a wholesale paper company who are engaged in the
delivery, from company warehouse within a state to customers within that
state, after a temporary pause at such warehouses, of goods procured
outside of the state upon prior orders from, or pursuant to contracts
with, such customers (walling v. jacksonville paper co.,  u.s. 
() employees of a private corporation who are engaged in the operation
and maintenance of a drawbridge which is part of a toll road used
extensively by persons and vehicles traveling in interstate commerce,
and which spans an intercoastal waterway used in interstate commerce
(overstreet v. north shore corp.,  u.s.  ());
() a night watchman employed in a plant in which veneer was
manufactured from logs and from which a substantial portion of the
manufactured product was shipped in interstate commerce (walton v.
southern package corp.,  u.s.  ());
() employees putting in stand-by time in the auxiliary fire-fighting
service of an employer engaged in interstate commerce (armour & co. v.
wantock,  u.s.  ());
() warehouse and central office employees of an interstate retail chain
store system (phillips co. v. walling,  u.s.  ());
() employees of an independent contractor engaged in repairing
abutments and substructures of bridges which were part of the line of an
interstate railroad (fitzgerald co. v. pedersen,  u.s.  ());
() maintenance employees of an office building which was owned and
operated by a manufacturing corporation and in which  per cent of the
rental space was used for its central offices, where its production of
goods for interstate commerce was administered, managed and controlled,
although the goods were actually produced at plants located elsewhere
(borden company v. borella,  u.s.  ());
() the employees of an electrical contractor, locally engaged in
commercial and industrial wiring and dealing in electrical motors and
generators for commercial and industrial uses, whose customers are
engaged in the production of goods for interstate commerce (roland co.
v. walling,  u.s. - ());
() employees of a window-cleaning company, the greater part of whose
work is done on the windows of industrial plants of producers of goods
for interstate commerce (martino v. michigan window cleaning company,
() mechanics engaged in servicing and maintaining equipment of a motor
transportation company which is engaged in interstate commerce (boutell
v. walling,  u.s.  ()). nor does the maxim "de minimis"
apply to the act. hence the publishers of a daily newspaper only about
one half of one per cent of whose circulation is outside the state of
publication are not by that fact excluded from the operation of the act.
(mabee v. white plains publishing co.,  u.s.  ()). on the
other hand, an employee whose work it is to prepare meals and serve them
to maintenance-of-way employees of an interstate railroad in pursuance
of a contract between his employer and the railroad company is not
"engaged in commerce" within the meaning of §§ and  of the fair labor
standards act (mcleod v. threlkeld,  u.s.  ()); nor are
maintenance employees of a typical metropolitan office building operated
as an independent enterprise, which is used and is to be used for
offices by every variety of tenants, including some producers of goods
for commerce ( east th st. v. callus,  u.s.  ()); nor
are maintenance employees of a building corporation which furnishes loft
space to tenants engaged in production for interstate commerce "unless
an adequate proportion of such tenants are so engaged." (schulte v.
gangi,  u.s.  ()). also section (a) of the fair labor
standards act, which provides that "no producer, *** shall ship or
deliver for shipment in commerce any goods produced in an establishment
*** in or about which *** any oppressive child labor has been
employed ***" was held inapplicable to a company engaged in the
transmission in interstate commerce of telegraph messages, (western
union v. lenroot,  u.s.  ()). the decision was a
five-to-four one. it should be added that the court has not always been
unanimous in favoring coverage by the act. in the borden case above,
chief justice stone, speaking for himself and justice roberts,
protested, as follows: "no doubt there are philosophers who would argue,
what is implicit in the decision now rendered, that in a complex modern
society there is such interdependence of its members that the activities
of most of them are necessary to the activities of most others. but i
think that congress did not make that philosophy the basis of the
coverage of the fair labor standards act. it did not, by a
'house-that-jack-built' chain of causation, bring within the sweep of
the statute the ultimate causa causarum which result in the production
of goods for commerce. instead it defined production as a physical
process. it said in §(j) 'produced means produced, manufactured,
mined, handled, or in any other manner worked on' and declared that
those who participate in any of these processes 'or in any process or
occupation necessary to' them are engaged in production and subject to
the act."  u.s. , . on the other hand, the holding in  east
th st., above, was a five-to-four decision, and justice frankfurter,
speaking for the court took pains to explain that congress in enacting
the fair labor standards act, "did not see fit, ***, to exhaust its
constitutional power over commerce."  u.s. -. see  law ed.
pp. - for a note reviewing both supreme court, lower federal court,
and state court cases defining "engaged in commerce" as that term is
used in the fair labor standards act.
[]  stat. .
[] ibid. -.
[]  stat. .
[]  u.s. at -.
[] ibid. - passim. in united states v. rock royal
co-operative,  u.s.  (), the court sustained an order under
the agricultural marketing agreement act of  ( stat. )
regulating the price of milk in certain instances. said justice reed for
the majority of the court: "the challenge is to the regulation 'of the
price to be paid upon the sale by a dairy farmer who delivers his milk
to some country plant.' it is urged that the sale, a local transaction,
is fully completed before any interstate commerce begins and that the
attempt to fix the price or other elements of that incident violates the
tenth amendment. but where commodities are bought for use beyond state
lines, the sale is a part of interstate commerce. we have likewise held
that where sales for interstate transportation were commingled with
intrastate transactions, the existence of the local activity did not
interfere with the federal power to regulate inspection of the whole.
activities conducted within the state lines do not by this fact alone
escape the sweep of the commerce clause. interstate commerce may be
dependent upon them. power to establish quotas for interstate marketing
gives power to name quotas for that which is to be left within the state
of production. where local and foreign milk alike are drawn into a
general plan for protecting the interstate commerce in the commodity
from the interferences, burdens and obstructions, arising from excessive
surplus and the social and sanitary evils of low values, the power of
the congress extends also to the local sales."' ibid. -. see
also h.p. hood & sons v. united states,  u.s.  (), another
milk case; and mulford v. smith,  u.s.  (), in which certain
restrictions on the sale of tobacco, under the agricultural adjustment
act of  ( stat. ), were sustained in an opinion by justice
roberts, who spoke for the court in the latter case.
[] united states v. the william,  fed. cas. no. ,,
, - passim (). other parts of this opinion are considered
below in connection with the prohibiting of interstate commerce. see
also gibbons v. ogden,  wheat. ,  (); united states v.
marigold,  how.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[]  stat.  §.
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. ;  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  u.s.  (); cf. united states v. california,
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . see also robert b. cushman, national police
power under the commerce clause,  selected essays on constitutional
law, -.
[] groves v. slaughter,  pet. , - ().
the issue
a little reflection will suffice to show that, as a matter of fact, any
regulation at all of commerce implies some measure of power to prohibit
it, since it is the very nature of regulation to lay down terms on which
the activity regulated will be permitted and for noncompliance with
which it will not be permitted. it is also evident that when occasion
does arise for an outright prohibition of an activity, the power to
enact the required prohibition ordinarily must belong to the body which
is vested with authority to regulate it, which in this instance is
congress.
what, then, are the outstanding differences between such conditional
prohibitions of commerce and that with which this résumé deals? there
seem to be three such differences. first, there is often a difference of
modus operandi between the statutes already considered and those about
to be considered. the former impinge upon persons or agencies engaged in
interstate commerce and their activities in connection therewith,
whereas the latter look primarily to things, or the subject matter, of
the trade or commerce prohibited. secondly, there is a difference in
purpose between the two categories of congressional statutes. the
purpose of the acts already treated is to lay down the conditions on
which a designated branch of commerce among the states may be carried
on; that of the acts now to be treated is to eliminate outright a
designated branch of trade among the states. in other words, whereas the
former acts were, in general, preservative of the commerce which they
regulated because of its value to society, the latter regard the
commerce which they reach as detrimental to society. the third, and most
important difference from the point of view of constitutional law, is
the difference in relation of the two categories of acts respectively to
the reserved powers of the states. the enactments of congress already
dealt with frequently intrude upon the ordinary field of jurisdiction of
the states; but when they do so, it is because the acts or things which
they thus bring under national control are regarded as "local incidents"
of interstate commerce itself. the relation of the enactments about to
be considered to the reserved powers of the states is precisely the
inverse of this. their very purpose is to reach and control matters
ordinarily governed by the state's police power, sometimes in order to
make state policy more effective, sometimes in order to supply a
corrective to it.
the argument denying congress' power to prohibit interstate
commerce
the principal argument against the constitutionality of prohibitory
congressional legislation pivoted on the dual conception of the federal
system "the federal equilibrium". the constitution, the argument ran,
clearly contemplates two spheres of governmental activity, that of the
states, that of the united states; and while the latter government is
generally supreme when the two collide with one another in the exercise
of their respective powers, yet collision is not contemplated as the
rule of life of the system, but the contrary. and since there are these
two spheres, the line to be drawn between them, in order to secure
harmony instead of collision, should recognize that the objects which
the national government was established to promote are relatively few,
while those which the states were retained to advance comprise the
principal objectives of government, the protection of the public health,
safety, morals, and welfare. the power to promote these ends is, indeed,
the very definition of the police power of the states—that power for
which all other powers of the states exist. seriously to impair the
police power of the states, or to diminish their autonomy in its
employment, would be, in fact to remove their reason for being, and so
the reason for the federal system itself.
so while the power of congress to regulate commerce among the states and
with foreign nations is in terms a single power, in the intention of the
framers it comprised two very different powers. in the field of foreign
relations, the national government is completely sovereign, and the
power to regulate commerce with foreign nations is but a branch of this
sovereign power. the power to regulate commerce among the states is, on
the other hand, not a sovereign power except for purposes of commercial
advantage; in other respects it is confronted at every turn by the
police power of the states, and hence requires to be defined in relation
to the known and frequently reiterated objectives of that power.
indeed, it was urged on the authority of madison that the power to
regulate commerce among the states was not bestowed upon the national
government "to be used for *** positive purposes," but merely as "a
negative and preventive provision against injustice among the states
themselves." madison iv, letters and other writings,  (philadelphia,
). furthermore, it is a power which was designed for the promotion
and advancement of commerce, not a power to strike commerce down in
order to advance other purposes and programs. grant that the power to
regulate commerce among the states is the power to prohibit it at the
discretion of congress, and you at once endow congress with power which
it may use as a weapon to consolidate substantially all power in the
hands of the national government.
thus, if congress may prohibit ad libitum the carrying on of
interstate commerce, it may make deprivation of the right to engage in
interstate commerce in any of its phases, even the right to move from
one state to another, a sanction of ever-increasing efficacy for
whatever standards of conduct it may choose to lay down in any field of
human action; and since laws passed by congress in pursuance of its
powers are generally supreme over conflicting state laws, these
standards would supersede the conflicting standards imposed under the
police powers of the states. henceforth, in effect, the police power
would exist solely by "leave and license" of congress—as "the power to
govern men and things" it would be at an end; and by the same token the
federal system, which is the outstanding feature of government under the
constitution, would be at an end. in the first employers' liability
cases, (howard v. illinois central r. co.,  u.s.  ()), the
majority of the court, speaking through justice white, gave special
attention to the government's argument that though the act, in terms,
governed the liability of "every" interstate carrier to "any" of its
employees, whether engaged in interstate commerce or not when the
liability fell, it was none the less constitutional "because one who
engaged in interstate commerce thereby submits all his business concerns
to the regulating power of congress." justice white answered: "to state
the proposition is to refute it. it assumes that because one engages in
interstate commerce he thereby endows congress with power not delegated
to it by the constitution; in other words, with the right to legislate
concerning matters of purely state concern. it rests upon the conception
that the constitution destroyed that freedom of commerce which it was
its purpose to preserve, since it treats the right to engage in
interstate commerce as a privilege which cannot be availed of except
upon such conditions as congress may prescribe, even although the
conditions would be otherwise beyond the power of congress. it is
apparent that if the contention were well founded it would extend the
power of congress to every conceivable subject, however inherently
local, would obliterate all the limitations of power imposed by the
constitution, and would destroy the authority of the states as to all
conceivable matters which from the beginning have been, and must
continue to be, under their control so long as the constitution
endures." ibid. -. see also justice white's dissenting opinion,
for himself, chief justice fuller, and justices peckham and holmes, in
northern securities co. v. united states,  u.s. , -
the argument asserting the power
the thesis that the power to regulate commerce among the states
comprises in general the power to prohibit it turns on the proposition
stated by marshall in his opinion in gibbons v. ogden, that this power
is vested "in congress as absolutely as it would be in a single
government, having in its constitution the same restrictions on the
exercise of the power as are found in the constitution of the united
states. the wisdom and discretion of congress," marshall continued,
"their identity with the people, and the influence which their
constituents possess at elections, are, in this, as in many other
instances, as that, for example, of declaring war, the sole restraints
on which they have relied, to secure them from its abuse."  wheat. ,
that the national government is a government of limited powers, the
advocates of this view conceded; but the powers which it
uncontrovertibly possesses, they urged, may be utilized to promote all
good causes, of which fact, it was asserted, the preamble of the
constitution itself was proof. there the objectives of the constitution
and so, presumably, of the government created by it, are stated to be
"more perfect union," "justice," "domestic tranquillity," "the common
defense," "the general welfare," and "liberty." it was to forward these
broad general purposes, then, that the commercial power, like its other
powers, was bestowed upon the national government. no doubt it was
expected that the states, too, would use the powers still left them to
assist the same purposes, which indeed are those of good government
always. yet that circumstance should not operate to withdraw the powers
delegated to the national government from the service of these same
ends. the fact, in other words, that the power to govern commerce among
the states was bestowed by the constitution on the national government
should not imply that it thereby became available merely for the purpose
of fostering such commerce. it ought, on the contrary, to be applicable,
as would be the equivalent power in england or france for instance, to
aid and support all recognized objectives of government. see juilliard
v. greenman (legal tender case),  u.s. , - (). as
originally possessed by the several states, the power to regulate
commerce with one another included the power to prohibit it at
discretion; on what principle, then, it was asked, can it be contended
that the power delegated to congress is not as exhaustive and complete
as the power it was designed to supersede? see especially justice
holmes' dissenting opinion in hammer v. dagenhart,  u.s. ,
and, the protagonists of this view continued, if the public health,
safety, morals, and general welfare must depend solely upon the police
powers of the states, they must in modern conditions, often fail of
realization in this country. with goods flowing over state lines in
ever-increasing quantities, and people in ever-increasing numbers, how
was it possible to regard the states as watertight compartments? at
least, then, when local legislative programs break down on account of
the division of the country into states, it becomes the clear duty of
congress to adopt supplementary legislation to remedy the situation. in
doing so, it is not undermining the federal system; it is supporting it,
by making it viable in modern conditions. the assemblage of the states
in one union was never intended to put one state at the mercy of
another. if, however, well considered programs of legislation are
rendered abortive in a state in consequence of the flow of commerce into
it from other states, then it becomes the duty—certainly it is within
the discretion of congress—which alone can govern commerce among the
states, to supply the required relief. see especially assistant
attorney general maury's argument. in re rapier,  u.s. , -
in this connection the advocates of this view cited discussion
contemporaneous with jefferson's embargo, and under the embargo itself,
as supporting their position. in the case of the brigantine william the
validity of the embargo was challenged before the united states district
court of massachusetts on the ground that the power to regulate commerce
did not embrace the power to prohibit it. judge davis answered: "it will
be admitted that partial prohibitions are authorized by this expression;
and how shall the degree, or extent, of the prohibition be adjusted, but
by the discretion of the national government, to whom the subject
appears to have been committed? *** the power to regulate commerce is
not to be confined to the adoption of measures, exclusively beneficial
to commerce itself, or tending to its advancement; but, in our national
system, as in all modern sovereignties, it is also to be considered as
an instrument for other purposes of general policy and interest. ***
the national right, or power, under the constitution, to adapt
regulations of commerce to other purposes, than the mere advancement of
commerce, appears to be unquestionable. *** the situation of the
united states, in ordinary times, might render legislative
interferences, relative to commerce, less necessary; but the capacity
and power of managing and directing it, for the advancement of great
national purposes, seems an important ingredient of sovereignty." and in
confirmation of this argument judge davis cited the clause of § of
article i of the constitution interdicting a prohibition of the slave
trade till . this clause clearly proves that those who framed the
constitution perceived that "under the power of regulating commerce,
congress would be authorized to abridge it, in favour of the great
principles of humanity and justice." fed. cas. no. ,, , 
the embargo, to be sure, operated on foreign commerce; but that there is
any difference between congress's power in relation to foreign and to
interstate commerce the advocates of the view under consideration
denied. the power to "regulate" is the power which belongs to congress
as to the one as well as to the other; and if this comprehends the power
to prohibit in the one case, it must equally, by acknowledged principles
of statutory construction, comprehend it in the other case as well. nor
in fact, the argument continued, does it make any difference, by
approved principles of statutory construction, what purposes the framers
of the constitution may have immediately in mind when they gave congress
power to regulate commerce among the states; the governing consideration
is that they gave congress the power, to be exercised in accordance with
its judgment of what are proper occasions for its use. "the reasons
which may have caused the framers of the constitution to repose the
power to regulate interstate commerce in congress do not, however,
affect or limit the extent of the power itself." justice peckham for the
court in addyston pipe & steel co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
references
see especially the arguments of counsel in re rapier,  u.s. 
(); champion v. ames (lottery case),  u.s.  (); hammer
v. dagenhart,  u.s.  ();  selected essays on constitutional
law, , , , , , . indeed, regulation of interstate
commerce by congress may take the form of a positive adoption by it of a
regime of state regulation in the form of statutes (e.g., pilotage) or
of administrative regulations in some degree (as in the motor carrier
act of ); or congress may "regulate" through the device of
divestment of a subject matter of its interstate character, thus
indirectly causing state laws to apply, as was done by the wilson act of
 in respect to intoxicating liquors, or by the mccarran act of 
following the united states v. south-eastern underwriters association,
 u.s.  (), in respect to the insurance business. in a sense,
congress may delegate to the states its power to regulate interstate
commerce.
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[] illinois central r. co. v. mckendree,  u.s. 
(). see also united states v. dewitt,  wall.  (). of the
nature of a quarantine act is the federal firearms act of  ( stat
[] champion v. ames (the lottery case),  u.s. 
[]  stat .
[] champion v. ames (the lottery case),  u.s. 
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  (), "the
webb-kenyon act."
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  (), "the hawes-cooper act."
[]  stat.  (), "the mann act."
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] hoke v. united states,  u.s. ,  (). in
caminetti v. united states,  u.s.  () the act was held to
apply to the case of transportation of a woman for immoral purposes,
although no commercial motive was present; and in cleveland v. united
states,  u.s.  (), to the transportation of a plural wife by
the member of a religious sect a tenet of which is polygamy.
[] united states v. hill,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] ibid. -.
[]  stat.  ().
[]  u.s. at -. see also kentucky whip & collar
co. v. illinois c.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. darby,  u.s. , - ().
[] roland co. v. walling,  u.s. ,  ().
[] polish alliance v. labor board,  u.s. , 
(). cf. the opinion of chief justice vinson for the court in bus
employees v. wisconsin board,  u.s.  ().
[] federalist no. .
[]  wheat. , ,  ().
[] madison, iv, letters and other writings, -
(philadelphia, ).
[]  wheat. , .
[]  wheat. at -.
[]  wheat. at -; also ibid. .
[]  wheat. -, .
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] congressional regulation of commerce, however, does not
have to be uniform. the uniformity rule is a test of the invalidity of
state legislation affecting commerce, not the validity of congressional
legislation regulating commerce. clark distilling co. v. w.m.r. co.,
 u.s. ,  (); currin v. wallace,  u.s. ,  ();
prudential ins. co. v. benjamin,  u.s.  ().
[] simpson v. shepard,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] mccarroll v. dixie greyhound lines,  u.s. ,
- (). f.d.g. ribble's state and national power over commerce
(columbia university press, ) is an excellent study both of the
court's formulas and of the arbitral character of its task in this field
of constitutional law. on the latter point, see especially chapters x
and xii. the late chief justice stone took repeated occasion to stress
the "balancing" and "adjusting" role of the court when applying the
commerce clause in relation to state power. see his words in south
carolina state highway dept. v. barnwell bros.,  u.s. , -
(); california v. thompson,  u.s. , - (); parker
v. brown,  u.s. , - (); and southern pacific v.
arizona, . u.s. , - (). see also justice black for the
court in united states v. south-eastern underwriters assoc.,  u.s.
[]  wheat.  ().
[] compare, for example, may v. new orleans,  u.s. 
(); and the recent case of hooven & allison co. v. evatt,  u.s.
 (). in the latter case the benefits of the original package
doctrine were extended to imports from the philippine islands title to
which did not vest in the importer until their arrival in the united
states.
[] freeman v. hewit,  u.s. ,  ().
[] philadelphia & r.r. co. v. pennsylvania (state freight
tax case),  wall.  ().
[] headnotes. said the court: "the rule has been asserted
with great clearness, that whenever the subjects over which a power to
regulate commerce is asserted are in their nature national, or admit of
one uniform system or plan of regulation, they may justly be said to be
of such a nature as to require exclusive legislation by congress. surely
transportation of passengers or merchandise through a state, or from one
state to another, is of this nature. it is of national importance that
over that subject there should be but one regulating power, for if one
state can directly tax persons or property passing through it, or tax
them indirectly by levying a tax upon their transportation, every other
may, and thus commercial intercourse between states remote from each
other may be destroyed."  wall. at -, citing cooley v. port
wardens,  how.  (); gilman. v. philadelphia,  wall. 
(); crandall v. nevada,  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] heisler v. thomas colliery co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . see also diamond match co. v. ontonagon
[] hope natural gas co. v. hall,  u.s.  (). see
also american manufacturing co. v. st. louis,  u.s.  () in
which there was imposed a license tax on manufacture of goods computed
upon the amount of sales of the goods.
[] coverdale v. arkansas-louisiana pipe line co.,  u.s.
[] toomer v. witsell,  u.s.  ().
[] dahnke-walker milling co. v. bondurant,  u.s. 
(). here a tennessee corporation, in pursuance of its practice of
purchasing grain in kentucky to be transported to and used in its
tennessee mill, made a contract for the purchase of wheat, to be
delivered in kentucky on the cars of a public carrier, intending to
forward it as soon as delivery was made. it was held that the
transaction was in interstate commerce, notwithstanding the contract was
made and to be performed in kentucky; and that the possibility that the
purchaser might change its mind after delivery and sell the grains in
kentucky or consign it to some other place in that state did not affect
the essential character of the transaction. interstate commerce, said
the court, "is not confined to transportation from one state to another,
but comprehends all commercial intercourse between different states and
all the component parts of that intercourse." ibid. . followed in
lemke v. farmers grain co.,  u.s.  (); and flanagan v.
federal coal co.,  u.s.  ().
[] eureka pipe line co. v. hallanan,  u.s.  ().
[] united fuel gas co. v. hallanan,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . see also state tax commission v.
interstate natural gas co.,  u.s.  () holding invalid a state
privilege tax imposed on a foreign corporation selling to distributors
in the state natural gas piped in from another state, whose only
activity was the use of a thermometer and meter and reduction of
pressure to permit vendee to draw off the gas. "the work done by the
plaintiff is done upon the flowing gas to help the delivery and seems to
us plainly to be an incident to the interstate commerce between
louisiana and mississippi." ibid. .
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). see also pittsburgh & s. coal co.
v. bates,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at -.
[] ibid. .
[] see wagner v. covington,  u.s.  ().
[] brimmer v. rebman,  u.s.  (); patapsco guano
co. v. board of agriculture,  u.s.  (); red "c" oil mfg. co.
v. board of agriculture,  u.s.  (); savage v. jones, 
u.s.  (); foote & co. v. stanley,  u.s.  ().
[] standard oil co. v. graves,  u.s.  (); askren
v. continental oil co.,  u.s.  (); bowman v. continental
oil co.,  u.s.  (); texas co. v. brown,  u.s. 
[] sonneborn bros. v. cureton,  u.s.  ().
reviewing cases. cf. phipps v. cleveland refining co.,  u.s. 
[] see pp. , -.
[] eastern air transport, inc. v. south carolina tax
comm'n.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] rast v. van deman and lewis,  u.s.  (). see
also tanner v. little,  u.s.  (), and pitney v.
washington,  u.s.  () upholding a washington statute imposing
a prohibitive license tax upon merchants using trading stamps or coupons
redeemable in merchandise.
[] howe machine co. v. gage,  u.s.  (); emert
v. missouri,  u.s.  (); singer sewing machine co. v.
brickell,  u.s.  (); wagner v. city of covington,  u.s.
 (); caskey baking co. v. virginia,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also armour packing co. v.
lacy,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (); see also ward v. maryland, 
wall.  ().
[] see cook v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  (); guy
v. baltimore,  u.s.  (); tiernan v. rinker,  u.s. 
(); howe machine co. v. gage,  u.s.  (); webber v.
virginia,  u.s.  (); walling v. michigan,  u.s. 
(); darnell & son co. v. memphis,  u.s.  (), where was
held void a property tax on lumber which discriminated in favor of the
local product: bethlehem motor corp. v. flynt,  u.s.  (),
where a license tax on distributors was held to be invalidated by the
provision made for a rebate under conditions that could be met only by
manufacturers within the taxing state.
[] coe v. errol,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] general oil co. v. crain,  u.s.  ().
[] american steel & wire co. v. speed,  u.s. 
(); bacon v. illinois,  u.s.  (); susquehanna coal co.
v. south amboy,  u.s.  (); minnesota v. blasius,  u.s.
 (); independent warehouses v. scheele,  u.s.  ().
[] nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. wallace,  u.s. 
[] edelman v. boeing air transport, inc.,  u.s. 
(). the court also upheld a tax on the sale of gasoline for use by
an air transport line in conducting interstate transportation across the
state in eastern air transport, inc. v. south carolina tax comm., 
[] southern pacific co. v. gallagher,  u.s. 
[] pacific telephone & telegraph co. v. gallagher, 
[] southern pacific co. v. gallagher,  u.s.  (),
as formulated in the headnotes; see also monamotor oil co. v.
johnson,  u.s.  ().
[] bingaman v. golden eagle western lines,  u.s. 
(); mccarroll v. dixie greyhound lines,  u.s.  (). in
helson v. kentucky,  u.s.  (), the court held that gasoline
purchased in illinois and used in an illinois-kentucky ferry could not
be taxed by kentucky, being, as it were, a part of the ferry, an
instrument of commerce between the two states. see also kelley v.
rhoads,  u.s.  (); champlain realty co. v. brattleboro, 
u.s.  (); hughes bros. timber co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
(); carson petroleum co. v. vial,  u.s.  ().
[] corson v. maryland,  u.s.  (); asher v.
texas,  u.s.  (); stoutenburgh v. hennick,  u.s. 
(); brennan v. titusville,  u.s.  (); stockard v.
morgan,  u.s.  (); crenshaw v. arkansas,  u.s.  ();
rogers v. arkansas,  u.s.  (); stewart v. michigan, 
u.s.  (); western oil refining co. v. lipscomb,  u.s. 
(); cheney bros. v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ().
[] caldwell v. north carolina,  u.s.  ().
[] norfolk & w.r. co. v. sims,  u.s.  ().
[] rearick v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  (); dozier
v. alabama,  u.s.  (); davis v. virginia,  u.s. 
[]  u.s. at .
[] real silk hosiery mills v. portland,  u.s. 
[] heyman v. hays,  u.s.  (). see also hump
hairpin co. v. emmerson,  u.s.  (), holding that business
done by a corporation through orders which were approved in a state
where its tangible property and offices were located, but which were
first taken by its salesmen in other states, was interstate, although
the tax involved was sustained.
[] ficklen v. shelby county taxing district,  u.s. ,
[] new york ex rel. hatch v. reardon,  u.s.  ();
cf. nathan v. louisiana,  how.  ().
[] ware v. mobile county,  u.s.  (). see also
brodnax v. missouri,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . see also superior oil v. mississippi ex
rel. knox,  u.s.  ().
[] chassaniol v. greenwood,  u.s.  ().
[] wiloil corp. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. ,  ();
see also minnesota v. blasius,  u.s.  ().
[] best & co. v. maxwell.  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s.  (). cf. hinson v. lott,  wall. 
(). here was involved a tax of fifty cents per gallon on all
spiritous liquors brought into the state. comparing the tax with a
similar one imposed upon liquors manufactured in the state, the court
upheld the statute. "the taxes were complementary and were intended to
effect equality."
[]  u.s. at -. some subsequent use tax cases in the
henneford pattern are the following: bacon & sons v. martin was
decided in a unanimous per curiam opinion. it involved a kentucky
statute which imposed a tax "on the 'receipt' of cosmetics in the state
by any kentucky retailer" equal to twenty per cent of the invoice price
plus transportation cost, if any to the kentucky dealer. the kentucky
court held that "the imposition of the tax against the retailer is not
on the act of receiving the cosmetics, but on the sale and use thereof,
after the retailer has received them." on this interpretation the
supreme court sustained the tax. obviously, other things being equal,
there is little difference between a tax on receiving and a tax on
possession a moment later.  u.s.  (). in felt & tarrant
manufacturing co. v. gallagher,  u.s.  (), a california use
tax was upheld applicable to a nonresident corporation which solicited
orders from california purchasers through agents for whom it hired
offices in the state and took orders subject to the vendor's approval.
in nelson v. sears, roebuck & company and nelson v. montgomery ward
& company,  u.s.  and  () it was held that a foreign
corporation which maintained retail stores in iowa could be validly
required to collect an iowa use tax in respect of mail orders sent by
iowa purchasers to out-of-state branches of the corporation and filled
by direct shipment by mail or common carrier from those branches to the
purchasers. in general trading company v. state tax commission, 
u.s.  (), also involving the iowa tax, it was held that a company
carrying on no operations in iowa other than the solicitation of orders
by traveling salesmen was liable for collection of the tax on goods sold
to iowa residents, even though the corporation was not licensed to do
business in the state and the orders were forwarded for acceptance to
minnesota where they were filled by direct shipment to iowa customers.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. , citing ficklen v. shelby county taxing
district,  u.s.  (); howe machine co. v. gage,  u.s. 
(); and wagner v. covington,  u.s.  (). in the first it
was held that the robbins case did not apply to a firm of agents and
brokers maintaining an office and samples throughout the year in the
taxing district. the other two cases were totally irrelevant.
[]  u.s.  and .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] memphis steam laundry v. stone,  u.s.  ().
[] norton co. v. dept. of revenue,  u.s.  (),
although decided by a closely divided court, further confirms this
impression.
[]  wheat. , - ().
[] smith v. turner (passenger cases),  how.  ().
[] henderson v. mayor of new york,  u.s.  (); new
york v. compagnie générale transatlantique,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] see covington & c. bridge co. v. kentucky,  u.s.
 (); also edwards v. california,  u.s.  (), the
decision in which represents the exact inverse of that in the crandall
case, being based by the majority on the commerce clause, while several
of the justices preferred to put it on the broader grounds invoked by
justice miller in the crandall case.
[] western union telegraph company v. texas,  u.s. 
() state freight tax case,  wall.  () and pensacola
telegraph co. v. western union telegraph co.,  u.s.  () were
the precedents principally relied on.
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  wall. , -, - ().
[] ibid. .
[] crutcher v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (); followed in cudahy packing co. v.
hinkle,  u.s.  (). cf., however, western live stock v.
bureau of revenue,  u.s. ,  ().
[] anglo-chilean nitrate sales corp. v. alabama,  u.s.
[] cooney v. mountain states telephone & telegraph co.,
[] fisher's blend station v. state tax commission, 
[] puget sound stevedoring co. v. tax commission of
washington,  u.s.  ().
[] adams mfg. co. v. storen,  u.s.  ().
[] mccarroll v. dixie greyhound lines,  u.s. 
(). see also the following cases in which the court found a tax to
be an unconstitutional interference with the interstate commerce
privilege: tax on maintenance of office in pennsylvania for use of
stockholders, officers, employees, and agents of railroad not operating
in pennsylvania but a link in a line operating therein, norfolk & w.r.
co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  (); license tax on sale of
liquor as applied to a sale out of state by mail, heyman v. hays, 
u.s.  (); tax on pipe lines transporting oil or gas produced in
state but which might pass out of state, eureka pipe line co. v.
hallanan,  u.s.  (); united fuel gas co. v. hallanan, 
u.s.  (); kentucky tax on gasoline purchased in illinois and used
in an illinois-kentucky ferry, helson & randolph v. kentucky,  u.s.
 (); tax laid on privilege of operating a bus in interstate
commerce because not imposed solely as compensation for use of highways
or to defray expenses of regulating motor traffic, interstate transit,
inc. v. lindsey,  u.s.  (); tax on gas pipe line whose only
activity in state was the use of a thermometer and reduction of pressure
to permit a vendee to draw off gas, state tax commission v. interstate
natural gas co.,  u.s.  ()—but see east ohio gas co. v. tax
commission,  u.s.  (); gasoline tax imposed per gallon of
gasoline imported by interstate carriers as fuel for use in their
vehicles within the state as well as in their interstate travel,
bingaman v. golden eagle western lines,  u.s.  (). see
also, for reiteration of the basic rule that the commerce clause
forbids states to tax the privilege of engaging in interstate commerce,
gwin, white & prince v. henneford,  u.s. , - (). in
california v. thompson,  u.s.  (), the court, overruling di
santo v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  (), sustained, as not a
"revenue measure," but "a measure to safeguard the traveling public by
motor vehicle," who are "particularly unable" to protect themselves
against overreaching by those "engaged in a business notoriously subject
to abuses," a california statute requiring that agents for this type of
transportation take out a license for both their interstate and their
intrastate business.
[]  u.s.  (). cf. osborne v. florida,  u.s.
 (), involving an express business; in pullman company v.
adams,  u.s.  (); and in allen v. pullman's palace car co.,
 u.s.  (). here state taxes levied on the local business of
companies engaged also in interstate commerce were sustained "on the
assumption" that the companies in question were free to abandon their
local business.
[] see also pullman co. v. kansas ex rel. coleman, 
u.s.  (); ludwig v. western union teleg. co.,  u.s. 
(); atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. o'connor,  u.s. , 
[]  u.s.  (). cf. baltic mining co. v.
massachusetts,  u.s.  (); kansas city ry. v. kansas,  u.s.
 (); and kansas city, m. & b.r. co. v. stiles,  u.s. 
(). in each of these a tax like that involved in looney v. crane
was sustained, in the first two because the statute set a maximum limit
to the tax; in the third because the amount collected under the act was
held to be "reasonable." the ideology of these decisions is clearly
opposed to that of the cases treated in the text. the rule in looney
v. crane co. was held not applicable in the case of a west virginia
corporation doing business in illinois and owning practically all of its
property there. an illinois tax on the local business, which was
measured by the total capitalization of the company was sustained, it
being shown further that the tax was little more than it would have been
if levied at the same rate directly on the property of the company that
was in illinois. hump hairpin mfg. co. v. emmerson,  u.s. 
[]  u.s.  (). see also locomobile co. of america
v. massachusetts,  u.s.  (); cheney brothers co. v.
massachusetts,  u.s.  (); union pacific r.r. co. v. pub.
service comm.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . headnote .
[]  wall. ,  (). see also bank of augusta v.
earle,  pet.  (); and security mut. l. ins. co. v. prewitt,
[] see atlantic lumber co. v. commissioner,  u.s. 
(); southern natural gas corp. v. alabama,  u.s.  ();
atlantic refining co. v. virginia,  u.s.  (); coverdale v.
arkansas-louisiana pipe line co.,  u.s.  (); ford motor co.
v. beauchamp,  u.s.  (); treasury of indiana v. wood
corp.,  u.s.  (); wheeling steel corp. v. glander,  u.s.
,  (); cf. however, james v. dravo contracting co., 
u.s.  (); memphis natural gas co. v. stone,  u.s. , -
[] philadelphia & r.r. co. v. pennsylvania (state freight
tax case),  wall.  ().
[] prudential ins. co. v. benjamin,  u.s. , 
[]  wheat.  ().
[] philadelphia & r.r. co. v. pennsylvania,  wall. 
[] philadelphia & s. mail s.s. co. v. pennsylvania, 
[] western union tel. co. v. massachusetts,  u.s. 
[] ibid. .
[] see railroad co. v. peniston,  wall. , -
[] pullman's palace car co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s. ; upon rehearing  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] see justice holmes' language in galveston, harrisburg,
& s.a. ry. co. v. texas,  u.s. , ,  (). see also
cudahy packing co. v. minnesota  u.s.  (); and pullman co.
v. richardson,  u.s.  (); and virginia v. imperial coal
sales co.,  u.s.  ().
[] pullman's palace car co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] pittsburgh, c.c. & st. l.r. co. v. backus,  u.s. 
(); cleveland, c.c. & st. l.r. co. v. backus,  u.s. 
[] western union teleg. co. v. taggart,  u.s.  ().
see also western union teleg. co. v. massachusetts,  u.s. 
[] adams express co. v. ohio,  u.s.  (), upon
rehearing  u.s.  ().
[] great northern railway co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
[] nashville, c. & st. l. railway v. browning,  u.s.
[] ibid. , citing union tank line co. v. wright, 
u.s.  (); wallace v. hines,  u.s.  (); southern r. co.
v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] atlantic lumber co. v. commissioner,  u.s. 
(). cf. alpha portland cement co. v. massachusetts,  u.s. 
[] ibid. -.
[] citing pickard v. pullman southern car co.,  u.s. 
(); leloup v. port of mobile,  u.s.  (); crutcher v.
kentucky,  u.s.  (); philadelphia & s. mail steamship co. v.
pennsylvania,  u.s.  ().
[] galveston, harrisburg & s.a.r. co. v. texas,  u.s.
[] ibid. .
[] postal telegraph cable co. v. adams,  u.s. , 
(). see also illinois central r. co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
(), in which was sustained a five percent gross earnings tax on all
railroads operating in the state, payable in lieu of all other taxes and
found to have "a fair relation to the property employed in the state."
[] new jersey bell telephone co. v. state bd. of taxes &
assessments,  u.s.  ().
[] bass, ratcliff & gretton v. state tax com.,  u.s.
[] matson navigation co. v. state board,  u.s. 
(). see also international shoe co. v. shartel,  u.s. 
[] ford motor co. v. beauchamp,  u.s.  ().
[] international harvester co. v. evatt,  u.s. 
[] galveston, harrisburg & san antonio r. co. v. texas,
[] wallace v. hines,  u.s.  ().
[] see pp. , . see also interstate oil pipe line
co. v. stone,  u.s.  () for an extensive review and
evaluation of cases.
[] illinois central r. co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
(). see also wisconsin and michigan ry. v. powers,  u.s. 
(); united states express co. v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
see note  to justice rutledge's opinion in freeman v. hewit, 
u.s. at pp. -.
[] western live stock v. bureau of revenue,  u.s. 
(). see also united states express co. v. minnesota,  u.s.
 (); dept. of treasury of indiana v. wood corp.,  u.s. 
(); dept. of treasury of indiana v. mfg. co.,  u.s.  ();
harvester co. v. dept. of treasury,  u.s.  ().
[] western live stock v. bureau of revenue,  u.s. 
[] meyer v. wells, fargo & co.,  u.s.  ();
also the following note.
[] philadelphia & s. mail s.s. co. v. pennsylvania, 
u.s.  (); ratterman v. western union teleg. co.,  u.s. 
(); western union teleg. co. v. alabama board of assessment
(seay),  u.s.  (); adams mfg. co. v. storen,  u.s. 
(); gwin, white & prince v. henneford,  u.s.  (). cf.
fargo v. michigan (fargo v. stevens),  u.s.  (), as
explained in western live stock v. bureau of revenue,  u.s. 
[] lockhart, gross receipts taxes on interstate
transportation and communication,  harvard l. rev. , ,  ();
galveston, h. & s.a.r. co. v. texas,  u.s.  (); new jersey
bell teleph. co. v. state bd. of taxes and assessments,  u.s. 
(). but cf. nashville, c. and st. l. ry. v. browning,  u.s.
 (). in both the galveston and new jersey telephone company
cases, although the taxable events all occurred within the taxing state,
the possibility of multiple taxation was nevertheless present. see
also puget sound stevedoring co. v. state tax commission,  u.s. 
(), the decision in which might have been rested upon the clause of
the constitution forbidding the states to tax exports. see also
richfield oil corp. v. state board of equalization,  u.s. 
[] fisher's blend station v. state tax comm.,  u.s. 
(); western live stock v. bureau of revenue,  u.s.  ().
[] see p. .
[] see pp. -.
[] see p. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[]  u.s. at  ().
[] see mccarroll v. dixie greyhound lines, inc., 
[] freeman v. hewit,  u.s.  ().
[] the court relied particularly on adams mfg. co. v.
storen,  u.s.  () in which the multiple taxation test had been
used.
[] justice black dissented without opinion. justice douglas,
speaking also for justice murphy, contended that the sale had been
local, and that the only interstate agency employed had been the mails,
an argument which squares badly with the attitude of the same justices
in united states v. south-eastern underwriters assoc.,  u.s. 
[]  u.s.  (), reaffirming puget sound stevedoring
co. v. tax comm.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] justices murphy, douglas, and rutledge thought the
decision correct as to receipts from foreign commerce. speaking for
them, justice douglas made an effort to resurrect maine v. grand trunk
r. co.,  u.s.  (). justice black dissented without opinion.
[] ibid. , citing western live stock v. bureau of
revenue,  u.s.  (); and ratterman v. western union teleg.
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] see supra, pp. , -.
[] ibid. -.
[] shaffer v. carter,  u.s.  ().
[] underwood typewriter co. v. chamberlain,  u.s. 
(); bass, ratcliff & gretton v. state tax commission,  u.s. 
[] hans rees' sons v. north carolina,  u.s. , ,
 (). in this case a north carolina tax was assessed on the income
of a new york corporation, which bought leather, manufactured it in
north carolina, and sold its products at wholesale and retail in new
york. the court observed: "the difficulty of making an exact
apportionment is apparent and hence, when the state has adopted a method
not intrinsically arbitrary, it will be sustained until proof is offered
of an unreasonable and arbitrary application in particular cases." the
decisions in the underwood and bass cases, supra, "are not authority
for the conclusion that where a corporation manufactures in one state
and sells in another, the net profits of the entire transaction, as a
unitary enterprise, may be attributed, regardless of evidence, to either
state."
[] atlantic coast line v. daughton,  u.s.  ().
[] matson nav. co. v. state board,  u.s.  ().
see also butler bros. v. mccolgan,  u.s.  (), where the
tax was sustained under the fourteenth amendment.
[] memphis gas co. v. beeler,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -
[] spector motor service v. o'connor,  u.s. 
[] hays v. pacific mail s.s. co.,  how.  ().
[] packet co. v. keokuk,  u.s.  (); see also
transportation co. v. parkersburg,  u.s.  ().
[] ayer & l. tie co. v. kentucky,  u.s.  (). for
a résumé of the rules for taxing vessels see northwest airlines v.
minnesota,  u.s. , - (), note .
[] old dominion s.s. co. v. virginia,  u.s.  ():
a vessel enrolled in new york at domicile of owner, but operating wholly
in virginia, was held taxable in virginia.
[] northwest airlines v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] he also invoked new york central and h.r.r. co. v.
miller,  u.s.  (), where although  to  per cent of the
rolling stock of the railroad was outside of new york throughout the tax
year, new york was nevertheless allowed to tax it all because no part
was in any other state throughout the year. the case is atypical, a
constitutional sport; cf. union refrigerator transit co. v.
kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at -.
[] "the apportionment theory is a mongrel one, a cross
between desire not to interfere with state taxation and desire at the
same time not utterly to crush out interstate commerce. it is a
practical, but rather illogical, device to prevent duplication of tax
burdens on vehicles in transit. it is established in our decisions and
has been found more or less workable with more or less arbitrary
formulae of apportionment. nothing either in theory or in practice
commends it for transfer to air commerce."—ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] pullman's palace car co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] ibid. .
[] hendrick v. maryland,  u.s.  ().
[] kane v. new jersey,  u.s.  ().
[] morf v. bingaman,  u.s.  ().
[] ingels v. morf,  u.s.  ().
[] clark v. poor,  u.s.  (); hicklin v. coney,
[] interstate busses corp. v. blodgett,  u.s. 
(); continental baking co. v. woodring,  u.s.  ().
[] aero mayflower transit co. v. georgia pub. serv.
commission,  u.s.  ().
[] interstate transit v. lindsey,  u.s.  ().
cf. sprout v. south bend,  u.s.  ().
[] see dixie ohio express co. v. state rev. comm., 
u.s.  (); also clark v. paul gray, inc.,  u.s.  ();
aero mayflower transit co. v. board of r.r. commrs.,  u.s. ,
- (). here was sustained a state statute imposing a flat tax
of $ annually upon each vehicle operated by a motor carrier over the
state's highways, and a fee of one half of one per cent of the carrier's
gross operating revenue from its operations within the state, with an
annual minimum of $ per vehicle, in consideration of the use of the
highways and in addition to all other motor vehicle license fees and
taxes. this was held, as applied to a carrier engaged solely in
interstate commerce, not to burden such commerce unconstitutionally,
although the proceeds went into the state's general fund subject to
appropriation for other than highway purposes. (opinion by rutledge, j.,
all concurring.) while a "state may not discriminate against or exclude
such interstate traffic generally in the use of its highways, *** [it
is not] required to furnish those facilities to it free of charge or
indeed on equal terms with other traffic not inflicting similar
destructive effects. *** interstate traffic equally with intrastate
may be required to pay a fair share of the cost and maintenance
reasonably related to the use made of the highways." ibid., headnote .
[] ibid. .
[] justice roberts for the court in great northern r. co.
v. washington,  u.s. , - ().
[] charlotte, c. & a.r. co. v. gibbes,  u.s. 
(); new york ex rel. new york electric lines co. v. squire, 
[] atlantic & p. teleg. co. v. philadelphia,  u.s. 
(); mackay teleg. & cable co. v. little rock,  u.s. , 
[] western u. teleg. co. v. new hope,  u.s. , 
(); pure oil co. v. minnesota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] new mexico ex rel. mclean v. denver & r.g.r. co., 
u.s. ,  (). cf. red "c" oil mfg. co. v. board of
agriculture,  u.s. ,  (); western u. teleg. co. v. new
hope,  u.s.  ().
[] brimmer v. rebman,  u.s. ,  (); postal
teleg. & cable co. v. taylor,  u.s.  (); pure oil co. v.
minnesota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] atlantic & p. teleg. co. v. philadelphia,  u.s. ,
 (); postal teleg. cable co. v. taylor,  u.s. ,  ();
foote & co. v. stanley,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] foote & co. v. stanley,  u.s. ,  (); lugo
v. suazo,  f. (d)  ().
[] western u. teleg. co. v. new hope,  u.s. , 
(); foote & co. v. stanley,  u.s. ,  ().
[] postal teleg. cable co. v. new hope,  u.s. 
(); foote & co. v. stanley,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat. . sustained in pennsylvania v. wheeling &
belmont bridge co.,  how.  ().
[] pennsylvania v. wheeling & belmont bridge co.,  how.
[] transportation co. v. parkersburg,  u.s. , 
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. -, -.
[] see pp. -.
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] cf.  wheat. at -.
[]  pet.  ().
[] smith v. turner (passenger cases),  how.  ().
[] henderson v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] chy lung v. freeman,  u.s.  ().
[] compagnie francaise de navigation v. bd. of health, 
u.s. , , (). see also morgan's l. & t.r.s.s. co. v. bd. of
health,  u.s.  (); louisiana v. texas,  u.s. , 
[] as to concessions by the court to the practical
necessities of enforcement, see also bayside fish flour co. v.
gentry,  u.s.  (); and whitfield v. ohio,  u.s. 
[] ibid. ; citing: minnesota rate cases,  u.s. ,
,  (); south carolina highway dept. v. barnwell bros., 
u.s. ,  (), et seq.; california v. thompson,  u.s. ,
,  () and cases cited; parker v. brown,  u.s. , ,
[]  u.s. at ; citing: cooley v. board of wardens, 
how. at  (); south carolina highway dept. v. barnwell bros.,
 u.s. at ; california v. thompson,  u.s. at ; duckworth
v. arkansas,  u.s. ,  (); parker v. brown,  u.s. at
[]  u.s. at ; citing: south carolina highway dept.
v. barnwell bros.,  u.s. at  and cases cited; lone star gas co.
v. texas,  u.s. ,  (); milk board v. eisenberg co., 
u.s. ,  (); maurer v. hamilton,  u.s. ,  ();
california v. thompson,  u.s. ,  and cases cited.
[]  u.s. at , ; citing: cooley v. board of
wardens,  how. at  (); leisy v. hardin,  u.s. , ,
 (); minnesota rate cases,  u.s. at ,  (); edwards
v. california,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. at ; citing: brown v. maryland,  wheat.
,  (); minnesota rate cases,  u.s. at , ;
pennsylvania v. west virginia,  u.s. ,  (); baldwin v.
seelig,  u.s. ,  (); south carolina highway dept. v.
barnwell bros.,  u.s. at  ().
[]  u.s. at ; citing: welton v. missouri,  u.s.
,  (); hall v. decuir,  u.s. ,  (); brown v.
houston,  u.s. ,  (); bowman v. chicago & n.w.r. co., 
u.s. , ,  (); leisy v. hardin,  u.s. at ; in re
rahrer,  u.s. , ,  (); brennan v. titusville,  u.s.
,  (); covington & c. bridge co. v. kentucky,  u.s. ,
 (); graves v. new york ex rel. o'keefe,  u.s. , 
(); dowling, interstate commerce and state power,  va. law rev. 
[]  u.s. at ; citing: parker v. brown.  u.s. at
 (); terminal railroad assn. v. brotherhood,  u.s. , 
(); see di santo v. pennsylvania,  u.s. ,  () (and
compare california v. thompson,  u.s.  ()); illinois gas co.
v. public service co.,  u.s. , ,  ().
[]  u.s. at ; citing: cooley v. board of wardens, 
how.  (); kansas city southern r. co. v. kaw valley district,
 u.s. ,  (); south covington r. co. v. covington,  u.s.
,  (); missouri, k. & t.r. co. v. texas,  u.s. , 
(); st. louis & s.f.r. co. v. public service comm'n.,  u.s.
,  (): foster-fountain packing co. v. haydel,  u.s. , 
(); gwin, white & prince v. henneford,  u.s. ,  ();
mccarroll v. dixie lines,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at ; citing: in re rahrer,  u.s. at ,
 (); adams express co. v. kentucky,  u.s. ,  ();
rosenberger v. pacific express co.,  u.s. , ,  (); clark
distilling co. v. western maryland r. co.,  u.s. , , 
(); whitfield v. ohio,  u.s. , - (); kentucky whip
& collar co. v. illinois central r. co.,  u.s. , , 
(); hooven & allison co. v. evatt,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. at , ; citing: addyston pipe & steel co.
v. united states,  u.s. ,  (); louisville & nashville r.
co. v. mottley,  u.s.  (); houston, e. & w.t.r. co. v.
united states,  u.s.  (); american express co. v. caldwell,
 u.s. ,  (); illinois central r. co. v. public utilities
comm'n.,  u.s. ,  (); new york v. united states,  u.s.
,  (); louisiana public service comm'n. v. texas & n.o.r.
co.,  u.s. ,  (); pennsylvania r. co. v. illinois brick
co.,  u.s. , , ().
[]  u.s. at ; citing: gwin, white & prince v.
henneford,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. at ; citing: terminal railroad assn. v.
brotherhood,  u.s. ,  (); southern r. co. v. king,  u.s.
[] peik v. chicago & n.w.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] wabash, st. l. & p.r. co. v. illinois,  u.s. 
[]  stat.  ().
[] wisconsin railroad com. v. chicago, b. & q.r.r. co.,
[] gladson v. minnesota,  u.s.  (); followed in
lake shore & m.s.r. co. v. ohio ex rel. lawrence,  u.s.  (),
in which an ohio statute requiring that "each company shall cause three,
each way, of its regular trains carrying passengers, *** sundays
excepted, to stop at a station, city or village, containing three
thousand inhabitants, for a time sufficient to receive and let off
passengers; ***" was sustained.
[] illinois central r.r. co. v. illinois,  u.s. ,
[] chicago, burlington & quincy r.r. co. v. wisconsin r.r.
com.,  u.s. ,  (); st. louis & san francisco r. co. v.
public service com.,  u.s. , - ().
[] st. louis & san francisco r. co. v. public service
com.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wisconsin, minnesota & pacific r.r. v. jacobson, 
[] missouri p.r. co. v. larabee flour mills co.,  u.s.
[] mcneill v. southern r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] st. louis s.w.r. co. v. arkansas,  u.s.  ().
[] see e.g. the court's language in hannibal & st. l.r.
co. v. husen,  u.s. ,  (); new york, n.h. & h.r. co. v.
new york,  u.s. ,  (); lake shore & m.s.r. co. v. ohio ex
rel. lawrence,  u.s. ,  (); hennington v. georgia, 
u.s.  (); simpson v. shepard (minnesota rate cases),  u.s.
[] smith v. alabama,  u.s.  (); see also
nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. alabama,  u.s.  (); mccall
v. california,  u.s.  (); missouri, k. & t.r. co. v.
haber,  u.s. ,  ().
[] new york, n.h. & h.r. co. v. new york,  u.s. 
(). see also chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. solan,  u.s. ,
[] erb v. morasch,  u.s.  ().
[] erie r.r. co. v. public utility commrs.,  u.s. 
[] atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. r.r. comm.,  u.s. 
[] chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. arkansas,  u.s. 
[] ibid, , . see also st. louis, i.m. & s. co. v.
arkansas,  u.s.  (); missouri p.r. co. v. norwood,  u.s.
[] terminal railroad assn. v. brotherhood,  u.s. 
[]  u.s.  (). in south covington r. co. v.
covington,  u.s.  (), the court sustained a municipal
ordinance which prohibits the company from allowing passengers to ride
on the rear or front platforms without suitable barriers, and requires
that the cars be kept clean and ventilated and fumigated. however,
provisions of the ordinance that cars shall never be permitted to fall
below a certain temperature and regulating the number of passengers to
be carried in the cars were held to be unreasonable and violative of the
commerce clause. there was no unconstitutional interference with
interstate commerce by a municipal ordinance which directed a railway
company to remove its tracks from a busy street intersection. denver &
r.g.r. co. v. denver,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. solan,  u.s. 
(); richmond & a.r. co. v. patterson tobacco co.,  u.s. 
[] kansas city southern r. co. v. kaw valley drainage
dist.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cf. southern r. co. v. king,  u.s.  (),
where the crossings were fewer and the burden to interstate commerce was
shown not to be unduly heavy.
[] hendrick v. maryland,  u.s.  (); kane v.
new jersey,  u.s.  ().
[] sproles v. binford,  u.s.  (). see also
morris v. duby,  u.s.  ().
[] south carolina state highway dept. v. barnwell bros.
inc.,  u.s.  ().
[] eichholz v. public service com. of missouri,  u.s.
 (), citing cooley v. board of wardens,  how.  ().
[] railway express agency v. new york,  u.s. 
[] ibid. . for a more extreme application of this idea by
a narrowly divided court, in a quite special situation, see buck et
al. v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] continental baking co. v. woodring,  u.s. 
(); stephenson v. binford,  u.s.  (); hicklin v.
coney,  u.s.  ().
[] michigan pub. utilities com. v. duke,  u.s. 
(). see also smith v. cahoon,  u.s.  (); and
continental baking co. v. woodring,  u.s.  ().
[] buck v. kuykendall,  u.s.  (). see also,
bush & sons co. v. maloy,  u.s.  (); interstate busses corp.
v. holyoke street r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also mccall v. california,
 u.s.  (). in the former case, agents soliciting patronage for
steamship lines were involved; in the latter, an agent soliciting
patronage for a particular railway line.
[] california v. thompson,  u.s. , - ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  pet. ,  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] foster v. davenport,  how.  (); sinnot v.
davenport,  how.  (). see also lord v. steamship co., 
[] foster v. master & wardens of port of new orleans, 
[] ibid. .
[] northern transp. co. v. chicago,  u.s. , 
(); willamette iron bridge co. v. hatch,  u.s.  ();
illinois v. economy power light co.,  u.s.  ().
[] economy light and power co. v. united states,  u.s.
[] harman v. chicago,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] hall v. de cuir,  u.s.  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] pound v. turck,  u.s.  (); lindsay & phelps
co. v. mullen,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. . see also, escanaba & l.m. transp. co. v.
chicago,  u.s.  (); and cardwell v. american river bridge
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] packet co. v. keokuk,  u.s.  (); ouachita
packet co. v. aiken,  u.s.  ().
[] prosser v. northern p.r. co.,  u.s.  (). see
also sands v. manistee r. imp. co.,  u.s.  (); gring v.
ives,  u.s.  ().
[] cases cited in note  above; parkersburg & o. transp. co.
v. parkersburg,  u.s.  ().
[] gloucester ferry co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. , 
(); conway v. taylor,  black  (); wiggins ferry co. v.
east st. louis,  u.s.  ().
[] mayor and board of aldermen of vidalia v. mcneely, 
u.s.  (). see also helson v. kentucky,  u.s. , 
[] covington & c. bridge co. v. kentucky,  u.s. 
[] port richmond and bergen point ferry co. v. bd. of
chosen freeholders,  u.s.  ().
[] new york central & h.r.r. co. v. bd. of chosen
freeholders,  u.s.  ().
[] wilmington transp. co. v. r.r. com.,  u.s. 
[] western u. teleg. co. v. pendleton,  u.s. 
[] western u. teleg. co. v. foster,  u.s.  ().
[] western u. teleg. co. v. crovo,  u.s.  ().
[] western u. teleg. co. v. commercial milling co., 
[] western u. teleg. co. v. brown,  u.s.  ().
[] essex v. new england teleg. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] pensacola teleg. co. v. western u. teleg. co.,  u.s.
[] western union teleg. co. v. richmond,  u.s. 
(). see also postal teleg. cable co. v. richmond,  u.s. 
[] northwestern bell teleph. co. v. nebraska state r.
com.,  u.s.  ().
[] bell tel. co. v. pennsylvania public util. com., 
[] missouri ex rel. barrett v. kansas natural gas co., 
[] public utilities com. v. attleboro steam & electric
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] pennsylvania natural gas co. v. public serv. com., 
u.s.  (); public utilities com. v. landon,  u.s.  ().
[] panhandle eastern pipe lines co. v. public serv. com.,
[] panhandle co. v. michigan comm'n.,  u.s. 
[] peoples natural gas co. v. public serv. com.,  u.s.
[] east ohio gas co. v. tax com. of ohio,  u.s. 
[] western distributing co. v. public serv. com. of
kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] arkansas louisiana gas co. v. dept. of public
utilities,  u.s.  ().
[] lone star gas co. v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[] cities service co. v. peerless co.,  u.s. 
[] union brokerage co. v. jensen,  u.s.  ().
see also international harvester co. v. kentucky,  u.s. 
(); sioux remedy co. v. cope,  u.s.  (); interstate
amusement co. v. albert,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at -.
[] sioux remedy co. v. cope,  u.s.  ().
[] international milling co. v. columbia t. co.,  u.s.
[] natural gas pipeline co. v. slattery,  u.s. 
[] engel v. o'malley,  u.s.  ().
[] merrick v. halsey & co.,  u.s.  (). see
also hall v. geiger-jones co.,  u.s.  (); caldwell v.
sioux falls stock yards co.,  u.s.  ().
[] hartford accident & indemnity co. v. illinois ex rel.
mclaughlin,  u.s.  (), citing cargill co. v. minnesota, 
u.s. ,  (); simpson v. shepard (minnesota rate case), 
u.s. ,  (); hall v. geiger-jones co.,  u.s. , 
(); federal compress & warehouse co. v. mclean,  u.s. 
[] davis v. cleveland, c.c. & st. l. co.,  u.s. 
[] martin v. west,  u.s.  ().
[] the "winnebago,"  u.s. ,  ().
[] justice hughes for the court in minnesota rate cases
(simpson v. shepard),  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] railroad co. v. husen,  u.s.  ().
[] kimmish v. ball,  u.s.  ().
[] smith v. st. louis & s.w.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . morgan's s.s. co. v. louisiana bd. of
health,  u.s.  () is cited.
[] hebe co. v. shaw,  u.s.  ().
[] hygrade provision co. v. sherman,  u.s.  ().
[] mintz v. baldwin,  u.s.  ().
[] pacific states box & basket co. v. white,  u.s. 
[] bayside fish flour co. v. gentry,  u.s.  ().
[] highland farms dairy, inc. v. agnew,  u.s. 
[] bourjois, inc. v. chapman,  u.s.  ().
[] clason v. indiana,  u.s.  ().
[] milk control bd. v. eisenberg farm products,  u.s.
[] patapsco guano co. v. north carolina,  u.s. 
[] savage v. jones,  u.s.  (); followed in corn
products refining co. v. eddy,  u.s.  ().
[] pure oil co. v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] mutual film corp. v. hodges,  u.s.  ().
[] minnesota v. barber,  u.s.  (); see also
brimmer v. rebman,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at . see also pp. -.
[] voight v. wright,  u.s.  ().
[] hale v. bimco trading co.,  u.s.  ().
[] dean milk co. v. madison,  u.s.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] woodruff v. parham,  wall.  (). there were
later some departures from the rule, apparently due to inattention, in
cases involving oil. see standard oil v. graves,  u.s. 
(); askren v. continental oil co.,  u.s.  (); bowman
v. continental oil co.,  u.s.  () and texas co. v. brown,
 u.s.  (). these cases were "qualified," and in fact disavowed
in sonneborn bros. v. cureton,  u.s. ,  (). cf. the
contemporary case of wagner v. covington,  u.s.  () where the
true rule is followed.
[] mugler v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] kidd v. pearson,  u.s.  ().
[] leisy & co. v. hardin,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  (); sustained in in re rahrer,  u.s.
[] rhodes v. iowa,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  (); sustained in clark distilling co.
v. western md. ry. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] austin v. tennessee,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] schollenberger v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  ().
[] collins v. new hampshire,  u.s.  ().
[] see note  above.
[] state board v. young's market co.,  u.s.  ();
finch & co. v. mckittrick,  u.s.  (); brewing co. v.
liquor comm'n.,  u.s.  (); ziffrin, inc. v. reeves,  u.s.
[] duckworth v. arkansas,  u.s.  (); followed in
carter v. virginia,  u.s.  (). justice jackson would have
preferred to rest the decision on the twenty-first amendment instead of
"what i regard as an unwise extension of state power over interstate
commerce,"  u.s. at ; and appears to have converted justice
frankfurter. see latter's opinion in  u.s. at -.
[]  stat  ().
[]  u.s. at . see also justice cardozo's remarks in
baldwin v. seelig,  u.s. , - ().
[] cf. plumley v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ();
savage v. jones,  u.s.  (); corn products refining co. v.
eddy,  u.s.  ().
[] elkison v. deliesseline,  fed. cas. no.  ().
[] for interesting particulars see  charles warren, the
supreme court in united states history, -.
[]  op. atty. gen. .
[]  op. atty. gen. .
[]  pet.  ().
[] smith v. turner (passenger cases),  how.  ().
[] crandall v. nevada,  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . justice cardozo's words, quoted by justice
byrnes, occur in baldwin v. seelig,  u.s. ,  (). justice
byrnes' answer to another argument of the state, based on historical
conceptions of the word "indigent," was, "poverty and immorality are not
synonymous."
[] see especially justice douglas' forceful opinion. 
[] hudson county water co. v. mccarter,  u.s. 
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  ();  l. ed. , hd. .
[] see pp. -.
[]  u.s.  (); followed in hegeman farms corp. v.
baldwin,  u.s.  ().
[] milk control bd. v. eisenberg farm products,  u.s.
[] ibid. .
[] hood v. du mond,  u.s. ,  ().
[] foster-fountain packing co. v. haydel,  u.s. 
[] ibid. .
[] toomer v. witsell,  u.s.  (). other features
of the south carolina act were found to violate article iv, section .
see p. .
[] bayside fish flour co. v. gentry,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , citing silz v. hesterberg,  u.s. , 
[]  stat.  ().
[] chicago, i. & l.r. co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] southern r. co. v. reid,  u.s.  (); southern
r. co. v. burlington lumber co.,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. hardwick farmers elevator
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] st. louis, i.m. & s.r. co. v. edwards,  u.s. 
[] yazoo & m.v.r. co. v. greenwood grocery co.,  u.s. 
(). in this case the severity of the regulation furnished additional
reason for its disallowance.
[]  u.s.  (). for the court's reiteration of the
formula governing such cases, see ibid. -. see also barrett
v. new york,  u.s.  (); chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. cramer,
 u.s.  (); atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. harold,  u.s. 
(); missouri p.r. co. v. porter,  u.s.  (). a year
before the enactment of the carmack amendment the court had held that
the imposition by a state upon the initial or any connecting carrier of
the duty of tracing the freight and informing the shipper in writing
when, where, how, and by which carrier the freight was lost, damaged, or
destroyed, and of giving the names of the parties and their official
position, by whom the truth of the facts set out in the information
could be established, was, when applied to interstate commerce, a
violation of the commerce clause. central of georgia r. co. v.
murphey,  u.s. ,  (). the court's opinion definitely
invited congress to deal with the subject, as it does in the carmack
amendment.
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ().
[] mondou v. new york, n.h. & h.r. co. (second employers'
liability cases),  u.s.  (); southern r. co. v. railroad com.,
[] erie r. co. v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] crossman v. lurman,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  (); savage v. jones,  u.s. 
(), citing missouri, kansas & texas ry. co. v. haber,  u.s. 
(); reid v. colorado,  u.s.  (); asbell v. kansas, 
u.s.  (); southern ry. co. v. reid,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mcdermott v. wisconsin,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] armour & co. v. north dakota,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ().
[] oregon-washington r. & nav. co. v. washington,  u.s.
[]  stat.  ().
[] mintz v. baldwin,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ().
[] townsend v. yeomans,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] allen-bradley local v. employment relations board, 
[]  stat.  ().
[] quoting napier v. atlantic coast line r. co.,  u.s.
[] parker v. brown,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] ibid. .
[] union brokerage co. v. jensen,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] panhandle eastern pipe line co. v. public serv. com.
of indiana,  u.s.  (); rice v. chicago board of trade, 
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat. - ().
[] california v. zook,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] illinois gas co. v. public service co.,  u.s. 
[] cloverleaf co. v. patterson,  u.s.  (). four
justices, speaking by chief justice stone dissented, on the basis of
mintz v. baldwin,  u.s.  (); kelly v. washington ex rel.
foss co.,  u.s.  (); and welch co. v. new hampshire,  u.s.
[]  stat.  (); amended by  stat.  ().
[] rice v. santa fe elevator corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] see note  above.
[] interstate natural gas co. v. federal power com., 
[] schwabacher v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] seaboard air line r. co. v. daniel,  u.s. 
[] hill v. florida,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] auto workers v. wisconsin board,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ().
[] algoma plywood & veneer co. v. wisconsin bd.,  u.s.
[] automobile workers v. o'brien,  u.s.  ();
bus employees v. wisconsin board,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. kagama,  u.s. ,  ();
cf. united states v. holliday,  wall.  ().
[]  stat. , ; r.s. .
[] see united states v. sandoval,  u.s.  ().
[] see perrin v. united states,  u.s.  ();
johnson v. gearlds,  u.s.  (); dick v. united states, 
[] united states v. nice,  u.s.  (), overruling
re heff,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. sandoval,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. holliday,  wall. ,  ().
[] ex parte webb,  u.s.  ().
[] boyd v. nebraska,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] mackenzie v. hare,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat. ; public law , d cong., d sess.
[] ibid. tit. iii, §. the first category comprises, it
should be noted, those who are citizens by the opening clause of
amendment xiv, which embodies chief justice marshall's holding in
gassies v. ballon, that a citizen of the united states, residing in
any state of the union, is a citizen of that state.  pet. , 
[]  stat. ; tit. iii, §§-. these categories
illustrate collective naturalization. "instances of collective
naturalization by treaty or by statute are numerous." boyd v.
nebraska,  u.s. ,  (). see also elk v. wilkins, 
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. , tit. iii, §.
[] ibid. §(a)(-).
[] ibid. §(c).
[]  stat. , §(a). in united states v.
schwimmer,  u.s.  (); and united states v. macintosh, 
u.s.  () it was held, by a divided court, that clauses () and
() of the oath, as previously prescribed, required the candidate for
naturalization to be ready and willing to bear arms for the united
states, but these holdings were overruled in girouard v. united
states,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. , §(a); see also johannessen v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. §(c). for cancellation proceedings under the
nationality act of  ( stat. , §); see schneiderman v.
united states,  u.s.  (); baumgartner v. united states 
u.s.  (), where district court decisions ordering cancellation
were reversed on the ground that the government had not discharged the
burden of proof resting upon it. knauer v. united states,  u.s. 
() represents a less rigid view.
[] osborn v. bank of the united states,  wheat. , 
[] ibid. .
[] johannessen v. united states,  u.s.  () and
knauer v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat. , tit. iii, §(a).
[] perkins v. elg,  u.s. , ,  ().
naturalization has a retroactive effect and removes all liability to
forfeiture of land held while an alien (osterman v. baldwin,  wall.
,  ()); the subsequent naturalization of an alien who takes
land by grant or by location on public land relates back and obviates
every consequence of his alien disability (manuel v. wulff,  u.s.
,  (); doe ex dem. governeur's heirs v. robertson,  wheat.
,  ()). a certificate of naturalization, while conclusive as a
judgment of citizenship, cannot be introduced in a distinct proceeding
as evidence of residence, age or good character of the person
naturalized (mutual ben. l. ins. co. v. tisdale,  u.s.  ()).
[] chirac v. chirac,  wheat. ,  ().
[] holmgren v. united states,  u.s.  (), where
it was also held that congress may provide for the punishment of false
swearing in such proceedings in state court. ibid. .
[] spragins v. houghton,  ill.  (); stewart v.
foster,  binney's (pa.)  ().
[] shanks v. dupont,  pet. ,  ().
[]  stat. ;  u.s.c.a. §.
[] mackenzie v. hare,  u.s. , , - ().
in this case, a now obsolete statute ( stat. ), known as the
citizenship act of , which divested the citizenship of a woman
marrying an alien, was upheld as constitutional. under the act of june
, , these conditions comprise the following: () obtaining
naturalization in a foreign state; () taking an oath of allegiance to a
foreign state; () serving in the armed forces of a foreign state
without authorization and with consequent acquisition of foreign
nationality; () assuming public office under the government of a
foreign state, for which only nationals of that state are eligible; ()
voting in an election or participating in a plebiscite in a foreign
state; () formal renunciation of citizenship before an american foreign
service officer abroad; () conviction and discharge from the armed
services for desertion in time of war; () conviction of treason or an
attempt at forceful overthrow of the united states; () formal
renunciation of citizenship within the united states in time of war,
subject to approval by the attorney general; () fleeing or remaining
outside the united states in time of war or proclaimed emergency in
order to evade military training; () residence by a naturalized
citizen, subject to certain exceptions, for two to three years in the
country of his birth or in which he formerly was a national or for five
years in any other foreign state, and () minor children, of
naturalized citizens losing citizenship by such foreign residence, also
lose their united states citizenship if they acquire the nationality of
a foreign state; but not until they attain the age of  without having
acquired permanent residence in the united states.  stat. ; tit.
[] chinese exclusion case,  u.s. , ,  ();
see also fong yue ting v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
japanese immigrant case,  u.s.  (); turner v. williams, 
u.s.  (); bugajewitz v. adams,  u.s.  (); hines v.
davidowitz,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. ; tit. ii, §.
[] ibid. §(a)()(f).
[]  stat. .
[] hines v. davidowitz,  u.s. , -.
[]  stat. ; tit. ii, §§-.
[]  stat. .
[]  u.s. at .
[] carlson v. landon,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. .
[] harisiades v. shaughnessy,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s.c, §c was the provision in question.
[] united states v. spector,  u.s.  ().
[] keller v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -. for the requirements of due process of
law in the deportation of alien, see p.  (amendment v).
[] adams v. storey,  fed. cas. no.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] story's commentaries, ii,  (cooley's ed. ).
[] continental illinois nat. bank & trust co. v. chicago,
r.i. & p.r. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. bekins,  u.s.  (),
distinguishing ashton v. cameron county water improv. dist.,  u.s.
[] in re reiman, fed. cas. no. , (), cited with
approval in continental illinois nat. bank & trust co. v. chicago,
r.i. & p.r. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] continental illinois nat. bank & trust co. v. chicago,
r.i. & p.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] wright v. mountain trust bank,  u.s.  ();
adair v. bank of america assn.,  u.s.  ().
[] wright v. union central insurance co.,  u.s. 
[] ibid. .
[] louisville joint stock land bank v. radford,  u.s.
[] ashton v. cameron county water improvement district,
 u.s.  (). but see united states v. bekins,  u.s. 
[] chicago title & trust co. v.  wilcox bldg. corp.,
[] re klein,  how.  (); hanover nat. bank v.
moyses,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. bekins,  u.s.  ().
[] stellwagen v. clum,  u.s.  (); hanover nat.
bank v. moyses,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hanover nat. bank v. moyses,  u.s. , 
[] sturges v. crowninshield,  wheat. ,  ();
ogden v. saunders,  wheat. ,  ().
[] tua v. carriere,  u.s.  (); butler v.
goreley,  u.s. ,  ().
[] sturges v. crowninshield,  wheat.  ().
[] ogden v. saunders,  wheat. ,  (); denny
v. bennett,  u.s. ,  (); brown v. smart,  u.s. 
[] re watts,  u.s. ,  (); international shoe co.
v. pinkus,  u.s. ,  ().
[] international shoe co. v. pinkus,  u.s. , 
[] kalb v. feuerstein,  u.s.  ().
[] stellwagen v. clum,  u.s. ,  ().
[] reitz v. mealey,  u.s.  ().
[] new york v. irving trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat.  ().
[] veazie bank v. fenno,  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] merchants nat. bank v. united states,  u.s. 
[] nortz v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] legal tender cases,  wall. ,  (); juilliard
v. greenman,  u.s. ,  ().
[] legal tender cases,  wall.  ().
[] norman v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ling su fan v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. marigold,  how. ,  ().
[] fox v. ohio,  how.  ().
[] united states v. marigold,  how. ,  ().
[] ibid.
[] baender v. barnett,  u.s.  ().
[] knox v. lee (legal tender cases),  wall. , 
[] mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat. ,  ();
osborn v. bank of united states,  wheat. ,  (); farmers' &
mechanics' nat. bank v. dearing,  u.s.c. ,  (); smith v.
kansas city title & trust co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] legal tender cases,  wall. , - ().
[] perry v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. railroad bridge co., fed. cas. no.
[] searight v. stokes,  how. ,  ().
[] ex parte jackson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] searight v. stokes,  how. ,  ().
[] re debs,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  cong. globe ,  ().
[] ibid. . on this point his reasoning would appear to
be vindicated by such decisions, as bowman v. chicago & n.w.r. co.,
 u.s.  () and leisy v. hardin,  u.s.  () denying
the right of the states to prevent the importation of alcoholic
beverages from other states.
[] ibid. .
[] public clearing house v. coyne,  u.s.  (),
followed in donaldson v. read magazine,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] lewis publishing co. v. morgan,  u.s. , 
[] hannegan v. esquire, inc.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat. , ,  (),  u.s.c. d, e
[] electric bond & share co. v. securities and exchange
comm'n.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] pensacola teleg. co. v. western u. teleg. co.,  u.s.
[] illinois c.r. co. v. illinois ex rel. butler,  u.s.
[] gladson v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] price v. pennsylvania r. co.,  u.s.  ();
martin v. pittsburgh & l.e.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] railway mail assn. v. corsi,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. kirby,  wall.  ().
[] johnson v. maryland,  u.s.  ().
[] pennock v. dialogue,  pet. , ,  ().
[] wheaton v. peters,  pet. , ,  ().
[] kendall v. winsor,  how. ,  (); great
atlantic & pacific tea co. v. supermarket equipment corp.,  u.s.
[] evans v. jordan,  cr.  (); bloomer v.
mcquewan,  how. ,  (); bloomer v. millinger,  wall. ,
 (); eunson v. dodge,  wall. ,  ().
[] brown v. duchesne,  how. ,  ().
[] seymour v. osborne,  wall. ,  (). cf.
union paper collar co. v. van dusen,  wall. ,  ();
reckendorfer v. faber,  u.s. ,  ().
[] smith v. nichols,  wall. ,  ().
[] rubber-tip pencil co. v. howard,  wall. , 
(); clark thread co. v. willimantic linen co.,  u.s. , 
[] funk bros. seed co. v. kalo co.,  u.s. , 
(). cf. dow chemical co. v. halliburton co.,  u.s. 
(); cuno corp. v. automatic devices corp.,  u.s. , 
[] sinclair & carroll co. v. interchemical corp., 
u.s.  (); marconi wireless teleg. co. v. united states, 
[] keystone mfg. co. v. adams,  u.s.  ();
diamond rubber co. v. consolidated tire co.,  u.s.  ().
[] great atlantic & pacific tea co. v. supermarket
equipment corp.,  u.s.  (). an interesting concurring opinion
was filed by justice douglas for himself and justice black: "it is not
enough," says justice douglas, "that an article is new and useful. the
constitution never sanctioned the patenting of gadgets. patents serve a
higher end—the advancement of science. an invention need not be as
startling as an atomic bomb to be patentable. but it has to be of such
quality and distinction that masters of the scientific field in which it
falls will recognize it as an advance." ibid. -. he then quotes
the following from an opinion of justice bradley's given  years ago:
"it was never the object of those laws to grant a monopoly for every
trifling device, every shadow of a shade of an idea, which would
naturally and spontaneously occur to any skilled mechanic or operator in
the ordinary progress of manufactures. such an indiscriminate creation
of exclusive privileges tends rather to obstruct than to stimulate
invention. it creates a class of speculative schemers who make it their
business to watch the advancing wave of improvement, and gather its foam
in the form of patented monopolies, which enable them to lay a heavy tax
upon the industry of the country, without contributing anything to the
real advancement of the arts. it embarrasses the honest pursuit of
business with fears and apprehensions of concealed liens and unknown
liabilities to lawsuits and vexatious accountings for profits made in
good faith. (atlantic works v. brady,  u.s. ,  ())."
ibid. .
the opinion concludes: "the attempts through the years to get a broader,
looser conception of patents than the constitution contemplates have
been persistent. the patent office, like most administrative agencies,
has looked with favor on the opportunity which the exercise of
discretion affords to expand its own jurisdiction. and so it has placed
a host of gadgets under the armour of patents—gadgets that obviously
have had no place in the constitutional scheme of advancing scientific
knowledge. a few that have reached this court show the pressure to
extend monopoly to the simplest of devices:
"hotchkiss v. greenwood,  how.  (): doorknob made of clay
rather than metal or wood, where different shaped doorknobs had
previously been made of clay.
"rubber-tip pencil co. v. howard,  wall.  (): rubber caps put
on wood pencils to serve as erasers.
"union paper collar co. v. van dusen,  wall.  (): making
collars of parchment paper where linen paper and linen had previously
been used.
"brown v. piper,  u.s.  (): a method for preserving fish by
freezing them in a container operating in the same manner as an ice
cream freezer.
"reckendorfer v. faber,  u.s.  (): inserting a piece of
rubber in a slot in the end of a wood pencil to serve as an eraser.
"dalton v. jennings,  u.s.  (): fine thread placed across
open squares in a regular hairnet to keep hair in place more
effectively.
"double-pointed tack co. v. two rivers mfg. co.,  u.s.  ():
putting a metal washer on a wire staple.
"miller v. foree,  u.s.  (): a stamp for impressing initials
in the side of a plug of tobacco.
"preston v. manard,  u.s.  (): a hose reel of large diameter
so that water may flow through hose while it is wound on the reel.
"hendy v. miners' iron works,  u.s.  (): putting rollers on
a machine to make it moveable.
"st. germain v. brunswick,  u.s.  (): revolving cue rack.
"shenfield v. nashawannuck mfg. co.,  u.s.  (): using flat
cord instead of round cord for the loop at the end of suspenders.
"florsheim v. schilling,  u.s.  (): putting elastic gussets
in corsets.
"cluett v. claflin,  u.s.  (): a shirt bosom or dickie sewn
onto the front of a shirt.
"adams v. bellaire stamping co.,  u.s.  (): a lantern lid
fastened to the lantern by a hinge on one side and a catch on the other.
"patent clothing co. v. glover,  u.s.  (): bridging a strip
of cloth across the fly of pantaloons to reinforce them against tearing.
"pope mfg. co. v. gormully mfg. co.,  u.s.  (): placing
rubber hand grips on bicycle handlebars.
"knapp v. morss,  u.s.  (): applying the principle of the
umbrella to a skirt form.
"morgan envelope co. v. albany perforated wrapping paper co.,  u.s.
 (): an oval rather than cylindrical toilet paper roll, to
facilitate tearing off strips.
"dunham v. dennison mfg. co.,  u.s.  (): an envelope flap
which could be fastened to the envelope in such a fashion that the
envelope could be opened without tearing.
"the patent involved in the present case belongs to this list of
incredible patents which the patent office has spawned. the fact that a
patent as flimsy and as spurious as this one has to be brought all the
way to this court to be declared invalid dramatically illustrates how
far our patent system frequently departs from the constitutional
standards which are supposed to govern." ibid. -.
[] "inventive genius"—justice hunt in reckendorfer v.
faber,  u.s. ,  (); "genius or invention"—chief justice
fuller in smith v. whitman saddle co.,  u.s. ,  ();
"intuitive genius"—justice brown in potts v. creager,  u.s. ,
 (); "inventive genius"—justice stone in concrete appliances co.
v. gomery,  u.s. ,  (); "inventive genius"—justice
roberts in mantle lamp co. v. aluminum co.,  u.s. ,  ();
justice douglas in cuno corp. v. automatic devices corp.,  u.s. ,
 (); "the flash of creative genius, not merely the skill of the
calling." see also note  above.
[] see note  above.
[] great atlantic & pacific tea co. v. supermarket
equipment corp.,  u.s.  (); mahn v. harwood,  u.s. ,
[] evans v. eaton,  wheat. ,  ().
[] united states v. duell,  u.s. , - ().
see also butterworth v. hoe,  u.s.  ().
[] wheaton v. peters,  pet. ,  (); holmes v.
hurst,  u.s.  (). cf. e. burke inlow, the patent clause
() chaps. iii and iv, for evidence of a judicial recognition of an
inventor's inchoate right to have his invention patented.
[] wheaton v. peters,  pet. ,  (); evans v.
jordan,  cr.  ().
[] kalem co. v. harper bros.  u.s.  ().
[] baker v. selden,  u.s. ,  ().
[] stevens v. gladding,  how.  ().
[] ager v. murray,  u.s.  ().
[] james v. campbell,  u.s. ,  (). see
also united states v. burns,  wall. ,  (); cammeyer v.
newton,  u.s. ,  (); hollister v. benedict manufacturing
co.,  u.s. ,  (); united states v. palmer,  u.s. ,
 (); belknap v. schild,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mcclurg v. kingsland,  how. ,  ().
[] bloomer v. mcquewan,  how. ,  ().
[] see motion picture co. v. universal film co., 
u.s.  (); morton salt co. v. suppiger co.,  u.s.  ();
united states v. masonite corp.,  u.s.  (); and united
states v. new wrinkle, inc.,  u.s.  (), where the justices
divide  to  as to the significance for the case of certain leading
precedents. see also inlow, the patent clause, chap. v.
[] patterson v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] allen v. riley,  u.s.  (): woods & sons v.
carl,  u.s.  (); ozan lumber co. v. union county bank, 
[] fox film corp. v. doyal,  u.s. 
()—overruling long v. rockwood,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] burrow-giles lithographic co. v. sarony,  u.s. 
[] bleistein v. donaldson lithographing co.,  u.s.
[] kent, commentaries, -, (th ed. ).
[] xix journals of the continental congress , 
(). xx id. , xxi id. -, .
[] article ix.
[] madison, journal of the constitutional convention, ii,
 (hunt's ed. ).
[] ibid. -, .
[] united states v. smith,  wheat. , ,  ().
see also the marianna flora,  wheat. , - (); united states
v. brig malek abhel,  how. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. arjona,  u.s. , , 
[] united states v. flores,  f. supp.  ().
[] united states v. furlong,  wheat. ,  ().
[] the federalist no. .
[] penhallow v. doane,  dall.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. . emphasis supplied.
[] ex parte milligan,  wall. ,  () (dissenting
opinion); see also miller v. united states,  wall. , 
(); and united states v. macintosh,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  cong. globe, th cong., st sess., app.  ().
[] hamilton v. dillin,  wall. ,  ().
[] northern p.r. co. v. north dakota,  u.s. , 
[] home bldg. & loan assoc. v. blaisdell,  u.s. 
[] northern p.r. co. v. north dakota,  u.s. , 
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] ii madison journal of the constitutional convention 
(hunt's ed. ).
[] ibid. .
[]  annals of congress  ().
[] works of alexander hamilton, vii,  (hamilton's ed.
). cf. bas v. tingy,  dall.  ().
[]  stat. ,  (). emphasis supplied.
[] the prize cases,  bl. ,  ().
[] ibid. , .
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] i blackstone, commentaries , (wendell's ed. ).
[] ii story, commentaries, § (th ed. ).
[]  op. atty. gen. ,  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] h.j. res. , th cong., d sess. ().
[] selective draft law cases,  u.s. ,  (); cox
v. wood,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] ibid. -. the measure was upheld by a state court,
kneedler v. lane,  pa.  ().
[] selective draft law cases,  u.s. , , 
[] butler v. perry,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. williams,  u.s.  (). see
also in re grimley,  u.s. ,  (); in re morrissey,  u.s.
[] wissner v. wissner,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mckinley v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] dynes v. hoover,  how. ,  ().
[] ex parte milligan,  wall. , , - (). ex
parte quirin,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wade v. hunter,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dynes v. hoover,  how. ,  ().
[] swaim v. united states,  u.s.  (); carter
v. roberts,  u.s.  (); hiatt v. brown,  u.s. 
[] mullan v. united states,  u.s.  (); smith
v. whitney,  u.s. ,  (); hiatt v. brown,  u.s. 
[] clark, emergency legislation passed prior to december
[] ibid. 
[] ibid. , , , , .
[] ibid. , , , , , . many of these were
soon suspended or repealed. ibid. , , , .
[] ibid. , , , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] hepburn v. griswold,  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] knox v. lee (legal tender cases),  wall. , 
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  stat.  ().
[] lichter v. united states,  u.s. , -, ,
 (). see also united states v. bethlehem steel corp., 
u.s. ,  (); clallam county v. united states,  u.s. 
(); sloan shipyards v. united states fleet corp.,  u.s. 
[] lichter v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] yakus v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. -. cf. united states v. chemical
foundation,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -, .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[] story commentaries on the constitution, ii, § (th
ed., ).
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] stewart v. kahn,  wall. ,  (). see also
mayfield v. richards,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. ,  (). see also ruppert v.
caffey,  u.s.  ().
[] block v. hirsh,  u.s.  ().
[] chastleton corp. v. sinclair,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also fleming v. mohawk
wrecking & lumber co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ludecke v. watkins,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[]  cr.  (). see also conrad v. waples,  u.s.
[] miller v. united states,  wall.  ().
[] stoehr v. wallace,  u.s.  (); central union
trust co. v. garvan,  u.s.  (); united states v. chemical
foundation,  u.s.  (); silesian-american corp. v. clark, 
u.s.  (); cities service co. v. mcgrath,  u.s.  ().
[] the "siren,"  wall.  ().
[] the "hampton,"  wall. ,  ().
[] the "paquete habana,"  u.s. , ,  ().
[] block v. hirsh,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] bowles v. willingham,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] schenck v. united states,  u.s.  (); debs
v. united states,  u.s.  (); sugarman v. united states,
 u.s.  (); frohwerk v. united states,  u.s.  ();
abrams v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  (); amended by  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] gilbert v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] hirabayashi v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] korematsu v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte endo,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] writings of james madison, vi, - (hunt's ed.,
[]  stat.  ().
[] mitchell v. harmony,  how. ,  ().
[]  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] h.r. rep. no. , d cong., st sess., - ().
[] united states v. commodities trading corp.,  u.s.
 (); united states v. toronto nav. co.,  u.s.  ();
kimball laundry co. v. united states,  u.s.  (); united states
v. cors,  u.s.  (); united states v. john j. felin & co.,
 u.s.  (); united states v. petty motor co.,  u.s. 
(); united states v. general motors corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] moore v. houston,  s. & r. (pa.)  (), affirmed
in houston v. moore,  wheat.  ().
[] texas v. white,  wall.  (); tyler v.
defrees,  wall.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] martin v. mott,  wheat. ,  ().
[] houston v. moore,  wheat.  (); martin v. mott,
 wheat.  ().
[] houston v. moore,  wheat. ,  ().
[]  stat. ,  ().—by the act of june , 
( stat. , ) the age of enlistment in the national guard was
lowered to  years.
[] united states v. hammond,  cr. c.c.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] metropolitan r. co. v. district of columbia,  u.s.
[] district of columbia v. bailey,  u.s.  ().
[] shoemaker v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] morris v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states ex rel. greathouse v. dern,  u.s.
,  (); smoot sand & gravel corp. v. washington airport, 
u.s.  (); maryland v. west virginia,  u.s.  ();
marine r. & coal co. v. united states,  u.s.  (); morris v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] phillips v. payne,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] united states v. simms,  cr. ,  ().
[]  stat. ,  (). see tayloe v. thomson, 
pet. ,  (); ex parte watkins,  pet.  (); stelle v.
carroll,  pet. ,  (); van ness v. bank of united states,
 pet.  (); united states v. eliason,  pet. ,  ().
[] reily v. lamar,  cr. ,  ().
[] korn v. mutual assur. soc.,  cr. ,  ().
[] mutual assur. soc. v. watts,  wheat.  ().
[] hepburn v. ellzey,  cr. ,  (); see also
serè v. pitot,  cr. ,  (); new orleans v. winter, 
wheat. ,  (). the district has been held to be a "state" within
the terms of a treaty regulating the inheritance of property within the
"states of the union." de geofroy v. riggs,  u.s.  ().
[] barney v. baltimore,  wall.  (); hooe v.
jamieson,  u.s.  (); hooe v. werner,  u.s.  ().
[] national mut. ins. co. v. tidewater transfer co.,
inc.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. - (opinion of justice jackson, with whom
justices black and burton concurred).
[] ibid.  (opinion of justice rutledge, with whom
justice murphy concurred).
[] callan v. wilson,  u.s.  (); capital
traction co. v. hof,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. moreland,  u.s.  ().
[] wight v. davidson,  u.s. ,  (); cf.
adkins v. children's hospital,  u.s.  () overruled by west
coast hotel co. v. parrish,  u.s.  ().
[] kendall v. united states ex rel. stokes,  pet. ,
 (); shoemaker v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
atlantic cleaners & dyers v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
o'donoghue v. united states  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] loughborough v. blake,  wheat.  ().
[] gibbons v. district of columbia,  u.s. , 
(); welch v. cook,  u.s.  ().
[] loughborough v. blake,  wheat. ,  (); heald
v. district of columbia,  u.s.  ().
[] thompson v. roe ex dem. carroll,  how. , 
(); stoutenburgh v. hennick,  u.s. ,  ().
[] willard v. presbury,  wall. ,  (); briscoe
v. rudolph,  u.s.  ().
[] washington market co. v. district of columbia, 
[] mattingly v. district of columbia,  u.s. , 
[] keller v. potomac electric power co.,  u.s. 
[] o'donoghue v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] embry v. palmer,  u.s.  ().
[] james v. dravo contracting co.,  u.s. , 
[] battle v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] arlington hotel co. v. fant,  u.s.  ().
[] james v. dravo contracting co,  u.s. , 
[] collins v. yosemite park co.,  u.s. , 
[] ibid. .
[] battle v. united states,  u.s.  (); johnson
v. yellow cab co.,  u.s.  (); bowen v. johnston,  u.s.
[] surplus trading co. v. cook,  u.s.  ().
[] western union teleg. co. v. chiles,  u.s. 
(); arlington hotel co. v. fant,  u.s.  (); pacific
coast dairy v. dept. of agri.,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. mcglinn,  u.s. , 
(); james stewart & co. v. sadrakula,  u.s.  ().
[] palmer v. barrett,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. unzeuta,  u.s.  ().
[] benson v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] palmer v. barrett,  u.s.  ().
[] s.r.a., inc. v. minnesota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] fort leavenworth r. co. v. lowe,  u.s. , 
(); united states v. unzeuta,  u.s. ,  (); surplus
trading co. v. cook,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. cornell,  fed. cas. no. ,
[] james v. dravo contracting co.,  u.s. , 
[] silas mason co. v. tax commission of washington, 
u.s.  (). see also atkinson v. state tax commission,  u.s.
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. . this decision had been clearly foreshadowed
fourteen years earlier by marshall's opinion in united states v.
fisher,  cr. ,  (). upholding an act which gave priority to
claims of the united states against the estate of a bankrupt he wrote:
"the government is to pay the debt of the union, and must be authorized
to use the means which appear to itself most eligible to effect that
object. it has, consequently, a right to make remittances, by bills or
otherwise, and to take those precautions which will render the
transaction safe."
[] see pp. -, supra.
[] neely v. henkel,  u.s. ,  (). see also
missouri v. holland,  u.s.  ().
[] see p. , supra.
[] den ex dem. murray v. hoboken land & improvement co.,
 how. ,  ().
[] kohl v. united states,  u.s. ,  (); united
slates v. fox,  u.s. ,  ().
[] see pp. -, -.
[] united states v. fox,  u.s. ,  (); united
states v. hall,  u.s. ,  (); united states v. worrall, 
dall. ,  (); mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat.  ().
that this power has been freely exercised is attested by the  pages
of the united states code ( ed.) devoted to title , entitled
"criminal code and criminal procedure." in addition numerous regulatory
measures prescribe criminal penalties for infractions thereof.
[] ex parte carll,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. marigold,  how. ,  ().
[] logan v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. barnow,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte yarbrough,  u.s.  (); united states
v. waddell,  u.s.  (); in re quarles,  u.s. , 
(); motes v. united states,  u.s.  (); united states
v. mosley,  u.s.  (). see also rakes v. united states,
[] ex parte curtis,  u.s.  ().
[] the alien registration act of ,  stat. , 
[] mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat. ,  ().
[] osborn v. bank of the united states,  wheat. , 
(). see also pittman v. home owners' loan corp.,  u.s. 
[] first nat. bank v. fellows ex rel. union trust co.,
 u.s.  (); burnes nat. bank v. duncan,  u.s.  ().
[] smith v. kansas city title and trust co.,  u.s. 
[] juilliard v. greenman,  u.s. ,  ().
[] veazie bank v. fenno,  wall.  ().
[] juilliard v. greenman,  u.s.  (). see also
legal tender cases,  wall.  ().
[] norman v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] pacific railroad removal cases (union p.r. co. v.
myers),  u.s. ,  (); california v. central p.r. co., 
[] luxton v. north river bridge co.,  u.s. 
[] clallam county v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] sloan shipyards v. united states fleet corp.,  u.s.
 (). in , the congressional joint committee on nonessential
federal expenditures reported that there were then in existence one
hundred government corporations, including subsidiaries and
quasi-private corporations in which the government had some special
contractual or proprietary interest. s. doc. no. , th cong., d
sess.  ().
[] rhode island v. massachusetts,  pet. , 
[] tennessee v. davis,  u.s. ,  ().
[] chicago & northwestern r. co. v. whitton,  wall.
[] embry v. palmer,  u.s.  ().
[] bank of united states v. halstead,  wheat. , 
[] united states exp. co. v. kountze bros.,  wall. ,
[] ex parte bakelite corp.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  (). see sinclair v. united states,
[] paramino lumber co. v. marshall,  u.s.  ().
[] pope v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] detroit trust company v. the "thomas barium,"  u.s.
[] knickerbocker ice co. v. stewart,  u.s.  ();
washington v. dawson & co.,  u.s.  ().
[] barron v. baltimore,  pet.  (); morgan's l. &
t.r. & s.s. co. v. louisiana board of health,  u.s. , 
[] munn v. illinois,  u.s. ,  (); johnson
v. chicago & p. elevator co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  how. ,  ().
[] gasquet v. lapeyre,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. ,  ().
[] ex parte watkins,  pet. ,  ().
[] ex parte bollman,  cr. ,  ().
[] price v. johnston,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. smith,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gusik v. schilder,  u.s.  ().
[] frank v. mangum,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat. ,  ().
[] ex parte watkins,  pet. ,  (); ex parte
kearney,  wheat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] frank v. mangum,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte bollman,  cr.  ().
[] adams v. united states ex rel. mccann,  u.s. ,
 (); glasgow v. moyer,  u.s. ,  (); matter of
gregory,  u.s. ,  ().
[] adams v. united states ex rel. mccann,  u.s. ,
[] walker v. johnston,  u.s.  (); waley v.
johnston,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte milligan,  wall. ,  ().
[] mcnally v. hill,  u.s.  ().
[] goto v. lane,  u.s.  ().
[] salinger v. loisel,  u.s.  ().
[] wong doo v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] price v. johnston,  u.s. ,  ().
[] corwin, the president, office and powers,  (d ed.,
[] ex parte bollman,  cr. ,  ().
[] messages and papers of the presidents, vii, 
[] fed. cas. no. ,  ().
[]  op. atty. gen. ,  (-).
[]  stat.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] story, commentaries on the constitution, ii, § (th
ed., ).
[] cummings v. missouri,  wall. ,  ().
[] united states v. lovett,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte garland,  wall. ,  ().
[] united states v. lovett,  u.s.  ().
[] story, commentaries on the constitution, ii, §.
[]  dall. ,  ().
[] bankers trust co. v. blodgett,  u.s. , 
[] burgess v. salmon,  u.s.  ().
[] calder v. bull,  dall. ,  (); ex parte
garland,  wall. ,  (); burgess v. salmon,  u.s. , 
[] united states v. powers,  u.s.  ().
[] neely v. henkel,  u.s. ,  (). cf. in re
yamashita,  u.s. ,  () (dissenting opinion of justice murphy);
hirota v. macarthur,  u.s. ,  () (concurring opinion of
justice douglas).
[] ex parte garland,  wall.  ().
[] murphy v. ramsey,  u.s.  ().
[] mahler v. eby,  u.s.  (); bugajewitz v.
adams,  u.s.  ().
[] johannessen v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] cook v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] calder v. bull,  dall. ,  ().
[] hopt v. utah,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  madison, the constitutional convention,  (hunt's
ed., ).
[]  dall.  ().
[]  hamilton's works, ,  (hamilton's ed., ). "if
the meaning of the word excise is to be sought in the british
statutes, it will be found to include the duty on carriages, which is
there considered as an excise, and then must necessarily be uniform
and liable to apportionment; consequently, not a direct tax." ibid.
[]  annals of congress,  ();  madison's writings,
, (library of congress ed., ) (letter to thomas jefferson, may ,
[]  dall. ,  ().
[] pacific ins. co. v. soule,  wall.  ().
[] veazie bank v. fenno,  wall.  ().
[] scholey v. rew,  wall.  ().
[] springer v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  stat.  ().
[] stanton v. baltic mining co.,  u.s.  ();
knowlton v. moore,  u.s. ,  ().
[] nicol v. ames,  u.s.  ().
[] knowlton v. moore,  u.s.  ().
[] patton v. brady,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] new york trust co. v. eisner,  u.s. , 
[] phillips v. dime trust & safe deposit co.,  u.s.
[] tyler v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] fernandez v. wiener,  u.s.  ().
[] chase national bank v. united states,  u.s. 
[] bromley v. mccaughn,  u.s. ,  (). see
also helvering v. bullard,  u.s.  ().
[] bromley v. mccaughn,  u.s. ,  ().
[] loughborough v. blake,  wheat.  ().
[] de treville v. smalls,  u.s. ,  ().
[] turpin & bro. v. burgess,  u.s. ,  ().
cf. almy v. california,  how. ,  ().
[] dooley v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cornell v. coyne,  u.s. ,  (); turpin &
bro. v. burgess,  u.s. ,  ().
[] spalding & bros. v. edwards,  u.s.  ().
[] thompson v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] peck & co. v. lowe,  u.s.  (); national
paper & type co. v. bowers,  u.s.  ().
[] fairbank v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. hvoslef,  u.s.  ().
[] thames & mersey ins. co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] pace v. burgess,  u.s.  (); turpin & bro.
v. burgess,  u.s. ,  ().
[] louisiana public service comm'n. v. texas & n.o.r.
co.,  u.s. ,  (); pennsylvania v. wheeling & belmont
bridge co.,  how. ,  (); south carolina v. georgia, 
u.s.  (). in williams v. united states,  u.s.  () the
argument that an act of congress which prohibited interstate
transportation of liquor into states whose laws prohibited manufacture
or sale of liquor for beverage purposes was repugnant to this clause was
rejected as plainly wanting in merit.
[] louisiana public service comm'n. v. texas & n.o.r.
co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] smith v. turner (passenger cases),  how. , 
() (opinion of justice wayne); cf. cooley v. board of port
wardens,  how. ,  ().
[] morgan's l. & t.r. & s.s. co. v. louisiana bd. of
health,  u.s. ,  (). see also munn v. illinois,  u.s.
,  (); johnson v. chicago & p. elevator co.,  u.s. ,
[]  stat. ,  ().
[] thompson v. darden,  u.s.  ().
[] alaska v. troy,  u.s.  ().
[] cincinnati soap co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
 (); knote v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. price,  u.s.  (); united
states v. realty co.,  u.s. ,  (); allen v. smith, 
[] hart v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] cincinnati soap co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] reeside v. walker,  how.  ().
[] united states v. klein,  wall.  ().
[] knote v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
austin v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hart v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  ().
[] williams v. bruffy,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] united states v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] craig v. missouri,  pet. ,  (); byrne v.
missouri,  pet.  ().
[] poindexter v. greenhow,  u.s.  (); chaffin
v. taylor,  u.s.  ().
[] houston & t.c.r. co. v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[] briscoe v. bank of kentucky,  pet.  ().
[] darrington v. bank of alabama,  how. ,  ();
curran v. arkansas,  how. ,  ().
[] briscoe v. bank of kentucky,  pet.  ().
[] woodruff v. trapnall,  how. ,  ().
[] legal tender cases,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gwin v. breedlove,  how. ,  (). see also
griffin v. thompson,  how.  ().
[] farmers & merchants bank v. federal reserve bank, 
[] cummings v. missouri,  wall. ,  (); klinger
v. missouri,  wall.  (); pierce v. carskadon,  wall. ,
 (). see p. , supra, and p. , post.
[] calder v. bull,  dall. ,  (); watson v.
mercer,  pet. ,  (); baltimore & s.r. co. v. nesbit,  how.
,  (); carpenter v. pennsylvania,  how. ,  ();
loche v. new orleans,  wall.  (); orr v. gilman,  u.s.
,  (); kentucky union co. v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] frank v. mangum,  u.s. ,  (); ross v.
oregon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] jaehne v. new york,  u.s. ,  ().
[] rooney v. north dakota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] chicago & a.r. co. v. tranbarger,  u.s.  ().
[] samuels v. mccurdy,  u.s.  ().
[] hawker v. new york,  u.s. ,  (). see
also reetz v. michigan,  u.s. ,  (); lehmann v. state
board of public accountancy,  u.s.  ().
[] cummings v. missouri,  wall. ,  ().
[] pierce v. carskadon,  wall.  ().
[] lindsey v. washington,  u.s.  ().
[] kring v. missouri,  u.s.  ().
[] holden v. minnesota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte medley,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gryger v. burke,  u.s.  (); mcdonald v.
massachusetts,  u.s.  (); graham v. west virginia,  u.s.
[] malloy v. south carolina,  u.s.  ().
[] rooney v. north dakota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gibson v. mississippi,  u.s. ,  ().
[] duncan v. missouri,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gut v. minnesota,  wall. ,  ().
[] duncan v. missouri,  u.s.  ().
[] mallett v. north carolina,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gibson v. mississippi,  u.s. ,  ().
[] beazell v. ohio,  u.s.  ().
[] thompson v. missouri,  u.s. ,  ().
[] thompson v. utah,  u.s.  ().
[] dodge v. woolsey,  how.  (); railroad co.
v. mcclure,  wall.  (); new orleans gaslight co. v.
louisiana light & heat producing & mfg. co.,  u.s.  (); bier
v. mcgehee,  u.s. ,  ().
[] new orleans waterworks co. v. rivers,  u.s. 
(); walla walla v. walla walla water co.,  u.s.  ();
vicksburg v. vicksburg waterworks co.,  u.s.  (); atlantic
coast line r. co. v. goldsboro,  u.s.  (); cuyahoga river
power co. v. akron,  u.s.  ().
[] the above; also grand trunk western r. co. v.
railroad commission,  u.s.  (); louisville & n.r. co. v.
garrett,  u.s.  (); appleby v. delaney,  u.s. 
[] central land co. v. laidley,  u.s.  (). see
also new orleans waterworks co. v. louisiana sugar ref. co.,  u.s.
 (); hanford v. davies,  u.s.  (); ross v. oregon,
 u.s.  (); detroit united r. co. v. michigan,  u.s. 
(); long sault development co. v. call,  u.s.  (); mccoy
v. union elev. co.,  u.s.  (); columbia r. gas & e. co. v.
south carolina,  u.s.  (); tidal oil co. v. flanagan, 
[] jefferson branch bank v. skelly,  bl. , 
(); bridge proprietors v. hoboken co.,  wall. ,  ();
wright v. nagle,  u.s. ,  (); and mcgahey v. virginia,
 u.s. ,  (); scott v. mcneal,  u.s. ,  ();
stearns v. minnesota,  u.s. , - (); coombes v. getz,
 u.s. ,  (); atlantic c.l.r. co. v. phillips,  u.s.
[] mccullough v. virginia,  u.s.  (); houston &
texas central r.r. co. v. texas,  u.s. , ,  (); hubert
v. new orleans,  u.s. ,  (); carondelet canal co. v.
louisiana,  u.s. ,  (); louisiana ry. & nav. co. v. new
orleans,  u.s. ,  ().
[] state bank of ohio v. knoop,  how.  (), and
ohio life insurance & trust co. v. debolt,  how.  () are the
leading cases. see also jefferson branch bank v. skelly,  bl. 
(); louisiana v. pilsbury,  u.s.  (); mcgahey v.
virginia,  u.s.  (); mobile & ohio r.r. co. v. tennessee,
 u.s.  (); bacon v. texas,  u.s.  (); mccullough
v. virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] gelpcke v. dubuque,  wall. ,  (); havemeyer
v. iowa county,  wall.  (); thompson v. lee county,  wall.
 (); kenosha v. lamson,  wall.  (); olcott v. fond du
lac county,  wall.  (); taylor v. ypsilanti,  u.s. 
(); anderson v. santa anna,  u.s.  (); wilkes county
v. coler,  u.s.  ().
[] great southern fire proof hotel co. v. jones,  u.s.
[] sauer v. new york,  u.s.  (); muhlker v.
new york & h.r. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] tidal oil company v. flanagan,  u.s. , ,
[] walker v. whitehead,  wall.  (); wood v.
lovett,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wheat. ,  (); see also curran v.
arkansas,  how.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] "the blaisdell decision represented a realistic
appreciation of the fact that ours is an evolving society and that the
general words of the contract clause were not intended to reduce the
legislative branch of government to helpless impotency." justice black,
in wood v. lovett,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wright, the contract clause of the constitution, 
(cambridge, ).
[] farrand, records, iii, .
[] the federalist, no. .
[] works of james wilson, i, , (andrews, ed., ).
[]  dall.  ().
[] ogden v. saunders,  wheat. ,  ().
[]  cr.  ().
[] in ware v. hylton,  dall.  () the court had
earlier set aside an act of virginia as being in conflict with the
treaty of peace, of , with great britain.
[] as given by professor wright in his treatise, the
contract clause of the constitution, . professor wright dates
hamilton's pamphlet, .
[]  cr. ,  (). justice johnson, in his concurring
opinion, relied exclusively on general principles. "i do not hesitate to
declare, that a state does not possess the power of revoking its own
grants. but i do it, on a general principle, on the reason and nature of
things; a principle which will impose laws even on the deity." ibid.
. see also his words in satterlee v. matthewson,  pet. , 
(); and those of the north carolina supreme court in barnes v.
barnes,  jones l.  (n.c.)  (), quoted in thomas henry calvert.
the constitution and the courts, i,  (northport, l.i., ). in both
these opinions it is asseverated that the contracts clause has been made
to do the work of "fundamental principles."
[]  cr.  (). the exemption from taxation which was
involved in this case was held in  to have lapsed through the
acquiescence for sixty years of the owners of the lands in the
imposition of taxes upon these. given v. wright,  u.s.  ().
[] dartmouth college v. woodward,  wheat.  ().
[] it was not until well along in the eighteenth century
that the first american business corporation was created: "this was the
new london society united for trade and commerce, which was chartered in
connecticut in . it had, however, an early demise. following this
was a second connecticut charter, namely, for building 'union wharf,' on
'long wharf,' at new haven. a similar company, 'the proprietors of
boston pier,' or 'the long wharf in the town of boston in new england,'
was chartered by the massachusetts general court in . in  the
pennsylvania assembly incorporated 'the philadelphia contributionship
for the insuring of houses from loss by fire.' alone of the colonial
business corporations it has had a continuous existence to the present
day.
"apparently the only other business corporations of the colonies were
companies for supplying water. one was incorporated in massachusetts in
, and three in rhode island in  and . alongside of these
corporations, and, indeed, preceding them, were a large number of
unincorporated associations, partnerships, societies, groups of
'undertakers,' 'companies,' formed for a great variety of business
purposes. in the eye of the law all of them were probably mere
partnerships or tenancies in common. whaling and fishing companies,
so-called, were numerous. there were a number of mining companies,
chiefly for producing iron or copper. there were some manufacturing
companies, but they were not numerous. banking institutions were
represented notably by the 'bank of credit lumbard,' promoted in boston
by john blackwell and authorized by the general court in , and by
the 'land bank or manufacturing scheme' in the same colony in -.
"in addition to these there were a few insurance companies, a number of
companies formed for the indian trade, numerous land companies, large
and small, a number of associations for erecting bridges, building or
repairing roads, and improving navigation of small streams or rivers.
besides these there were a few colonial corporations not easily classed,
such as libraries, chambers of commerce, etc.
"during the revolution few corporations of any sort were chartered.
after the conclusion of peace the situation was materially altered.
capital had accumulated during the war. the disbanding of the army set
free a labor supply, which was rapidly increased by throngs of
immigrants. the day was one of bold experimentation, enthusiastic
exploitation of new methods, eager exploration of new paths, confident
undertaking of new enterprises. everything conspired to bring about a
considerable extension of corporate enterprise in the field of business
before the end of the eighteenth century, notably after the critical
period of disunion and constitution-making has passed. prior to 
over three hundred charters were granted for business corporations; 
per cent. of them after . judged by twentieth-century standards
these seem few, indeed, but neither in the colonies nor in the mother
country was there precedent for such a development."  the nation 
(new york, nov. , ), reviewing joseph stancliffe davis, essays in
the earlier history of american corporations ( vols., harvard
university press, ).
[] in  chief justice parsons of the supreme judicial
court of massachusetts, without mentioning the contracts clause,
declared that rights legally vested in a corporation cannot be
"controuled or destroyed by a subsequent statute, unless a power be
reserved to the legislature in the act of incorporation," wales v.
stetson,  mass.  (). see also stoughton v. baker et al., 
mass.  () to like effect; cf. locke v. dane,  mass. 
() in which it is said that the purpose of the contracts clause was
to "provide against paper money and insolvent laws." together these
holdings add up to the conclusion that the reliance of the massachusetts
court was on "fundamental principles," rather than the contracts
clause.
[]  wheat., especially at - (webster's argument);
ibid.  (story's opinion). see also story's opinion for the court in
terrett v. taylor,  cr.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  wheat. at ; see also home of the friendless v.
rouse,  wall. ,  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] note the various cases to which municipalities are
parties.
[]  wheat. at .
[] in munn v. illinois,  u.s.  () a category of
"business affected with a public interest" and whose property is
"impressed with a public use" was recognized. a corporation engaged in
such a business becomes a "quasi-public" corporation, the power of the
state to regulate which is larger than in the case of a purely private
corporation. inasmuch as most corporations receiving public franchises
are of this character, the final result of munn v. illinois was to
enlarge the police power of the state in the case of the most important
beneficiaries of the dartmouth college decision.
[] meriwether v. garrett,  u.s.  (); covington
v. kentucky,  u.s.  (); hunter v. pittsburgh,  u.s. 
[] east hartford v. hartford bridge co.,  how. 
(); hunter v. pittsburgh,  u.s.  ().
[] trenton v. new jersey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] newton v. mahoning county,  u.s.  ().
[] attorney general ex rel. kies v. lowrey,  u.s. 
[] faitoute iron & steel co. v. asbury park,  u.s. 
(). in this case the contracts involved were municipal bonds, and
hence "private" contracts; but the overruling power of the state in
relation to its municipalities was one of the grounds invoked by the
court in sustaining the legislation. see ibid. . "'a municipal
corporation *** is a representative not only of the state, but is a
portion of its governmental power. *** the state may withdraw these
local powers of government at pleasure, and may, through its legislature
or other appointed channels, govern the local territory as it governs
the state at large. it may enlarge or contract its powers or destroy its
existence.'" united states v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  wall. , 
(); and see hunter v. pittsburgh,  u.s.  ().
[] butler v. pennsylvania,  how.  (); fisk v.
police jury,  u.s.  (); dodge v. board of education, 
u.s.  (); mississippi use of robertson v. miller,  u.s. 
[] butler v. pennsylvania,  how.  (). cf.
marbury v. madison,  cr.  (); hoke v. henderson,  n.c., (
dev.)  (). see also united states v. fisher,  u.s. 
(); united states v. mitchell,  u.s.  (); crenshaw v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] fisk v. police jury,  u.s.  (); mississippi
use of robertson v. miller,  u.s.  ().
[] hall v. wisconsin,  u.s.  (). cf.
higginbotham v. baton rouge,  u.s.  ().
[] phelps v. board of education,  u.s.  ().
[] dodge v. board of education,  u.s.  ().
[] indiana ex rel. anderson v. brand  u.s.  ().
[]  cr.  ().
[] delaware railroad tax,  wall. ,  (); pacific
r. co. v. maguire,  wall. ,  (); humphrey v. pegues, 
wall. ,  (); home of friendless v. rouse,  wall. , 
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] salt co. v. east saginaw,  wall. ,  ().
see also welch v. cook,  u.s.  (); grand lodge, f. & a.m.
v. new orleans,  u.s.  (); wisconsin & m.r. co. v. powers,
 u.s.  (). cf. ettor v. tacoma,  u.s.  (), in
which it was held that the repeal of a statute providing for
consequential damages caused by changes of grades of streets could not
constitutionally affect an already accrued right to compensation.
[] see christ church v. philadelphia county,  how.
,  (); seton hall college v. south orange,  u.s. 
[] compare the above case with home of friendless v.
rouse,  wall. ,  (); also illinois central r. co. v.
decatur,  u.s.  () with wisconsin & m.r. co. v. powers, 
[] crane v. hahlo,  u.s. , - ();
louisiana ex rel. folsom v. new orleans,  u.s. ,  ();
morley v. lakeshore & m.s.r. co.,  u.s. ,  (). that the
obligation of contracts clause did not protect vested rights merely as
such was stated by the court as early as satterlee v. matthewson, 
pet. ,  (); and again in the charles river bridge co. v.
warren bridge co.,  pet. , - ().
[] see story's opinion.  wheat. at .
[] home of friendless v. rouse,  wall. ,  ();
pennsylvania college cases,  wall. ,  (); miller v. new
york,  wall.  (); murray v. charleston,  u.s.  ();
greenwood v. union freight r. co.,  u.s.  (); chesapeake &
o.r. co. v. miller,  u.s.  (); louisville water co. v.
clark,  u.s.  ().
[] new jersey v. yard,  u.s. ,  ().
[] see holyoke water power co. v. lyman,  wall. ,
 (), following fisheries v. holyoke water power co.,  mass.
,  (); also shields v. ohio,  u.s.  (); fair
haven & w.r. co. v. new haven,  u.s.  (); berea college v.
kentucky,  u.s.  (). see also lothrop v. stedman,  fed.
cas. no. , (), where the principles of natural justice are
thought to set a limit to the power. earlier is zabriskie v.
hackensack & n.y.r. co.,  n.j. eq.  () where it is said that a
new charter may not be substituted; also allen v. mckean,  fed.
cas. no.  () in which a federal court set aside a maine statute
somewhat like the one involved in the dartmouth college case, on the
ground that it went beyond the power of mere alteration. in this case,
however, only the right to alter had been reserved, in the charter
itself, and not the right to repeal.
[] see in this connection the cases cited by justice
sutherland in his opinion for the court in phillips petroleum co. v.
jenkins,  u.s.  ().
[] curran v. arkansas,  how.  (); shields v.
ohio,  u.s.  (); greenwood v. union freight r. co.,  u.s.
 (); adirondack r. co. v. new york,  u.s.  (); stearns
v. minnesota,  u.s.  (); chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v.
wisconsin,  u.s.  (); coombes v. getz,  u.s.  ().
[] pennsylvania college cases,  wall. ,  ().
see also calder v. michigan,  u.s.  ().
[] lakeshore & m.s.r. co. v. smith,  u.s. , 
(); coombes v. getz,  u.s.  (). both these decisions
cite greenwood v. union freight r. co.,  u.s. ,  (), but
without apparent justification.
[]  pet.  ().
[] thorpe v. rutland & burlington railroad co.,  vt.
[] thus a railroad may be required, at its own expense and
irrespective of benefits to itself, to eliminate grade crossings in the
interest of public safety, (new york & n.e.r. co. v. bristol,  u.s.
 ()); to make highway crossings reasonably safe and convenient
for public use, (great northern r. co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
()); to repair viaducts, (northern pac. r. co. v. minnesota, 
u.s.  ()); and to fence its right of way, (minneapolis & st. l.r.
co. v. emmons,  u.s.  ()). though a railroad company owns
the right of way along a street, the city may require it to lay tracks
to conform to the established grade; to fill in tracks at street
intersections; and to remove tracks from a busy street intersection,
when the attendant disadvantages and expense are small and the safety of
the public appreciably enhanced, (denver & r.g.r. co. v. denver, 
likewise the state, in the public interest, may require a railroad to
reestablish an abandoned station, even though the railroad commission
had previously authorized its abandonment on condition that another
station be established elsewhere, a condition which had been complied
with, (new haven & n. co. v. hamersley,  u.s.  ()). it may
impose upon a railroad liability for fire communicated by its
locomotives, even though the state had previously authorized the company
to use said type of locomotive power, (st. louis & s.f.r. co. v.
mathews,  u.s. ,  ()); and it may penalize the failure to cut
drains through embankments so as to prevent flooding of adjacent lands,
(chicago & a.r. co. v. tranbarger,  u.s.  ()).
[] boston beer co. v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ().
see also fertilizing co. v. hyde park,  u.s.  (); and
hammond packing v. arkansas,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[]  pet. at -.
[] ibid. -, citing the binghamton bridge,  wall. ,
[] memphis & l.r.r. co. v. berry,  u.s. , 
(). see also picard v. east tennessee, virginia & georgia r.
co.,  u.s. ,  (); louisville & n.r. co. v. palmes, 
u.s. ,  (); morgan v. louisiana,  u.s.  (); wilson
v. gaines,  u.s.  (); norfolk & w.r. co. v. pendleton, 
[] railroad co. v. georgia,  u.s. ,  ().
[] phoenix f. & m. insurance co. v. tennessee,  u.s.
[] rochester r. co. v. rochester,  u.s.  ();
followed in wright v. georgia r. & bkg. co.,  u.s.  (); and
new york rapid transit co. v. city of new york,  u.s.  ().
cf. tennessee v. whitworth,  u.s.  () the authority of
which is respected in the preceding case.
[] chicago, b. & k.c.r. co. v. missouri ex rel. guffey,
[] ford v. delta & pine land co.,  u.s.  ().
[] vicksburg, s. & p.r. co. v. dennis,  u.s. 
[] millsaps college v. jackson,  u.s.  ().
[] hale v. iowa state board of assessment,  u.s. 
[] stone v. farmers' loan & trust co. (railroad
commission cases),  u.s. ,  () extended in southern pacific
co. v. campbell,  u.s.  () to cases in which the word
"reasonable" does not appear to qualify the company's right to prescribe
tolls. see also american toll bridge co. v. railroad com. of
california et al.,  u.s.  ().
[] georgia r. & power co. v. decatur,  u.s. 
(). see also southern iowa electric co. v. chariton,  u.s.
[] walla walla v. walla walla water co.,  u.s. , 
[] skaneateles water works co. v. skaneateles,  u.s.
 (); knoxville water co. v. knoxville,  u.s.  ();
madera water works v. madera,  u.s.  ().
[] rogers park water co. v. fergus,  u.s.  ().
[] home telephone co. v. los angeles,  u.s. 
(); wyandotte gas co. v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] see also puget sound traction, light & p. co. v.
reynolds,  u.s.  (). "before we can find impairment of a
contract we must find an obligation of the contract which has been
impaired. since the contract here relied upon is one between a political
subdivision of a state and private individuals, settled principles of
construction require that the obligation alleged to have been impaired
be clearly and unequivocally expressed." justice black for the court in
keefe v. clark,  u.s. , - ().
[] corporation of brick church v. mayor et al.,  cowen
[] west river bridge co. v. dix,  how.  (). see
also backus v. lebanon,  n.h.  (); white river turnpike co.
v. vermont cent. r. co.,  vt.  (); and bonaparte v. camden
& a.r. co.,  fed. cas. no. , (); cited in calvert i, -.
[] pennsylvania hospital v. philadelphia,  u.s. 
[] illinois central railroad v. illinois,  u.s. ,
[] see pp. -.
[] see especially home of the friendless v. rouse, 
wall.  (), and washington university v. rouse,  wall. 
[] georgia railway co. v. redwine,  u.s. , -
(). the court distinguishes in re ayers,  u.s.  () on the
ground that the action there was barred "as one in substance directed
against the state to obtain specific performance of a contract with the
state".  u.s. .
[] stone v. mississippi,  u.s. ,  ().
[] butcher's union co. v. crescent city co.,  u.s. 
[] new orleans gas co. v. louisiana light co.,  u.s.
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. goldsboro,  u.s. ,
 (). see also chicago & a.r. co. v. tranbarger,  u.s. 
(); also pennsylvania hospital v. philadelphia,  u.s. 
(), where the police power and eminent domain are treated on the
same basis in respect of inalienability; also wabash r. co. v.
defiance,  u.s. ,  (); home telephone co. v. los angeles,
 u.s.  (); and calvert i, .
[] morley v. lake shore & m.s.r. co.,  u.s. 
(); new orleans v. new orleans waterworks co.,  u.s.  ();
missouri & a. lumber & min. co. v. greenwood dist,  u.s. 
(). but cf. livingston v. moore,  pet. ,  (); and
garrison v. new york,  wall. ,  (), suggesting that a
different view was earlier entertained in the case of judgments in
actions of debt.
[] maynard v. hill,  u.s.  (); dartmouth
college v. woodward,  wheat. ,  (). cf. andrews v.
andrews,  u.s.  (). the question whether a wife's rights in the
community property under the laws of california were of a contractual
nature was raised but not determined in moffitt v. kelly,  u.s. 
[] new orleans v. new orleans waterworks co.,  u.s. 
(); zane v. hamilton county,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wheat.  (). for the first such case in a
federal circuit court, see charles warren, the supreme court in united
states history, i,  (boston, ).
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] von hoffman v. quincy,  wall. ,  ().
[]  how.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] oshkosh waterworks co. v. oshkosh,  u.s. , 
(); new orleans & l.r. co. v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
[] antoni v. greenhow,  u.s.  ().
[] the right was unheld in mason v. haile,  wheat. 
(); and again in vial v. penniman (penniman's case),  u.s. 
(). on early english and colonial law touching the subject, see
argument of counsel in sturges v. crowninshield,  wheat. , -
[] mcgahey v. virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] louisiana ex rel. ranger v. new orleans,  u.s. 
[] von hoffman v. quincy,  wall. ,  ().
[] antoni v. greenhow,  u.s. , .—illustrations
of changes in remedies, which have been sustained, may be seen in the
following cases: jackson ex dem. hart v. lamphire,  pet.  ();
hawkins v. barney,  pet.  (); crawford v. branch bank of
alabama,  how.  (); curtis v. whitney,  wall.  ();
cairo & f.r. co. v. hecht,  u.s.  (); terry v. anderson, 
u.s.  (); tennessee v. sneed,  u.s.  (); south carolina
v. gaillard,  u.s.  (); louisiana v. new orleans,  u.s.
 (); connecticut mut. l. ins. co. v. cushman,  u.s. 
(); vance v. vance,  u.s.  (); gilfillan v. union
canal co.,  u.s.  (); hill v. merchants' mut. ins. co., 
u.s.  (); new orleans city & lake r. co. v. louisiana,  u.s.
 (); red river valley nat. bank v. craig,  u.s.  ();
wilson v. standefer,  u.s.  (); oshkosh waterworks co. v.
oshkosh,  u.s.  (); waggoner v. flack,  u.s.  ();
bernheimer v. converse,  u.s.  (); henley v. myers, 
u.s.  (); selig v. hamilton,  u.s.  (); security sav.
bank v. california,  u.s.  (); united states mortgage co.
v. matthews,  u.s.  ().
compare the following cases, where changes in remedies were deemed to be
of such a character as to interfere with substantial rights: wilmington
& w.r. co. v. king,  u.s.  (); memphis v. united states, 
u.s.  (); poindexter v. greenhow,  u.s. , , , 
(); effinger v. kenney,  u.s.  (); fisk v. jefferson
police jury,  u.s.  (); bradley v. lightcap,  u.s. 
(); bank of minden v. clement,  u.s.  ().
[] von hoffman v. quincy,  wall. , - ().
[] see also louisiana ex rel. nelson v. st. martin's
parish,  u.s.  ().
[] mobile v. watson,  u.s.  (); graham v.
folsom,  u.s.  ().
[] heine v. levee commissioners,  wall.  ().
cf. virginia v. west virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] faitoute iron & steel co. v. asbury park,  u.s.
,  (). alluding to the ineffectiveness of purely judicial
remedies against defaulting municipalities, justice frankfurter says:
"for there is no remedy when resort is had to 'devices and contrivances'
to nullify the taxing power which can be carried out only through
authorized officials. see rees v. city of watertown,  wall. ,
 (). and so we have had the spectacle of taxing officials
resigning from office in order to frustrate tax levies through mandamus,
and officials running on a platform of willingness to go to jail rather
than to enforce a tax levy (see raymond, state and municipal bonds,
-), and evasion of service by tax collectors, thus making impotent
a court's mandate. yost v. dallas county,  u.s. ,  ()." 
u.s. at .
[] myers v. irwin,  sergeant and rawle's (pa.), , 
(); also, to same effect, lindenmuller v. the people,  barbour
(n.y.),  (). see also brown v. penobscot bank,  mass. 
[] manigault v. springs,  u.s. ,  ().
[] jackson v. lamphire,  pet.  (). see also
phalen v. virginia,  how.  ().
[] stone v. mississippi,  u.s.  ().
[] boston beer co. v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ().
[] new york c.r. co. v. white,  u.s.  (). in
this and the preceding two cases the legislative act involved did not
except from its operation existing contracts.
[] manigault v. springs,  u.s.  ().
[] portland railway, light & power co. v. railroad comm.
of oregon,  u.s.  ().
[] midland realty co. v. kansas city power & light co.,
[] hudson county water co. v. mccarter,  u.s. 
[] brown (marcus) holding co. v. feldman,  u.s. ,
 (); followed in levy leasing co. v. siegel,  u.s. 
[] chastleton corp. v. sinclair,  u.s. , -
[] ibid. , . see also veix v. sixth ward building
and loan assn. of newark,  u.s.  () in which was sustained a
new jersey statute, amending, in view of the depression, the law
governing building and loan associations. the authority of the state to
safeguard the vital interests of the people, said justice reed, "is not
limited to health, morals and safety. it extends to economic needs as
well." ibid. -.
[] see especially edwards v. kearzey,  u.s. 
(); and barnitz v. beverly,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). as to conditions surrounding the
enactment of moratorium statutes in , see new york times of
january , , sec. ii, pp. -.
[] worthen co. v. thomas,  u.s.  (); worthen
co. v. kavanaugh,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at .
[] east new york savings bank v. hahn,  u.s. , 
[] honeyman v. jacobs,  u.s.  (). see also
gelfert v. national city bank,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at -.
[] one reason for this is indicated in the following
passage from justice field's opinion for the court in paul v.
virginia, decided in : "at the present day corporations are
multiplied to an almost indefinite extent. there is scarcely a business
pursued requiring the expenditure of large capital, or the union of
large numbers, that is not carried on by corporations. it is not too
much to say that the wealth and business of the country are to a great
extent controlled by them."  wall. , -.
[] wright, the contract clause, -.
[] perry v. united states,  u.s.  ();
louisville joint stock bank v. radford,  u.s.  (). the court
has pointed out, what of course, is evident on a reading of the
constitution, that the contract clause is a limitation on the powers of
the states and not of the united states. central p.r. co. v. gallatin
(sinking fund cases),  u.s. ,  (). see also mitchell v.
clark,  u.s. ,  (); legal tender cases,  wall. , 
(); continental ill. nat. bank & trust co. v. chicago, r.i. & p.r.
co.,  u.s.  (); st. anthony falls water power co. v. board
of water commissioners,  u.s. ,  (); dubuque, s.c.r. co.
v. richmond,  wall.  (); new york v. united states, 
u.s.  (). cf. however, hepburn v. griswold,  wall. , 
(); and central pacific r.r. co. v. gallatin (sinking fund cases),
[] see, e.g., neblett et al. v. carpenter, et al., 
u.s.  (); asbury hospital v. cass county,  u.s.  ();
connecticut mutual l. ins. co. v. moore,  u.s.  (). for a
notable case in which the obligations clause was mustered into service,
by rather heroic logic, to do work that was afterwards put upon the due
process clause, see state tax on foreign-held bonds,  wall. 
[] hooven & allison co. v. evatt,  u.s. , 
[] woodruff v. parham,  wall.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] may & co. v. new orleans,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. ; gulf fisheries co. v. macinerney,  u.s.
 (); mcgoldrick v. gulf oil corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] low v. austin,  wall.  (); may & co. v. new
orleans,  u.s.  ().
[] hooven & allison co. v. evatt,  u.s. , 
[] ibid. .
[] canton r. co. v. rogan,  u.s.  ().
[] brown v. maryland,  wheat. ,  ().
[] anglo-chilean nitrate sales corp. v. alabama,  u.s.
[] low v. austin,  wall. ,  ().
[] cook v. pennsylvania,  u.s. , , ().
[] crew levick co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  ().
[] cooley v. board of port wardens,  how. , 
[] waring v. mobile,  wall. ,  (). see also
pervear v. massachusetts,  wall. ,  (); schollenberger v.
pennsylvania,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gulf fisheries co. v. macinerney,  u.s. 
[] nathan v. louisiana,  how. ,  ().
[] mager v. grima,  how.  ().
[] brown v. maryland,  wheat. ,  (); hooven &
allison co. v. evatt,  u.s.  ().
[] new york ex rel. burke v. wells,  u.s.  ().
[] selliger v. kentucky,  u.s.  (); cf. almy
v. california,  how. ,  ().
[] bowman v. chicago & n.w.r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] ibid. .
[] patapsco guano co. v. north carolina bd. of
agriculture,  u.s. ,  (). for a discussion of the
limitations on state power to pass inspection laws resulting from the
commerce clause, see pp. , .
[] bowman v. chicago & n.w.r. co.,  u.s. , -
[] clyde mallory lines v. alabama ex rel. state docks
commission,  u.s. ,  (); cannon v. new orleans,  wall.
,  (); wheeling, p. & c. transportation co. v. wheeling, 
[] keokuk northern line packet co. v. keokuk,  u.s. 
(); parkersburg & ohio river transportation co. v. parkersburg,
 u.s.  (); ouachita packet co. v. aiken,  u.s. 
[] cooley v. board of port wardens,  how. , 
(); ex parte mcniel,  wall.  (); inman steamship co. v.
tinker,  u.s. ,  (); northwestern union packet co. v. st.
louis,  u.s.  (); vicksburg v. tobin,  u.s.  ();
cincinnati, p.b.s. & p. packet co. v. catlettsburg,  u.s. 
[] huse v. glover,  u.s. ,  ().
[] southern s.s. co. v. portwardens,  wall.  ().
[] peete v. morgan,  wall.  ().
[] morgan's l. & t.r. & s.s. co. v. board of health, 
[] wiggins ferry co. v. east st. louis,  u.s. 
(). see also gloucester ferry co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. ,
 (); philadelphia & s. mail steamship co. v. pennsylvania, 
u.s. ,  (); osborne v. mobile,  wall. ,  ().
[] cox v. lott (state tonnage tax cases),  wall. ,
[] luther v. borden,  how. ,  ().
[] presser v. illinois,  u.s.  ().
[] poole v. fleeger,  pet ,  ().
[] hinderlider v. la plata co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] frankfurter and landis, the compact clause of the
constitution—a study in interstate adjustments,  yale law journal,
[] article ix.
[] article vi.
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. , , .
[]  u.s. ,  (). see also stearns v.
minnesota,  u.s. ,  (); also reference in next note, at
pp. -.
[] see leslie w. dunbar, interstate compacts and
congressional consent,  virginia law review,  (october, ).
[] frankfurter and landis, the compact clause of the
constitution—a study in interstate adjustments,  yale law journal,
,  (); frederick l. zimmerman and mitchell wendell, interstate
compacts since  (),  book of states,  (-).
[]  stat.  ().
[]  book of the states,  (-).
[]  u.s.c. §;  u.s.c. §j;  u.s.c. §§,
a;  u.s.c. §§, -b.
[] green v. biddle,  wheat. ,  ().
[] virginia v. tennessee,  u.s.  ().
[] virginia v. west virginia,  wall.  ().
[] wharton v. wise,  u.s. ,  ().
[] james v. dravo contracting co.,  u.s.  ().
see also arizona v. california,  u.s. ,  ().
[] on the activities of the board, in which representatives
of both races participate and from which both races have benefited,
see remarks of hon. spessard l. holland of florida. cong. rec., st
cong., d sess., v. , p. -.
[] pennsylvania v. wheeling & belmont bridge co.,  how.
[] st. louis & s.f.r. co. v. james,  u.s. , 
[] poole v. fleeger,  pet. ,  (); rhode
island v. massachusetts,  pet. ,  ().
[] hinderlider v. la plata co.,  u.s. , , 
[] green v. biddle,  wheat. ,  (); virginia v.
west virginia,  u.s.  (). see also pennsylvania v.
wheeling & belmont bridge co.,  how. ,  (); olin v.
kitzmiller,  u.s.  ().
[] virginia v. west virginia,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dyer v. sims,  u.s.  (). the case stemmed
from mandamus proceedings brought to compel the auditor of west virginia
to pay out money to a commission which had been created by a compact
between west virginia and other states to control pollution of the ohio
river. the decision of the supreme court of appeals of west virginia
denying mandamus was reversed by the supreme court, and the case
remanded. the opinion of the court, by justice frankfurter, reviews and
revises the west virginia court's interpretation of the state
constitution, thereby opening up, temporarily at least, a new field of
power for judicial review. justice reed, challenging this extension of
judicial review, thought the issue determined by the supremacy clause.
justice jackson urged that the compact power was "inherent in
sovereignty" and hence was limited only by the requirement of
congressional consent. justice black concurred in the result without
opinion.
[pg ]
[pg ]
section . the president: page
clause . powers and term of the president 
nature and scope of presidential power 
contemporary source of the presidency 
presidency in the federal convention 
executive power; hamilton's contribution 
myers case 
curtiss-wright case 
theory of the presidential office 
term of four years 
anti-third term tradition 
clauses , , , , , , and . election, qualifications, succession, compensation, and oath of the president 
maintenance of the office of president 
"electoral college" 
constitutional status of electors 
"natural-born citizen" 
presidential succession 
act of  
acts of  and  
compensation and emoluments 
oath of office 
effect of the oath 
section . powers and duties of the president 
clause . commander in chiefship; opinions from heads of departments; pardons 
commander in chiefship 
historical 
prize cases 
impact of the prize cases on world wars i and ii 
presidential theory of the commander in chiefship in world war ii 
presidential war agencies 
constitutional status of presidential agencies 
west coast japanese 
act of march ,  
presidential government of labor relations 
"sanctions" 
constitutional basis of sanctions 
martial law and constitutional limitations 
martial law in hawaii 
case of the nazi saboteurs 
war crimes cases 
president as commander of the forces 
commander in chief a civilian officer 
presidential advisers 
the cabinet 
pardons and reprieves 
legal nature of a pardon 
qualification of above theory 
scope of the power 
"offenses against the united states"; contempt of court 
effects of a pardon: ex parte garland 
limits to the efficacy of a pardon 
congress and amnesty 
clauses  and . treaties and appointment of officers 
treaty-making power 
president and senate 
negotiation a presidential monopoly 
treaties as law of the land 
origin of the conception 
treaty rights versus state power 
recent cases 
when is a treaty self-executing; when not 
constitutional freedom of congress with respect to treaties 
treaty-making power and revenue laws 
congressional repeal of treaties 
treaties versus prior acts of congress 
interpretation and termination of treaties as international compacts 
termination of treaties by notice 
determination whether a treaty has lapsed 
status of a treaty a political question 
treaties and the "necessary and proper" clause 
constitutional limits of the treaty-making power: missouri v. holland 
indian treaties 
present status of indian treaties 
international agreements without senate approval 
routine executive agreements 
law-making executive agreements 
president mckinley's contribution 
executive agreements affecting far eastern relations 
international obligation of executive agreements 
litvinov agreement of  
united states v. belmont 
united states v. pink; national supremacy 
hull-lothian agreement,  
war-time agreements 
executive agreements by authorization of congress 
reciprocal trade agreements 
constitutionality of trade agreements 
lend-lease act 
president plus congress versus senate 
arbitration agreements 
agreements under the united nations charter 
united nations participation act 
executive establishment 
"office" 
"ambassadors and other public ministers" 
presidential diplomatic agents 
congressional regulation of offices 
conduct in office 
the loyalty issue 
legislation increasing duties of an officer 
"inferior officers"; "employees" 
stages of appointment process 
nomination 
senate approval 
when senate consent is complete 
commissioning the officer 
recess appointments 
ad interim designations 
removal power; myers case 
"nature of the office" concept 
humphrey case 
other phases of the removal power 
presidential aegis 
section . legislative, diplomatic, and law enforcement duties of the president 
legislative role of the president 
right of reception 
scope of the power 
a presidential monopoly 
"the logan act" 
a formal or a formative power 
president's diplomatic role 
jefferson's real position 
power of recognition 
the case of cuba 
power of nonrecognition 
president and congress 
congressional implementation of presidential policies 
doctrine of political questions 
recent statements of the doctrine 
the president as law enforcer 
types of executive power 
how the president's own powers are exercised 
power and duty of the president in relation to subordinate executive officers 
administrative decentralization v. jacksonian centralism 
congressional power v. presidential duty to the law 
myers case v. humphrey case 
power of the president to guide enforcement of the penal law 
president as law interpreter 
military power in law enforcement: the posse comitatus 
suspension of habeas corpus by president 
preventive martial law 
debs case 
status of the debs case, today 
president's duty in cases of domestic violence 
president as executive of the law of nations 
protection of american rights of person and property abroad 
presidential world policing 
the atlantic pact 
presidential action in the domain of congress: steel seizure case 
presidential immunity from judicial direction 
president's subordinates and the courts 
section . impeachment 
impeachment 
"civil" officer 
"high crimes and misdemeanors" 
chase impeachment 
johnson impeachment 
later impeachments 
[pg ]
article ii
section : the executive power shall be vested in a president
of the united states of america. he shall hold his office during the
term of four years, and, together with the vice president, chosen for
the same term, be elected, as follows:
the nature and scope of presidential power
the immediate source of article ii was the new york constitution of
,[] of which the relevant provisions are the following: "art.
xviii. *** the governor *** shall by virtue of his office, be
general and commander in chief of all the militia, and admiral of the
navy of this state; *** he shall have power to convene the assembly
and senate on extraordinary occasions; to prorogue them from time to
time, provided such prorogations shall not exceed sixty days in the
space of any one year; and, at his discretion, to grant reprieves and
pardons to persons convicted of crimes, other than treason and murder,
in which he may suspend the execution of the sentence, until it shall be
reported to the legislature at their subsequent meeting; and they shall
either pardon or direct the execution of the criminal, or grant a
further reprieve.
"art. xix. *** it shall be the duty of the governor to inform the
legislature at every session of the condition of the state so far as may
concern his department; to recommend such matters to their consideration
as shall appear to him to concern its good government, welfare, and
prosperity; to correspond with the continental congress and other
states; to transact all necessary business with the officers of
government, civil and military; to take care that the laws are executed
to the best of his ability; and to expedite all such measures as may be
resolved upon by the legislature.
"to these, of course, are to be added the important powers of qualified
appointment and qualified veto. it is to be observed also that there is
no question of the interposition of the law of the land to regulate
these powers. they are the governor's, by direct grant of the people,
and his alone. another distinguishing characteristic, equally important,
is the fact that the governor was to be chosen by a [pg ]constitutionally
defined electorate, not by the legislature. he was also to have a
three-year term, and there were to be no limitations on his
re-eligibility to office. in short, all the isolated principles of
executive strength in other constitutions were here brought into a new
whole. alone they were of slight importance; gathered together they gain
new meaning. and, in addition, we have new elements of strength utilized
for the first time on the american continent."[] the appellation
"president" appears to have been suggested to the federal convention by
charles pinckney,[] to whom it may have been suggested by the title at
that date of the chief magistrate of delaware.
the relevant clause in the report from the committee of detail of august
,  to the federal convention read as follows: "the executive power
of the united states shall be vested in a single person. his stile shall
be 'the president of the united states of america'; and his title shall
be 'his excellency.'"[] this language recorded the decision of the
convention, sitting in committee of the whole, that the national
executive power should be vested in a single person, not a body. for the
rest, it is a simple designation of office. the final form of the clause
came from the committee of style,[] and was never separately acted on
by the convention.
is this term a summary description merely of the powers which are
granted in more specific terms in succeeding provisions of article ii,
or is it also a grant of powers; and if the latter, what powers
specifically does it comprise? in the debate on the location of the
removal power in the house of representatives in [] madison and
others urged that this was "in its nature" an "executive power";[] and
their view prevailed so far as executive officers appointed without
stated term by the president, with the advice and consent of the senate,
were concerned. four years later hamilton, in defending president
washington's course in issuing a proclamation of impartiality upon the
outbreak of war between france and great britain, developed the
following argument: "the second article of the constitution of the
united states, section first, establishes this general proposition, that
'the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states
of america.' the same article, in a succeeding section, proceeds to
delineate particular cases of executive power. it [pg ]declares, among other
things, that the president shall be commander in chief of the army and
navy of the united states, and of the militia of the several states,
when called into the actual service of the united states; that he shall
have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, to make
treaties; that it shall be his duty to receive ambassadors and other
public ministers, and to take care that the laws be faithfully
executed. it would not consist with the rules of sound construction, to
consider this enumeration of particular authorities as derogating from
the more comprehensive grant in the general clause, further than as it
may be coupled with express restrictions or limitations; as in regard to
the co-operation of the senate in the appointment of officers, and the
making of treaties; which are plainly qualifications of the general
executive powers of appointing officers and making treaties. the
difficulty of a complete enumeration of all the cases of executive
authority, would naturally dictate the use of general terms, and would
render it improbable that a specification of certain particulars was
designed as a substitute for those terms, when antecedently used. the
different mode of expression employed in the constitution, in regard to
the two powers, the legislative and the executive, serves to confirm
this inference. in the article which gives the legislative powers of the
government, the expressions are, 'all legislative powers herein granted
shall be vested in a congress of the united states.' in that which
grants the executive power, the expressions are, 'the executive power
shall be vested in a president of the united states.' the enumeration
ought therefore to be considered, as intended merely to specify the
principal articles implied in the definition of executive power; leaving
the rest to flow from the general grant of that power, interpreted in
conformity with other parts of the constitution, and with the principles
of free government. the general doctrine of our constitution then is,
that the executive power of the nation is vested in the president;
subject only to the exceptions and qualifications, which are
expressed in the instrument."[]
these enlarged conceptions of the executive power clause have been
ratified by the supreme court within recent times. in the myers case,[]
decided in , not only was madison's contention as to [pg ]the location
of the removal power adopted, and indeed extended, but hamilton's
general theory as to the proper mode of construing the clause was
unqualifiedly endorsed. said chief justice taft, speaking for the court:
"the executive power was given in general terms, strengthened by
specific terms where emphasis was regarded as appropriate, and was
limited by direct expressions where limitation was needed, ***"[]
ten years later justice sutherland, speaking for the court in united
states v. curtiss-wright corporation,[] joined hamilton's conception
of the president's role in the foreign relations field to the conception
that in this field the national government is not one of enumerated but
of inherent powers;[] and the practical conclusion he drew was that
the constitutional objection to delegation of legislative power does not
apply to a delegation by congress to the president of its "cognate"
powers in this field; that, in short, the merged powers of the two
departments may be put at the president's disposal whenever congress so
desires.[]
nor is it alone in the field of foreign relations that the opening
clause of article ii has promoted latitudinarian conceptions of
presidential power. especially has his role as "commander in chief in
wartime" drawn nourishment from the same source, in recent years. the
matter is treated in later pages.[]
the looseness of the grants of power to the president has been more than
once the subject of animadversion.[] this and the unity of the office
furnished a text for opponents of the constitution while its
ratification was pending. "here," according to hamilton, writing in the
federalist, "the writers against the constitution, seem to have taken
pains to signalize their talent of misrepresentation."[] once the
constitution was adopted, however, the tables were turned, and some
members of the first congress, including certain former members of the
federal convention, sought to elaborate the monarchical aspects of the
office. they would fain give him a title, his excellency [pg ](already
applied in several states to the governors thereof), highness,
elective majesty, being suggestions. ellsworth of connecticut wished
to see his name or place inserted in the enacting clause of statutes.
they contrived to make a ceremony of the president's appearances before
congress, his annual address to which, given in person, was answered by
a reply equally formal.[] they sought to enact that "all writs and
processes, issuing out of the supreme or circuit courts shall be in the
name of the president of the united states." although the attempt
failed, owing to opposition in the house, the idea was adopted by the
supreme court itself in its first term, that of february , when it
"ordered, that (unless, and until, it shall be otherwise provided by
law) all process of this court shall be in the name of 'the president of
the united states,'"[] and it has never been otherwise provided by
law. meantime, on october , , president washington had, at the
request of a joint committee of "both houses of congress," issued the
first thanksgiving proclamation.[]
the "revolution of " was, in the opinion of its principal author, a
revolution against monarchical tendencies, and making a virtue of the
fact that he was a bad public speaker, jefferson, in a symbolic gesture,
substituted the written message for the presidential address. but the
claims of the presidential office to power jefferson in no wise
abated,[] although marshall had predicted that he would;[] to the
contrary he in some respects enlarged upon them. after his day, however,
the office passed into temporary eclipse behind its own creature, the
cabinet,[] an ignominy from which andrew jackson rescued it. as "the
people's choice," as all by himself "one of the three equal
departments of government,"[] as the leader of his party, as the
embodiment of the unity of the country,[] jackson stamped upon the
presidency the outstanding features of its final character, thereby
reviving, in the opinion of henry jones ford, "the oldest political
institution of the race, the elective kingship."[] the modern theory
of presidential power was the contribution primarily of alexander
hamilton; the modern conception of the presidential office was the
contribution primarily of andrew jackson and his times.
[pg ]
formerly the term of four years during which the president "shall hold
office" was reckoned from march  of the alternate odd years beginning
with . this came about from the circumstance that under the act of
september , , of "the old congress," the first wednesday in march,
which was march , , was fixed as the time for commencing
proceedings under the said constitution. although as a matter of fact
washington was not inaugurated until april  of that year, by an act
approved march , , it was provided that the presidential term
should be reckoned from the fourth day of march next succeeding the date
of election. and so things stood until the adoption of the twentieth
amendment by which the terms of the president and vice president end at
noon on the th of january.[]
the prevailing sentiment of the philadelphia convention favored the
indefinite eligibility of the president. it was jefferson who raised the
objection that indefinite eligibility would in fact be for life and
degenerate into an inheritance. prior to  the idea that no president
should hold for more than two terms was generally thought to be a fixed
tradition, although some quibbles had been raised as to the meaning of
the word "term". president franklin d. roosevelt's violation of the
tradition led to the proposal by congress on march , , of an
amendment to the constitution to rescue the tradition by embodying it in
the constitutional document. the proposal became a part of the
constitution on february , , in consequence of its adoption by the
necessary thirty-sixth state, which was minnesota. see pp. ,
.[transcriber's note: page  is blank.][]
[pg ]
clause . each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature
thereof may direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of
senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the
congress; but no senator or representative, or person holding an office
of trust or profit under the united states, shall be appointed an
elector.
clause . the electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote
by ballot for two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an
inhabitant of the same state with themselves. and they shall make a list
of all the persons voted for, and of the number of votes for each; which
list they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of
government of the united states, directed to the president of the
senate. the president of the senate shall, in the presence of the senate
and house of representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes
shall then be counted. the person having the greatest number of votes
shall be the president, if such number be a majority of the whole number
of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who have such
majority, and have an equal number of votes, then the house of
representatives shall immediately chuse by ballot one of them for
president; and if no person have a majority, then from the five highest
on the list the said house shall in like manner chuse the president. but
in chusing the president, the votes shall be taken by states, the
representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of the
states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice.
in every case, after the choice of the president, the person having the
greatest number of votes of the electors shall be the vice president.
but if there should remain two or more who have equal votes, the senate
shall chuse from them by ballot the vice president.
[pg ]
clause . the congress may determine the time of chusing the electors,
and the day on which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the
same throughout the united states.
clause . no person except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the
united states, at the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall
be eligible to the office of president; neither shall any person be
eligible to that office who shall not have attained to the age of thirty
five years, and been fourteen years a resident within the united states.
clause . in case of the removal of the president from office, or of his
death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of
the said office, the same shall devolve on the vice president, and the
congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation
or inability, both of the president and vice president, declaring what
officer shall then act as president, and such officer shall act
accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a president shall be
elected.
clause . the president shall, at stated times, receive for his
services, a compensation, which shall neither be encreased nor
diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected, and
he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the
united states, or any of them.
clause . before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take
the following oath or affirmation:—"i do solemnly swear (or affirm)
that i will faithfully execute the office of president of the united
states, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend
the constitution of the united states."
maintenance of the office of president
the word "appoint" is used in clause  "as conveying the broadest power
of determination."[] this power has been used. "therefore, on
reference to contemporaneous and subsequent action under the clause, we
should expect to find, as we do, that various modes of choosing [pg ]the
electors were pursued, as, by the legislature itself on joint ballot; by
the legislature through a concurrent vote of the two houses; by vote of
the people for a general ticket; by vote of the people in districts; by
choice partly by the people voting in districts and partly by
legislature; by choice by the legislature from candidates voted for by
the people in districts; and in other ways, as, notably, by north
carolina in , and tennessee in  and . no question was raised
as to the power of the state to appoint, in any mode its legislature saw
fit to adopt, and none that a single method, applicable without
exception, must be pursued in the absence of an amendment to the
constitution. the district system was largely considered the most
equitable, and madison wrote that it was that system which was
contemplated by the framers of the constitution, although it was soon
seen that its adoption by some states might place them at a disadvantage
by a division of their strength, and that a uniform rule was
preferable."[] in the federal convention james wilson had proposed
that the electors be "taken by lot from the national legislature," but
the suggestion failed to come to a vote.[]
dealing with the question of the constitutional status of the electors,
the court said in : "the sole function of the presidential electors
is to cast, certify and transmit the vote of the state for president and
vice president of the nation. although the electors are appointed and
act under and pursuant to the constitution of the united states, they
are no more officers or agents of the united states than are the members
of the state legislatures when acting as electors of federal senators,
or the people of the states when acting as electors of representatives
in congress. *** in accord with the provisions of the constitution,
congress has determined the time as of which the number of electors
shall be ascertained, and the days on which they shall be appointed and
shall meet and vote in the states, and on which their votes shall be
counted in congress; has provided for the filling by each state, in such
manner as its legislature may prescribe, of vacancies in its college of
electors; and has regulated the manner of certifying and transmitting
their votes to the seat of the national government, and the course of
proceeding in their opening and counting them."[] the truth of the
matter is that the electors are not "officers" at all, by the usual
tests of office.[] they have neither tenure nor salary, and having
performed their single function they cease to exist as electors. this
function is, moreover, "a federal function,"[] their capacity to
perform which results from no power which was originally resident in the
states, but springs directly from the constitution [pg ]of the united
states.[] in the face, therefore, of the proposition that electors are
state officers, the court has upheld the power of congress to protect
the right of all citizens who are entitled to vote to lend aid and
support in any legal manner to the election of any legally qualified
person as a presidential elector;[] and more recently its power to
protect the choice of electors from fraud or corruption.[] "'if this
government,' said the court, 'is anything more than a mere aggregation
of delegated agents of other states and governments, each of which is
superior to the general government, it must have the power to protect
the elections on which its existence depends from violence and
corruption. if it has not this power it is left helpless before the two
great natural and historical enemies of all republics, open violence and
insidious corruption.'"[] the conception of electors as state officers
is still, nevertheless, of some importance, as was shown in the recent
case of ray v. blair,[] which is dealt with in connection with
amendment xii.[]
clause  of this section, while requiring that the electors each vote
for two persons, did not require them to distinguish their choices for
president and vice president, the assumption being that the vice
president would be the runner-up of the successful candidate for
president. as a result of this arrangement the election of  produced
a dangerous tie between jefferson and burr, the candidates of the
republican-democrat party for president and vice president respectively.
amendment xii, which was adopted in  and replaces clause , makes a
recurrence of the  contretemps impossible. see pp. -. clause
 testifies still further to the national character of presidential
electors. clause  is today chiefly of [pg ]historical interest, all
presidents since, and including martin van buren, except his immediate
successor, william henry harrison, having been born in the united states
subsequently to the declaration of independence. the question, however,
has been frequently mooted, whether a child born abroad of american
parents is "a natural-born citizen" in the sense of this clause. the
answer depends upon whether the definition of "citizens of the united
states" in section i of amendment xiv is to be given an exclusive or
inclusive interpretation. see pp. -.
was it the thought of the constitution that a vice president, in
succeeding to "the powers and duties" of the office of president, should
succeed also to the title? in answering this question in the affirmative
in , john tyler established a precedent which has been followed ever
since; but inasmuch as all successions have taken place in consequence
of the death in office of a president, the precedent would not
necessarily hold in the case of a succession on account of the temporary
inability of the incumbent president. nor has any procedure been
established for determining the question of inability, with the result
that in the two instances of disability which have occurred, those of
presidents garfield and wilson, the former continued in office until his
death and the other, after his partial recovery, till the end of his
term.
the act of 
in pursuance of its power to provide for the disappearance, whether
permanently or temporarily, from the scene of both president and vice
president, congress has passed three presidential succession acts. a law
enacted march , [] provided for the succession first of the
president pro tempore of the senate and then of the speaker; but in
the event that both of these offices were vacant, then the secretary of
state was to inform the executive of each state of the fact and at the
same time give public notice that electors will be appointed in each
state to elect a president and vice president, unless the regular time
of such election was so near at hand as to render the step unnecessary.
it is unlikely that congress ever passed a more ill-considered law. as
madison pointed out at the time, it violated the principle of the
separation of powers and flouted the probability that neither the
president pro tempore nor the speaker is an "officer" in the sense of
this paragraph of the constitution. it thus contemplated the possibility
of there being nobody to exercise the powers of the president for an
indefinite period, and at the same time set at naught, by the provision
made for an interim presidential election, the synchrony evidently
contemplated by the constitution in the choice of a president with a new
house of representatives and a new one-third of the senate. yet this
inadequate enactment remained on [pg ]the statute book for nearly one
hundred years, becoming all the time more and more unworkable from
obsolescence. one provision of it, moreover, still survives, that which
ordains that the only evidence of refusal to accept, or of resignation
from the office of president or vice president, shall be an instrument
in writing declaring the same and subscribed by the person refusing to
accept, or resigning, as the case may be, and delivered into the office
of the secretary of state.[]
the acts of  and 
by the presidential succession act of january , ,[] recently
repealed, congress provided that, in case of the disqualification of
both president and vice president, the secretary of state should act as
president provided he possessed the qualifications laid down in clause
, above; if not, then the secretary of the treasury, etc. the act
apparently assumed that while a member of the cabinet acted as president
he would retain his cabinet post. the succession act now in force was
urged by president truman, who argued that it was "undemocratic" for a
vice president who had succeeded to the presidency to be able to appoint
his own successor. by the act of july , [] the speaker of the
house and the president pro tempore of the senate are put ahead of the
members of the cabinet in the order of succession, but when either
succeeds he must resign both his post and his seat in congress; and a
member of the cabinet must in the like situation resign his cabinet
post. the new act also implements amendment xx by providing for
vacancies due to failure to qualify of both a newly elected president
and vice president.
clause  may be advantageously considered in the light of what has been
determined as to the application of the parallel provision regarding
judicial salaries. see pp. -.[]
what is the time relationship between a president's assumption of office
and his taking the oath? apparently the former comes first. this answer
seems to be required by the language of the clause itself, [pg ]and is
further supported by the fact that, while the act of march , 
assumes that washington became president march , , he did not take
the oath till april th. also, in the parallel case of the coronation
oath of the british monarch, its taking has been at times postponed for
years after the heir's succession.
effect of the oath
does the oath add anything to the president's powers? again to judge
from its english-british antecedent, its informing purpose is to
restrain rather than to aggrandize power. jackson, it is true, appealed
to the oath in his bank veto message of july , ; and lincoln did
so in his message of july , ; as did johnson's counsel in his
impeachment trial; but in each of these instances the presidential
exercise of power involved rested primarily on other grounds.
section . clause . the president shall be commander in chief
of the army and navy of the united states, and of the militia of the
several states, when called into the actual service of the united
states; he may require the opinion, in writing, of the principal officer
in each of the executive departments, upon any subject relating to the
duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to grant
reprieves and pardons for offences against the united states, except in
cases of impeachment.
the commander in chiefship
the purely military aspects of the commander in chiefship were those
which were originally stressed. hamilton said the office "would amount
to nothing more than the supreme command and direction of the military
and naval forces, as first general and admiral of the confederacy."[]
story wrote in his commentaries: "the propriety of admitting the
president to be commander in chief, so far as to give orders, and have a
general superintendency, was admitted. but it was urged, that it would
be dangerous to let him command in person, without any restraint, as he
might make a bad use of it. the consent of both houses of congress
ought, therefore, to be required, before he should take the actual
command. the answer then given was, that though the president might,
there was no necessity that he should, take the command in person; and
there was no probability that he would do so, except in extraordinary
emergencies, and when he was possessed of superior military
talents."[] in  chief justice taney, for the court, said: "his
[the president's] duty and his power are [pg ]purely military. as commander
in chief, he is authorized to direct the movements of the naval and
military forces placed by law at his command, and to employ them in the
manner he may deem most effectual to harass and conquer and subdue the
enemy. he may invade the hostile country, and subject it to the
sovereignty and authority of the united states. but his conquests do not
enlarge the boundaries of this union, nor extend the operation of our
institutions and laws beyond the limits before assigned to them by the
legislative power. *** but in the distribution of political power
between the great departments of government, there is such a wide
difference between the power conferred on the president of the united
states, and the authority and sovereignty which belong to the english
crown, that it would be altogether unsafe to reason from any supposed
resemblance between them, either as regards conquest in war, or any
other subject where the rights and powers of the executive arm of the
government are brought into question."[] even after the civil war a
powerful minority of the court described the role of president as
commander in chief simply as "the command of the forces and the conduct
of campaigns."[]
the basis for a broader conception was laid in certain early acts of
congress authorizing the president to employ military force in the
execution of the laws.[] in his famous message to congress of july ,
,[] lincoln advanced the claim that the "war power" was his for
the purpose of suppressing rebellion; and in the prize cases[] of
, a sharply divided court sustained this theory. the immediate issue
of the case was the validity of the blockade which the president,
following the attack on fort sumter, had proclaimed of the southern
ports.[] the argument was advanced that a blockade to be valid must be
an incident of a "public war" validly declared, and that only congress
could, by virtue of its power "to declare war," constitutionally impart
to a military situation this character and scope. speaking for the
majority of the court, justice grier answered: "if a war be made by
invasion of a foreign nation, the president is not only authorized but
bound to resist force by force. he does not initiate the war, but is
bound to accept the challenge without waiting for any special
legislative authority. and whether the hostile party be a foreign
invader, or states organized in rebellion, it is none the less a war,
although the declaration of it be 'unilateral.' lord stowell (
dodson, ) observes, 'it is not the less a war on that account, for
war may exist without a declaration on either side. it is so laid down
by the best writers on the law of nations. a declaration of war by one
country only is [pg ]not a mere challenge to be accepted or refused at
pleasure by the other.' the battles of palo alto and resaca de la palma
had been fought before the passage of the act of congress of may ,
, which recognized 'a state of war as existing by the act of the
republic of mexico.' this act not only provided for the future
prosecution of the war, but was itself a vindication and ratification of
the act of the president in accepting the challenge without a previous
formal declaration of war by congress. this greatest of civil wars was
not gradually developed by popular commotion, tumultuous assemblies, or
local unorganized insurrections. however long may have been its previous
conception, it nevertheless sprung forth suddenly from the parent brain,
a minerva in the full panoply of war. the president was bound to meet
it in the shape it presented itself, without waiting for congress to
baptize it with a name; and no name given to it by him or them could
change the fact. *** whether the president in fulfilling his duties,
as commander in chief, in suppressing an insurrection, has met with such
armed hostile resistance, and a civil war of such alarming proportions
as will compel him to accord to them the character of belligerents, is a
question to be decided by him, and this court must be governed by the
decisions and acts of the political department of the government to
which this power was entrusted. 'he must determine what degree of force
the crisis demands.' the proclamation of blockade is itself official and
conclusive evidence to the court that a state of war existed which
demanded and authorized a recourse to such a measure, under the
circumstances peculiar to the case."[]
in brief, the powers claimable for the president under the commander in
chief clause at a time of wide-spread insurrection were equated with his
powers under the clause at a time when the united states is engaged in a
formally declared foreign war; and—impliedly—vice versa. and since
lincoln performed various acts especially in the early months of the
civil war which, like increasing the army and navy, admittedly fell
within the constitutional province of congress, it seems to have been
assumed during world war i and world war ii that the commander in
chiefship carries with it the power to exercise like powers practically
at discretion; and not merely in wartime but even at a time when war
becomes a strong possibility. nor was any attention given the fact that
lincoln had asked congress to ratify and confirm his acts, which
congress promptly did,[] with the [pg ]exception of his suspension of the
habeas corpus privilege which was regarded by many as attributable to
the president in the situation then existing, by virtue of his duty to
take care that the laws be faithfully executed.[] nor is this the only
respect in which war or the approach of war operates to enlarge the
scope of power which is claimable by the president as commander in chief
in wartime.[] for at such time the maxim that congress may not
delegate its powers is, by the doctrine of the curtiss-wright case,[]
in a state of suspended animation.[]
in his message of september ,  to congress, in which he demanded
that congress forthwith repeal certain provisions of the emergency price
control act of the previous january th,[] the late president
roosevelt formulated his conception of his powers as "commander in chief
in wartime" as follows:
"i ask the congress to take this action by the first of october.
inaction on your part by that date will leave me with an inescapable
responsibility to the people of this country to see to it that the war
effort is no longer imperiled by threat of economic chaos.
"in the event that the congress should fail to act, and act adequately,
i shall accept the responsibility, and i will act.
"at the same time that farm prices are stabilized, wages can and will be
stabilized also. this i will do.
"the president has the powers, under the constitution and under
congressional acts, to take measures necessary to avert a disaster which
would interfere with the winning of the war.
"i have given the most thoughtful consideration to meeting this issue
without further reference to the congress. i have determined, however,
on this vital matter to consult with the congress. ***
"the american people can be sure that i will use my powers with a full
sense of my responsibility to the constitution and to my country. the
american people can also be sure that i shall not hesitate to use every
power vested in me to accomplish the defeat of our enemies in any part
of the world where our own safety demands such defeat.
[pg ]"when the war is won, the powers under which i act automatically revert
to the people—to whom they belong."[]
while congressional compliance with the president's demand rendered
unnecessary an effort on his part to amend the price control act, there
were other matters as to which he repeatedly took action within the
normal field of congressional powers, not only during the war, but in
some instances prior to it. thus in exercising both the powers which he
claimed as commander in chief and those which congress conferred upon
him to meet the emergency, mr. roosevelt employed new emergency
agencies, created by himself and responsible directly to him, rather
than the established departments or existing independent regulatory
agencies. oldest of all these presidential agencies was the office for
emergency management (oem), which was created by an executive order
dated may , . others were the board of economic warfare (bew), the
national housing agency (nha), the national war labor board (nwlb), or
more shortly (wlb), the office of censorship (oc), the office of
civilian defense (ocd), the office of defense transportation (odt), the
office of facts and figures (off), presently absorbed into the office of
war information (owi), the war production board (wpb), which superseded
the earlier office of production management (opm), the war manpower
commission (wmc), etc. earlier there had been the office of price
administration and civilian supply (opacs), but was replaced under the
emergency price control act of january , , by opa. later owi was
created by executive order, as was also the office of economic
stabilization (oes). the office of war mobilization and reconversion
(owmr), one of the last of the war agencies to appear, was established
by the war mobilization and reconversion act of october , .[]
[pg ]
the question of the legal status of the presidential agencies was dealt
with judicially but once. this was in the decision, in june , of the
united states court of appeals of the district of columbia in a case
styled employers group of motor freight carriers v. national war labor
board,[] which was a suit to annul and enjoin a "directive order" of
the war labor board. the court refused the injunction on the ground that
at the time when the directive was issued any action of the board was
"informatory," "at most advisory." in support of this view the court
quoted approvingly a statement by the chairman of the board itself:
"these orders are in reality mere declarations of the equities of each
industrial dispute, as determined by a tripartite body in which
industry, labor, and the public share equal responsibility; and the
appeal of the board is to the moral obligation of employers and workers
to abide by the nonstrike, no-lock-out agreement and *** to carry out
the directives of the tribunal created under that agreement by the
commander in chief." nor, the court continued, had the later war labor
disputes act vested war labor board's orders with any greater authority,
with the result that they were still judicially unenforceable and
unreviewable. following this theory, war labor board was not an office
wielding power, but a purely advisory body, such as presidents have
frequently created in the past without the aid or consent of congress.
congress itself, nevertheless, both in its appropriation acts and in
other legislation, treated the presidential agencies as in all respects
offices.[]
on february ,  the president issued an executive order the
essential paragraphs of which read as follows:
"whereas the successful prosecution of the war requires every possible
protection against espionage and against sabotage to national-defense
material, national-defense premises, and national-defense utilities
"now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me as
president of the united states, and commander in chief of the army and
navy, i hereby authorize and direct the secretary of war, and the
military commanders whom he may from time to time designate, whenever he
or any designated commander deems such action necessary or desirable, to
prescribe military areas in such places and of such extent as he or the
appropriate military commander may determine, from which any or all
persons may be excluded, and with respect to which, the right of any
person to enter, remain in, or leave shall be subject to whatever
restrictions the secretary of war or the appropriate military commander
may impose in his discretion. the secretary [pg ]of war is hereby authorized
to provide for residents of any such area who are excluded therefrom,
such transportation, food, shelter, and other accommodations as may be
necessary, in the judgment of the secretary of war or the said military
commander, and until other arrangements are made, to accomplish the
purpose of this order. ***
"i hereby further authorize and direct all executive departments,
independent establishments and other federal agencies, to assist the
secretary of war or the said military commanders in carrying out this
executive order, including the furnishing of medical aid,
hospitalization, food, clothing, transportation, use of land, shelter,
and other supplies, equipment, utilities, facilities and services."[]
in pursuance of this order more than , japanese residents of
western states, of whom nearly two out of every three were natural-born
citizens of the united states, were eventually removed from their farms
and homes and herded, first in temporary camps, later in ten so-called
"relocation centers," situated in the desert country of california,
arizona, idaho, utah, colorado, and wyoming and in the delta areas of
arkansas.
the act of march , 
it was apparently the original intention of the administration to rest
its measures concerning this matter on the general principle of military
necessity and the power of the commander in chief in wartime. but before
any action of importance was taken under executive order , congress
ratified and adopted it by the act of march , ,[] by which it
was made a misdemeanor to knowingly enter, remain in, or leave
prescribed military areas contrary to the orders of the secretary of war
or of the commanding officer of the area. the cases which subsequently
arose in consequence of the order were decided under the order plus the
act. the question at issue, said chief justice stone for the court, "is
not one of congressional power to delegate to the president the
promulgation of the executive order, but whether, acting in cooperation,
congress and the executive have constitutional *** [power] to impose
the curfew restriction here complained of."[] this question was
answered in the affirmative, as was the similar question later raised by
an exclusion order.[]
the most important segment of the home front regulated by what were in
effect presidential edicts was the field of labor relations. exactly six
months before pearl harbor, on june , , mr. roosevelt, citing his
proclamation thirteen days earlier of an unlimited [pg ]national emergency,
issued an executive order seizing the north american aviation plant at
inglewood, california, where, on account of a strike, production was at
a standstill. attorney general jackson justified the seizure as growing
out of the "'duty constitutionally and inherently rested upon the
president to exert his civil and military as well as his moral authority
to keep the defense efforts of the united states a going concern,'" as
well as "to obtain supplies for which congress has appropriated the
money, and which it has directed the president to obtain."[] other
seizures followed, and on january , , mr. roosevelt, by executive
order , created the national war labor board. "whereas," the order
read in part, "by reason of the state of war declared to exist by joint
resolutions of congress, ***, the national interest demands that there
shall be no interruption of any work which contributes to the effective
prosecution of the war; and whereas as a result of a conference of
representatives of labor and industry which met at the call of the
president on december , , it has been agreed that for the duration
of the war there shall be no strikes or lockouts, and that all labor
disputes shall be settled by peaceful means, and that a national war
labor board be established for a peaceful adjustment of such disputes.
now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the
constitution and the statutes of the united states, it is hereby
ordered: . there is hereby created in the office for emergency
management a national war labor board, ***"[] in this field, too,
congress intervened by means of the war labor disputes act of june ,
,[] which however still left ample basis for presidential activity
of a legislative character.[]
[pg ]
to implement his directives as commander in chief in wartime, and
especially those which he issued in governing labor relations, mr.
roosevelt often resorted to "sanctions," which may be described as
penalties lacking statutory authorization. ultimately, the president
sought, by executive order  of august , , to put sanctions in
this field on a systematic basis. this order read:
"(a) to other departments or agencies of the government directing the
taking of appropriate action relating to withholding or withdrawing from
a noncomplying employer any priorities, benefits or privileges extended,
or contracts entered into, by executive action of the government, until
the national war labor board has reported that compliance has been
effectuated;
"(b) to any government agency operating a plant, mine or facility,
possession of which has been taken by the president under section  of
the war labor disputes act, directing such agency to apply to the
national war labor board, under section  of said act, for an order
withholding or withdrawing from a noncomplying labor union any benefits,
privileges or rights accruing to it under the terms of conditions of
employment in effect (whether by agreement between the parties or by
order of the national war labor board, or both) when possession was
taken, until such time as the noncomplying labor union has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the national war labor board its willingness and
capacity to comply; but, when the check-off is denied, dues received
from the check-off shall be held in escrow for the benefit of the union
to be delivered to it upon compliance by it.
"(c) to the war manpower commission, in the case of noncomplying
individuals, directing the entry of appropriate orders relating to the
modification or cancellation of draft deferments or employment
privileges, or both.
"franklin d. roosevelt.
"the white house, aug. , ."[]
sanctions were also occasionally employed by statutory agencies, as by
opa, to supplement the penal provisions of the emergency price control
act of january , ;[] and in the case of steuart and bro., inc.
v. bowles,[] the supreme court had the opportunity to attempt to
regularize this type of executive emergency legislation. here a retail
dealer in fuel oil in the district of columbia was charged with having
[pg ]violated a rationing order of opa by obtaining large quantities of oil
from its supplier without surrendering ration coupons, by delivering
many thousands of gallons of fuel oil without requiring ration coupons,
and so on, and was prohibited by the agency from receiving oil for
resale or transfer for the ensuing year. the offender conceded the
validity of the rationing order in support of which the suspension order
was issued, but challenged the validity of the latter as imposing a
penalty that congress has not enacted, and asked the district court to
enjoin it. the court refused to do so and was sustained by the supreme
court in its position. said justice douglas, speaking for the court:
"without rationing, the fuel tanks of a few would be full; the fuel
tanks of many would be empty. some localities would have plenty;
communities less favorably situated would suffer. allocation or
rationing is designed to eliminate such inequalities and to treat all
alike who are similarly situated. *** but middlemen—wholesalers and
retailers—bent on defying the rationing system could raise havoc with
it. *** these middlemen are the chief if not the only conduits between
the source of limited supplies and the consumers. from the viewpoint of
a rationing system a middleman who distributes the product in violation
and disregard of the prescribed quotas is an inefficient and wasteful
conduct. *** certainly we could not say that the president would lack
the power under this act to take away from a wasteful factory and route
to an efficient one a previous supply of material needed for the
manufacture of articles of war. *** from the point of view of the
factory owner from whom the materials were diverted the action would be
harsh. *** but in times of war the national interest cannot wait on
individual claims to preference. *** yet if the president has the
power to channel raw materials into the most efficient industrial units
and thus save scarce materials from wastage it is difficult to see why
the same principle is not applicable to the distribution of fuel
oil."[] sanctions were, therefore, constitutional when the
deprivations they wrought were a reasonably implied amplification of the
substantive power which they supported and were directly conservative of
the interests which this power was created to protect and advance. it is
certain, however, that sanctions not uncommonly exceeded this
pattern.[]
two theories of martial law are reflected in decisions of the supreme
court. by one, which stems from the petition of right, , the common
law knows no such thing as martial law;[] at any rate martial law is
not established by official authority of any sort, but arises from the
nature of things, being the law of paramount necessity, [pg ]of which
necessity the civil courts are the final judges.[] by the other
theory, martial law can be validly and constitutionally established by
supreme political authority in wartime. the latter theory is recognized
by the court in luther v. borden,[] where it was held that the rhode
island legislature had been within its rights in  in resorting to
the rights and usages of war in combating insurrection in that state.
the decision in the prize cases,[] while not dealing directly with the
subject of martial law, gave national scope to the same general
principle in . the civil war being safely over, however, a sharply
divided court, in the elaborately argued milligan case,[] reverting to
the older doctrine, pronounced void president lincoln's action,
following his suspension of the writ of habeas corpus in september,
, in ordering the trial by military commission of persons held in
custody as "spies" and "abettors of the enemy." the salient passage of
the court's opinion bearing on this point is the following: "if, in
foreign invasion or civil war, the courts are actually closed, and it is
impossible to administer criminal justice according to law, then, on
the theatre of active military operations, where war really prevails,
there is a necessity to furnish a substitute for the civil authority,
thus overthrown, to preserve the safety of the army and society; and as
no power is left but the military, it is allowed to govern by martial
rule until the laws can have their free course. as necessity creates the
rule, so it limits its duration; for, if this government is continued
after the courts are reinstated, it is a gross usurpation of power.
martial rule can never exist where the courts are open, and in proper
and unobstructed exercise of their jurisdiction. it is also confined to
the locality of actual war."[] four justices, speaking by chief
justice chase, while holding milligan's trial to have been void because
violative of the act of march ,  governing the custody and trial of
persons who had been deprived of the habeas corpus privilege, declared
their belief that congress could have authorized milligan's trial. said
the chief justice: "congress has the power not only to raise and support
and govern armies but to declare war. it has, therefore, the power to
provide by law for carrying on war. this power necessarily extends to
all legislation essential to the prosecution of war with vigor and
success, except such as interferes with the command of the forces and
the conduct of campaigns. that power and duty belong to the president as
commander in chief. both these powers are derived from the constitution,
but neither is defined by that instrument. their extent must be
determined by their nature, and by the principles of our institutions.
*** we by no means assert that congress can establish and apply the
laws of war where no war has been declared or exists. where peace exists
the laws of peace must prevail. what we do maintain is, that when the
nation is involved in war, and some portions of the country are invaded,
and all are exposed to invasion, [pg ]it is within the power of congress to
determine in what states or districts such great and imminent public
danger exists as justifies the authorization of military tribunals for
the trial of crimes and offences against the discipline or security of
the army or against the public safety."[] in short, only congress can
authorize the substitution of military tribunals for civil tribunals for
the trial of offenses; and congress can do so only in wartime.
the question of the constitutional status of martial law was raised in
world war ii by the proclamation of governor poindexter of hawaii, on
december , , suspending the writ of habeas corpus and conferring
on the local commanding general of the army all his own powers as
governor and also "all of the powers normally exercised by the judicial
officers *** of this territory *** during the present emergency and
until the danger of invasion is removed." two days later the governor's
action was approved by president roosevelt. the regime which the
proclamation set up continued with certain abatements until october ,
by section  of the organic act of april , ,[] the territorial
governor is authorized "in case of rebellion or invasion, or imminent
danger thereof, when the public safety requires it, [to] suspend the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, or place the territory, or any
part thereof, under martial law until communication can be had with the
president and his decision thereon made known." by section  of the
organic act, "the constitution, ***, shall have the same force and
effect within the said territory as elsewhere in the united states." in
a brace of cases which reached it in february  but which it
contrived to postpone deciding till february ,[] the court,
speaking by justice black, held that the term "martial law" as employed
in the organic act, "while intended to authorize the military to act
vigorously for the maintenance of an orderly civil government and for
the defense of the islands against actual or threatened rebellion or
invasion, was not intended to authorize the supplanting of [pg ]courts by
military tribunals."[] the court relied on the majority opinion in ex
parte milligan. chief justice stone concurred in the result. "i assume
also," said he, "that there could be circumstances in which the public
safety requires, and the constitution permits, substitution of trials by
military tribunals for trials in the civil courts";[] but added that
the military authorities themselves had failed to show justifying facts
in this instance. justice burton, speaking for himself and justice
frankfurter, dissented. he stressed the importance of hawaii as a
military outpost and its constant exposure to the danger of fresh
invasion. he warned that "courts must guard themselves with special care
against judging past military action too closely by the inapplicable
standards of judicial, or even military, hindsight."[]
the saboteurs were eight youths, seven germans and one an american, who,
following a course of training in sabotage in berlin, were brought to
this country in june  aboard two german submarines and put ashore,
one group on the florida coast, the other on long island, with the idea
that they would proceed forthwith to practice their art on american
factories, military equipment, and installations. making their way
inland, the saboteurs were soon picked up by the fbi, some in new york,
others in chicago, and turned over to the provost marshal of the
district of columbia. on july , the president appointed a military
commission to try them for violation of the laws of war, to wit: for not
wearing fixed emblems to indicate their combatant status. in the midst
of the trial, the accused petitioned the supreme court and the united
states district court for the district of columbia for leave to bring
habeas corpus proceedings. their argument embraced the contentions:
() that the offense charged against them was not known to the laws of
the united states; () that it was not one arising in the land and naval
forces; and () that the tribunal trying them had not been constituted
in accordance with the requirements of the articles of war.
the first argument the court met as follows: the act of congress in
providing for the trial before military tribunals of offenses against
the law of war is sufficiently definite, although congress has not
undertaken to codify or mark the precise boundaries of the law of war,
or to enumerate or define by statute all the acts which that law
condemns. "*** those who during time of war pass surreptitiously from
enemy territory into *** [that of the united states], discarding
[pg ]their uniforms upon entry, for the commission of hostile acts involving
destruction of life or property, have the status of unlawful combatants
punishable as such by military commission."[] the second argument it
disposed of by showing that petitioners' case was of a kind that was
never deemed to be within the terms of amendments v and vi, citing in
confirmation of this position the trial of major andre.[] the third
contention the court overruled by declining to draw the line between the
powers of congress and the president in the premises,[] thereby, in
effect, attributing to the latter the right to amend the articles of war
in a case of the kind before the court ad libitum.
the decision might well have rested on the ground that the constitution
is without restrictive force in wartime in a situation of this sort. the
saboteurs were invaders; their penetration of the boundary of the
country, projected from units of a hostile fleet, was essentially a
military operation, their capture was a continuation of that operation.
punishment of the saboteurs was therefore within the president's purely
martial powers as commander in chief. moreover, seven of the petitioners
were enemy aliens, and so, strictly speaking, without constitutional
status. even had they been civilians properly domiciled in the united
states at the outbreak of the war they would have been subject under the
statutes to restraint and other disciplinary action by the president
without appeal to the courts.[]
as a matter of fact, in general yamashita's case,[] which was brought
after the termination of hostilities for alleged "war crimes," the court
abandoned its restrictive conception altogether. in the words of justice
rutledge's dissenting opinion in this case: "the difference between the
court's view of this proceeding and my own comes down in the end to the
view, on the one hand, that there is no law restrictive upon these
proceedings other than whatever rules and regulations may be prescribed
for their government by the executive authority or the military and, on
the other hand, that the provisions of the articles of war, of the
geneva convention and the fifth amendment apply."[] and the adherence
of the united states to the charter of london in august , under
which the nazi leaders were brought to trial, is explicable by the same
theory. these individuals were charged with the crime of instigating
aggressive war, which at the time of its commission was not a crime
either under international law or under the laws of the prosecuting
governments. it must be presumed that the president is not in his
capacity as supreme [pg ]commander bound by the prohibition in the
constitution of ex post facto laws; nor does international law forbid
ex post facto laws.[]
while the president customarily delegates supreme command of the forces
in active service, there is no constitutional reason why he should do
so; and he has been known to resolve personally important questions of
military policy. lincoln early in  issued orders for a general
advance in the hope of stimulating mcclellan to action; wilson in 
settled the question of an independent american command on the western
front; truman in  ordered that the bomb be dropped on hiroshima and
nagasaki. as against an enemy in the field the president possesses all
the powers which are accorded by international law to any supreme
commander. "he may invade the hostile country, and subject it to the
sovereignty and authority of the united states."[] in the absence of
attempts by congress to limit his power, he may establish and prescribe
the jurisdiction and procedure of military commissions, and of tribunals
in the nature of such commissions, in territory occupied by armed forces
of the united states, and his authority to do this sometimes survives
cessation of hostilities.[] he may employ secret agents to enter the
enemy's lines and obtain information as to its strength, resources, and
movements.[] he may, at least with the assent of congress, authorize
intercourse with the enemy.[] he may also requisition property and
compel services from american citizens and friendly aliens who are
situated within the theatre of military operations when necessity
requires, thereby incurring for the united states the obligation to
render "just compensation."[] by the same warrant he may bring
hostilities to a conclusion by arranging an armistice, stipulating
conditions which may determine to a great extent the ensuing peace.[]
he may not, however, effect a permanent acquisition of territory;[]
though he may govern recently acquired territory until congress sets up
a more permanent regime.[] he is the ultimate tribunal for the
enforcement of the rules and regulations which congress adopts for the
government of the forces, and which are enforced through
courts-martial.[] indeed, until , courts-martial were convened
solely on his authority as commander in chief.[] such rules and
regulations are, moreover, it would seem, subject in wartime to his
amendment at discretion.[] similarly, the power of congress to "make
rules for the government and regulation of the law and naval forces"
(art. i, §, cl. ) did not prevent president lincoln from
promulgating in april,  a code of rules to govern the conduct in the
field of the armies of the united states which was prepared at his
instance by a commission [pg ]headed by francis lieber and which later
became the basis of all similar codifications both here and abroad.[]
one important power he lacks, that of choosing his subordinates, whose
grades and qualifications are determined by congress and whose
appointment is ordinarily made by and with the advice and consent of the
senate, though undoubtedly congress could if it wished vest their
appointment in "the president alone."[] also, the president's power
to dismiss an officer from the service, once unlimited, is today
confined by statute in time of peace to dismissal "in pursuance of the
sentence of a general court-martial or in mitigation thereof."[] but
the provision is not regarded by the court as preventing the president
from displacing an officer of the army or navy by appointing with the
advice and consent of the senate another person in his place.[] the
president's power of dismissal in time of war congress has never
attempted to limit.
is the commander in chiefship a military or civilian office in the
contemplation of the constitution? unquestionably the latter. a recent
opinion by a new york surrogate deals adequately, though not
authoritatively, with the subject: "the president receives his
compensation for his services, rendered as chief executive of the
nation, not for the individual parts of his duties. no part of his
compensation is paid from sums appropriated for the military or naval
forces; [pg ]and it is equally clear under the constitution that the
president's duties as commander in chief represents only a part of
duties ex officio as chief executive [article ii, sections  and  of
the constitution] and that the latter's office is a civil office.
[article ii, section  of the constitution; vol. , cong. rec.
-; beard, the republic () pp. -.] the president does
not enlist in, and he is not inducted or drafted into the armed forces.
nor, is he subject to court-martial or other military discipline. on the
contrary, article ii, section  of the constitution provides that 'the
president, [vice president] and all civil officers of the united states
shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of
treason, bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors.' *** the last
two war presidents, president wilson and president roosevelt, both
clearly recognized the civilian nature of the president's position as
commander in chief. president roosevelt, in his navy day campaign speech
at shibe park, philadelphia, on october , , pronounced this
principle as follows:—'it was due to no accident and no oversight that
the framers of our constitution put the command of our armed forces
under civilian authority. it is the duty of the commander in chief to
appoint the secretaries of war and navy and the chiefs of staff.' it is
also to be noted that the secretary of war, who is the regularly
constituted organ of the president for the administration of the
military establishment of the nation, has been held by the supreme court
of the united states to be merely a civilian officer, not in military
service. (united states v. burns,  u.s.  ()). on the general
principle of civilian supremacy over the military, by virtue of the
constitution, it has recently been said: 'the supremacy of the civil
over the military is one of our great heritages.' duncan v.
kahanamoku,  u.s.  (),  l.w.  at page ."[]
presidential advisers
the above provisions are the meager residue from a persistent effort in
the federal convention to impose a council on the president.[] the
idea ultimately failed, partly because of the diversity of ideas
concerning the council's make-up. one member wished it to consist of
"members of the two houses," another wished it to comprise two
representatives from each of three sections, "with a rotation and
duration of office similar to those of the senate." the proposal which
had the strongest backing was that it should consist of the heads of
departments and the chief justice of the supreme court, who should
preside [pg ]when the president was absent. of this proposal the only part
to survive was the above cited provision. the consultative relation here
contemplated is an entirely one-sided affair, is to be conducted with
each principal officer separately and in writing, and to relate only to
the duties of their respective offices.[] the cabinet, as we know
it today, that is to say, the cabinet meeting, was brought about
solely on the initiative of the first president, and may be dispensed
with on presidential initiative at any time, being totally unknown to
the constitution. several presidents have in fact reduced the cabinet
meeting to little more than a ceremony with social trimmings.[]
pardons and reprieves
in the first case to be decided concerning the pardoning power, chief
justice marshall, speaking for the court, said: "as this power had been
exercised from time immemorial by the executive of that nation whose
language is our language, and to whose judicial institutions ours bear a
close resemblance; we adopt their principles respecting the operation
and effect of a pardon, and look into their books for the rules
prescribing the manner in which it is to be used by the person who would
avail himself of it. a pardon is an act of grace, proceeding from the
power entrusted with the execution of the laws, which exempts the
individual, on whom it is bestowed, from the punishment the law inflicts
for a crime he has committed. it is the private, though official act of
the executive magistrate, delivered to the individual for whose benefit
it is intended, and not communicated officially to the court. *** a
pardon is a deed, to the validity of which delivery is essential, and
delivery is not complete without acceptance. it may then be rejected by
the person to whom it is tendered; and if it be rejected, we have
discovered no power in a court to force it on him." marshall thereupon
proceeded to lay down the doctrine, that "a pardon is a deed to the
validity of which delivery is essential, and delivery is not complete
without acceptance"; and that to be noticed judicially this deed must be
pleaded, like any private instrument.[]
[pg ]
qualification of the above theory
in the case of burdick v. united states,[] decided in ,
marshall's doctrine was put to a test that seems to have overtaxed it,
perhaps fatally. burdick, having declined to testify before a federal
grand jury on the ground that his testimony would tend to incriminate
him, was proffered by president wilson "a full and unconditional pardon
for all offenses against the united states" which he might have
committed or participated in in connection with the matter he had been
questioned about. burdick, nevertheless, refused to accept the pardon
and persisted in his contumacy with the unanimous support of the supreme
court. "the grace of a pardon," remarked justice mckenna sententiously,
"may be only a pretense *** involving consequences of even greater
disgrace than those from which it purports to relieve. circumstances may
be made to bring innocence under the penalties of the law. if so
brought, escape by confession of guilt implied in the acceptance of a
pardon may be rejected, ***"[] nor did the court give any
attention to the fact that the president had accompanied his proffer to
burdick with a proclamation, although a similar procedure had been held
to bring president johnson's amnesties to the court's notice.[] in
, however, in sustaining the right of the president to commute a
sentence of death to one of life imprisonment, against the will of the
prisoner, the court abandoned this view. "a pardon in our days," it
said, "is not a private act of grace from an individual happening to
possess power. it is a part of the constitutional scheme. when granted
it is the determination of the ultimate authority that the public
welfare will be better served by inflicting less than what the judgment
fixed."[] whether these words sound the death knell of the acceptance
doctrine is perhaps doubtful.[] they seem clearly to indicate that by
substantiating a commutation order for a deed of pardon, a president can
always have his way in such matters, provided the substituted penalty is
authorized by law and does not in common understanding exceed the
original penalty.[]
[pg ]
the power embraces all "offences against the united states," except
cases of impeachment, and includes the power to remit fines, penalties,
and forfeitures, except as to money covered into the treasury or paid an
informer;[] also the power to pardon absolutely or conditionally; and
includes the power to commute sentences, which, as seen above, is
effective without the convict's consent.[] it has been held,
moreover, in face of earlier english practice, that indefinite
suspension of sentence by a court of the united states is an invasion of
the presidential prerogative, amounting as it does to a condonation of
the offense.[] it was early assumed that the power included the power
to pardon specified classes or communities wholesale, in short, the
power to amnesty, which is usually exercised by proclamation. general
amnesties were issued by washington in , by adams in , by
madison in , by lincoln in , by johnson in , , and ,
and by the first roosevelt—to aguinaldo's followers—in .[] not,
however, till after the civil war was the point adjudicated, when it was
decided in favor of presidential prerogative.[]
in the first place, such offenses are not offenses against the states.
in the second place, they are completed offenses;[] the president
cannot pardon by anticipation, otherwise he would be invested with the
power to dispense with the laws, his claim to which was the principal
cause of james ii's forced abdication.[] lastly, the term has been
held to include criminal contempts of court. such was the holding in ex
parte grossman,[] where chief justice taft, speaking for the court,
resorted once more to english conceptions as being authoritative in
construing this clause of the constitution. said he: "the king of
england before our revolution, in the exercise of his prerogative, had
always exercised the power to pardon contempts of court, just as he did
ordinary crimes and misdemeanors and as he has done to the present day.
in the mind of a common law lawyer of the eighteenth century the word
pardon included within its scope the ending by the king's grace [pg ]of the
punishment of such derelictions, whether it was imposed by the court
without a jury or upon indictment, for both forms of trial for contempts
were had. [citing cases.] these cases also show that, long before our
constitution, a distinction had been recognized at common law between
the effect of the king's pardon to wipe out the effect of a sentence for
contempt in so far as it had been imposed to punish the contemnor for
violating the dignity of the court and the king, in the public interest,
and its inefficacy to halt or interfere with the remedial part of the
court's order necessary to secure the rights of the injured suitor.
blackstone iv, , , ; hawkins pleas of the crown, th ed.
(), vol. , . the same distinction, nowadays referred to as the
difference between civil and criminal contempts, is still maintained in
english law[]." nor was any new or special danger to be apprehended
from this view of the pardoning power. "if," says the chief justice, "we
could conjure up in our minds a president willing to paralyze courts by
pardoning all criminal contempts, why not a president ordering a general
jail delivery?" indeed, he queries further, in view of the peculiarities
of procedure in contempt cases, "may it not be fairly said that in order
to avoid possible mistake, undue prejudice or needless severity, the
chance of pardon should exist at least as much in favor of a person
convicted by a judge without a jury as in favor of one convicted in a
jury trial[]?"
the great leading case is ex parte garland[] which was decided
shortly after the civil war. by an act passed in  congress had
prescribed that before any person should be permitted to practice in a
federal court he must take oath asserting that he had never voluntarily
borne arms against the united states, had never given aid or comfort to
enemies of the united states, and so on. garland, who had been a
confederate sympathizer and so was unable to take the oath, had however
received from president johnson the same year "a full pardon 'for all
offences by him committed, arising from participation, direct or
implied, in the rebellion,' ***" the question before the court was
whether, armed with this pardon, garland was entitled to practice in the
federal courts despite the act of congress just mentioned. said justice
field for a sharply divided court: "the inquiry arises as to the effect
and operation of a pardon, and on this point all the authorities concur.
a pardon reaches both the punishment prescribed for the offence and the
guilt of the offender; and when the pardon is full, it releases the
punishment and blots out of [pg ]existence the guilt, so that in the eye of
the law the offender is as innocent as if he had never committed the
offense. if granted before conviction, it prevents any of the penalties
and disabilities consequent upon conviction from attaching; [thereto],
if granted after conviction, it removes the penalties and disabilities,
and restores him to all his civil rights; it makes him, as it were, a
new man, and gives him a new credit and capacity."[] justice miller
speaking for the minority protested that the act of congress involved
was not penal in character, but merely laid down an appropriate test of
fitness to practice the law. "the man who, by counterfeiting, by theft,
by murder, or by treason, is rendered unfit to exercise the functions of
an attorney or counsellor at law, may be saved by the executive pardon
from the penitentiary or the gallows, but he is not thereby restored to
the qualifications which are essential to admission to the bar."[]
justice field's language must today be regarded as much too sweeping in
light of a decision rendered in  in the case of carlesi v. new
york.[] carlesi had some years before been convicted of committing a
federal offense. in the instant case the prisoner was being tried for a
subsequent offense committed in new york. he was convicted as a second
offender, although the president had pardoned him for the earlier
federal offense. in other words, the fact of prior conviction by a
federal court was considered in determining the punishment for a
subsequent state offense. this conviction and sentence were upheld by
the supreme court. while this case involved offenses against different
sovereignties, the court declared by way of dictum that its decision
"must not be understood as in the slightest degree intimating that a
pardon would operate to limit the power of the united states in
punishing crimes against its authority to provide for taking into
consideration past offenses committed by the accused as a circumstance
of aggravation even although for such past offenses there had been a
pardon granted."[]
but justice field's latitudinarian view of the effect of a pardon
undoubtedly still applies ordinarily where the pardon is issued before
conviction. he is also correct in saying that a full pardon restores a
convict to his "civil rights," and this is so even though simple
completion of the convict's sentence would not have had that effect. one
such right is the right to testify in court, and in boyd v. united
states the court held that the disability to testify being a
consequence, according to principles of the common law, of the judgment
of conviction, the pardon obliterated that effect.[] but a pardon
cannot "make [pg ]amends for the past. it affords no relief for what has
been suffered by the offender in his person by imprisonment, forced
labor, or otherwise; it does not give compensation for what has been
done or suffered, nor does it impose upon the government any obligation
to give it. the offence being established by judicial proceedings, that
which has been done or suffered while they were in force is presumed to
have been rightfully done and justly suffered, and no satisfaction for
it can be required. neither does the pardon affect any rights which have
vested in others directly by the execution of the judgment for the
offence, or which have been acquired by others whilst that judgment was
in force. if, for example, by the judgment a sale of the offender's
property has been had, the purchaser will hold the property
notwithstanding the subsequent pardon. and if the proceeds of the sale
have been paid to a party to whom the law has assigned them, they cannot
be subsequently reached and recovered by the offender. the rights of the
parties have become vested, and are as complete as if they were acquired
in any other legal way. so, also, if the proceeds have been paid into
the treasury, the right to them has so far become vested in the united
states that they can only be secured to the former owner of the property
through an act of congress. moneys once in the treasury can only be
withdrawn by an appropriation by law."[]
congress cannot limit the effects of a presidential amnesty. thus the
act of july , , making proof of loyalty necessary to recover
property abandoned and sold by the government during the civil war,
notwithstanding any executive proclamation, pardon, amnesty, or other
act of condonation or oblivion, was pronounced void. said chief justice
chase for the majority: "*** the legislature cannot change the effect
of such a pardon any more than the executive can change a law. yet this
is attempted by the provision under consideration. the court is required
to receive special pardons as evidence of guilt and to treat them as
null and void. it is required to disregard pardons granted by
proclamation on condition, though the condition has been fulfilled, and
to deny them their legal effect. this certainly impairs the executive
authority and directs the court to be instrumental to that end."[] on
the other hand, congress may itself, under the necessary and proper
clause, enact amnesty laws remitting penalties incurred under the
national statutes,[] and may stipulate that witnesses before courts
or other bodies qualified to take testimony shall not be prosecuted by
the national government for any offenses disclosed by their
testimony.[]
[pg ]
clause . he shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the
senate, to make treaties, provided two thirds of the senators present
concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of
the senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and
consuls, judges of the supreme court, and all other officers of the
united states, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for,
and which shall be established by law: but the congress may by law vest
the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think proper, in the
president alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of departments.
the treaty-making power
the plan which the committee of detail reported to the federal
convention on august ,  provided that "the senate of the united
states shall have power to make treaties, and to appoint ambassadors,
and judges of the supreme court."[] not until september , ten days
before the convention's final adjournment, was the president made a
participant in these powers.[] the constitutional clause evidently
assumes that the president and senate will be associated throughout the
entire process of making a treaty, although jay, writing in the
federalist, foresaw that the initiative must often be seized by the
president without benefit of senatorial counsel.[] yet so late as
 rufus king, senator from new york, who had been a member of the
convention, declared on the floor of the senate: "in these concerns the
senate are the constitutional and the only responsible counsellors of
the president. and in this capacity the senate may, and ought to, look
into and watch over every branch of the foreign affairs of the nation;
they may, therefore, at any time call for full and exact information
respecting the foreign affairs, and express their opinion and advice to
the president respecting the same, when, and under whatever other
circumstances, they may think such advice expedient."[]
actually, the negotiation of treaties had long since been taken over by
the president; the senate's role in relation to treaties is today
essentially legislative in character.[] "he alone negotiates. into
the field of negotiation, the senate cannot intrude; and congress itself
is [pg ]powerless to invade it," declared justice sutherland for the court
in .[] the senate must, moreover, content itself with such
information as the president chooses to furnish it.[] in performing
the function that remains to it, however, it has several options. it may
consent unconditionally to a proposed treaty, or it may refuse its
consent, or it may stipulate conditions in the form of amendments to the
treaty or of reservations to the act of ratification, the difference
between the two being that, whereas amendments, if accepted by the
president and the other party or parties to the treaty,[] change it
for all parties, reservations limit only the obligations of the united
states thereunder. the act of ratification for the united states is the
president's act, but may not be forthcoming unless the senate has
consented to it by the required two-thirds of the senators present,
which signifies two-thirds of a quorum, otherwise the consent rendered
would not be that of the senate as organized under the constitution to
do business.[] conversely, the president may, if dissatisfied with
amendments which have been affixed by the senate to a proposed treaty or
with the conditions stipulated by it to ratification, decide to abandon
the negotiation, which he is entirely free to do.[]
treaty commitments of the united states are of two kinds. in the
language of chief justice marshall in ; "a treaty is, in its nature,
a contract between two nations, not a legislative act. it does not
generally effect, of itself, the object to be accomplished; especially,
so far as its operation is infraterritorial; but is carried into
execution by the sovereign power of the respective parties to the
instrument. in the united states, a different principle is established.
our constitution declares a treaty to be the law of the land. it is,
consequently, to be regarded in courts of justice as equivalent to an
act of the legislature, [pg ]whenever it operates of itself, without the aid
of any legislative provision. but when the terms of the stipulation
import a contract—when either of the parties engages to perform a
particular act, the treaty addresses itself to the political, not the
judicial department; and the legislature must execute the contract,
before it can become a rule for the court."[] to the same effect, but
more accurate, is justice miller's language for the court a half century
later, in head money cases: "a treaty is primarily a compact between
independent nations. it depends for the enforcement of its provisions on
the interest and the honor of the governments which are parties to it.
*** but a treaty may also contain provisions which confer certain
rights upon the citizens or subjects of one of the nations residing in
the territorial limits of the other, which partake of the nature of
municipal law, and which are capable of enforcement as between private
parties in the courts of the country."[]
origin of the conception
how did this distinctive feature of the constitution come about, by
virtue of which the treaty-making authority is enabled to stamp upon its
promises the quality of municipal law, thereby rendering them
"self-executory," as it is said; in other words, enforceable by the
courts? the answer is that article vi, paragraph  was, at its
inception, an outgrowth of a major weakness of the articles of
confederation. although the articles entrusted the treaty-making power
to congress, fulfillment of congress' promises was dependent on the
state legislatures. the result was that two highly important [pg ]articles
of the treaty of peace of  not only went unenforced, but were in
some instances directly flouted by the local legislatures. these were
articles iv and vi, which contained stipulations in favor, respectively,
of british creditors of american citizens and of the former loyalists;
in short of private persons. confronted with the reiterated protests
of the british government, john jay, secretary of the united states for
foreign affairs, suggested to congress late in  that it request the
state legislatures to repeal all legislation repugnant to the treaty of
peace, and at the same time authorize their courts in all cases arising
from the said treaty to decide and adjudge according to the true intent
and meaning of the same, "anything in the said acts *** to the
contrary notwithstanding." on april ,  congress unanimously voted
jay's proposal, which on the eve of the assembling of the federal
convention was transmitted to the state legislatures, by seven of which
it was promptly adopted.[]
the first case to arise under article vi, clause , was ware v.
hylton.[] the facts and bearing of the decision are indicated in the
syllabus: "a debt, due before the war from an american to a british
subject, was during the war, paid into the loan office of virginia, in
pursuance of a law of that state of the th of december, ,
sequestering british property and providing that such payment, and a
receipt therefor, should discharge the debt. held: that the legislature
of virginia which from the th of july, , and before the
confederation of the united states, *** possessed and exercised all
the rights of independent governments, had authority to make such law
and that the same was obligatory, since every nation at war with another
may confiscate all property of, including private debts due, the enemy.
such payment and discharge would therefore be a bar to a subsequent
action, unless the creditor's right was revived by the treaty of peace,
by which alone the restitution of, or compensation for, british property
confiscated during the war by any of the united states could only be
provided for. held, that the fourth article of the treaty of peace
between great britain and the united states, of september , ,
nullifies said law of virginia, destroys the payment made under it, and
revives the debt, and gives a right of recovery against the principal
debtor, notwithstanding such payment thereof, under the authority of
state law." in hopkirk v. bell[] the court further held that this
same treaty provision prevented the operation of a virginia statute of
limitation to bar collection of antecedent debts. in numerous subsequent
cases the court invariably ruled that treaty provisions supersede
inconsistent state laws governing the right of aliens to inherit real
estate.[] such a case was hauenstein v. lynham,[] in which the
court upheld the right of a [pg ]citizen of the swiss republic, under the
treaty of  with that country, to recover the estate of a relative
dying intestate in virginia, to sell the same and to export the proceeds
from the sale.[]
[pg ]
recent cases
certain more recent cases stem from california legislation, most of it
directed against japanese immigrants. a statute which excluded aliens
ineligible to american citizenship from owning real estate was upheld in
 on the ground that the treaty in question did not secure the rights
claimed.[] but in oyama v. california,[] decided in , a
majority of the court indicated a strongly held opinion that this
legislation conflicted with the equal protection clause of amendment
xiv, a view which has since received the endorsement of the california
supreme court by a narrow majority.[] meantime, california was
informed that the rights of german nationals, under the treaty of
december ,  between the united states and the reich, to whom real
property in the united states had descended or been devised, to dispose
of it, had survived the recent war and certain war legislation, and
accordingly prevailed over conflicting state legislation.[]
what is the scope of the power of american courts under article vi,
clause , to lend ear to private claims based on treaty provisions, on
the ground that such provisions are self-executing? jay had in mind
certain intended victims of state legislation; and in fact the cases
reviewed above all arose within the normal field of state legislative
power. nevertheless, as early as , in united states v. schooner
peggy,[] the supreme court, speaking by chief justice marshall, took
notice of a treaty with france, executed after a court of admiralty had
entered a final judgment condemning a captured french vessel, and
finding it applicable to the situation before it, set the judgment aside
and ordered the vessel restored to her owners. since that time the court
has declared repeatedly in cases in which state law was not involved
that when a treaty prescribes a rule by which private rights are to be
determined, the courts are bound to take [pg ]judicial notice thereof and to
accept it as a rule of decision in any appropriate proceeding to enforce
such rights.[] in short, whether a given treaty provision is
self-executing is a question for the court; although it does not
altogether lack guiding principles in deciding it, the most important of
which is the doctrine of political questions.[] see pp. ,
from the foregoing two other questions arise: first, are there types of
treaty provisions which only congress can put into effect? second,
assuming an affirmative answer to the above question, is congress under
constitutional obligation to supply such implementation? for such answer
as exists to the first question resort must be had to the record of
practice and nonjudicial opinion. the question arose originally in 
in connection with the jay treaty, certain provisions of which required
appropriations to carry them into effect. in view of the third clause of
article i, section  of the constitution, which says that "no money
shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations
made by law; ***," it was universally agreed that congress must be
applied to if the treaty provisions alluded to were to be put into
execution. but at this point the second question arose, to the solution
of which the court has subsequently contributed indirectly. (see pp.
-). a bill being introduced into the house of representatives to
vote the needed funds, supporters of the treaty, hamilton, chief justice
ellsworth, and others, argued that the house must make the appropriation
willy nilly; that the treaty, having been ratified by and with the
advice and consent of the senate, was "supreme law of the land," and
that [pg ]the legislative branch was bound thereby no less than the
executive and judicial branches.[] madison, a member of the house,
opposed this thesis in a series of resolutions, the nub of which is
comprised in the following statement: "when a treaty stipulates
regulations on any of the subjects submitted by the constitution to the
power of congress, it must depend for its execution, as to such
stipulations, on a law or laws to be passed by congress. and it is the
constitutional right and duty of the house of representatives, in all
such cases, to deliberate on the expediency or inexpediency of carrying
such treaty into effect, and to determine and act thereon, as, in their
judgment, may be most conducive to the public good."[] the upshot of
the matter was that the house adopted madison's resolutions, while at
the same time voting the required funds.[]
on the whole, madison's position has prospered. discussion whether there
are other treaty provisions than those calling for an expenditure of
money which require legislation to render them legally operative has
centered chiefly on the question whether the treaty-making power can of
itself alone modify the revenue laws. from an early date spokesmen for
the house have urged that a treaty does not, and cannot, ex proprio
vigore, become supreme law of the land on this subject; and while the
senate has never conceded this claim formally, yet in a number of
instances, "the treaty-making power has inserted in treaties negotiated
by it and affecting the revenue laws of the united states, a proviso
that they should not be deemed effective until the necessary laws to
carry them into operation should be enacted by congress, and the house
has claimed that the insertion of such requirements has been, in
substance, a recognition of its claim in the premises,"[] although
there are judicial dicta which inferentially support the senate's
position. latterly the question has become largely academic. commercial
agreements nowadays are usually executive agreements contracted by
authorization of congress itself. today the vital issue in this area of
constitutional law is whether the treaty-making power is competent to
assume obligations for the united states in the discharge of which the
president can, without violation of his oath to support the
constitution, involve the country in large scale military operations
abroad without authorization by the war-declaring power, congress to
wit. current military operations [pg ]in korea appear to assume an
affirmative answer to this question.
it is in respect to his contention that when it is asked to carry a
treaty into effect congress has the constitutional right, and indeed the
duty, to determine the matter according to its own ideas of what is
expedient, that madison has been most completely vindicated by
developments. this is seen in the answer which the court has returned to
the question, as to what happens when a treaty provision and an act of
congress conflict. the answer is, that neither has any intrinsic
superiority over the other and that therefore the one of later date will
prevail leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant. in short, the
treaty commitments of the united states in no wise diminish congress's
constitutional powers. to be sure, legislative repeal of a treaty as law
of the land may amount to a violation of it as an international contract
in the judgment of the other party to it. in such case, as the court has
said, "its infraction becomes the subject of international negotiations
and reclamations, so far as the injured party chooses to seek redress,
which may in the end be enforced by actual war. it is obvious that with
all this the judicial courts have nothing to do and can give no
redress."[]
[pg ]
treaties versus prior acts of congress
the cases are numerous in which the court has enforced statutory
provisions which were recognized by it as superseding prior treaty
engagements. how as to the converse situation? two early cases in which
chief justice marshall spoke for the court, stand for the proposition
that treaties, so far as self-executing, repeal earlier conflicting acts
of congress. in the case of the "peggy,"[] certain statutory
provisions dealing with the trial of prize cases were held to have been
modified by a subsequent treaty with france; and in [pg ]foster v..
neilson,[] while holding—mistakenly as he later admitted[]—that
the treaty of january ,  with spain was not self-executing with
respect to certain land grants, he went on to say that if it had been it
would have repealed acts of congress repugnant to it. with one
exception, however, judicial dicta which reiterate this idea are obiter,
and are disparaged by willoughby, as follows: "in fact, however, there
have been few (the writer is not certain that there have been any)
instances in which a treaty inconsistent with a prior act of congress
has been given full force and effect as law in this country without the
assent of congress. there may indeed have been cases in which, by
treaty, certain action has been taken without reference to existing
federal laws, as, for example, where by treaty certain populations have
been collectively naturalized, but such treaty action has not operated
to repeal or annul the existing law upon the subject. furthermore, with
specific reference to commercial arrangements with foreign powers,
congress has explicitly denied that a treaty can operate to modify the
arrangements which it, by statute, has provided, and, in actual
practice, has in every instance succeeded in maintaining this
point."[] the single exception just alluded to is cook v. united
states,[] which may be regarded as part of the aftermath of national
prohibition. here a divided court, speaking by justice brandeis, ruled
that the authority conferred by § of the tariff act of  and its
reenactment in the tariff act of , upon officers of the coast guard
to stop and board any vessel at any place within four leagues ( miles)
of the coast of the united states and to seize the vessel, if upon
examination it shall appear that any violation of the law has been
committed by reason of which the vessel or merchandise therein is liable
to forfeiture, is, as respects british vessels suspected of being
engaged in attempting to import alcoholic beverages into the united
states in violation of its laws, modified by the treaty of may , ,
between the united states and great britain, so as to allow seizure of
such vessels only within the distance from the coast which can be
traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit
the offense.[] only one case is cited in support of the proposition
that the treaty, being of later date than the act of congress,
superseded it so far as they were in conflict. this is whitney v.
robertson,[] in which an act of congress was held to have superseded
conflicting provisions of a prior treaty. moreover, the act of congress
involved in the cook case had, as above indicated, been reenacted
subsequently to the treaty involved. the decision actually accomplishes
the singular result of reversing the maxim leges posteriores. it may
be suspected that it was devised to avoid a diplomatic controversy which
in the low estate of prohibition at that date would not have been
worthwhile.[]
[pg ]
the repeal by congress of the "self-executing" clauses of a treaty as
"law of the land" does not of itself terminate the treaty as an
international contract, although it may very well provoke the other
party to the treaty to do so. hence the question arises of where the
constitution lodges this power; also the closely related question of
where it lodges the power to interpret the contractual provisions of
treaties. the first case of outright abrogation of a treaty by the
united states occurred in , when congress, by the act of july  of
that year, pronounced the united states freed and exonerated from the
stipulations of the treaties of  with france.[] this act was
followed two days later by one authorizing limited hostilities against
the same country; and in the case of bas v. tingy[] the supreme
court treated the act of abrogation as simply one of a bundle of acts
declaring "public war" upon the french republic.
the initial precedent in the matter of termination by notice occurred in
, when by the joint resolution of april , congress authorized the
president at his discretion to notify the british government of the
abrogation of the convention of august , , relative to the joint
occupation of the oregon territory. as the president himself had
requested the resolution, the episode supports the theory that
international conventions to which the united states is party, even
those terminable on notice, are terminable only by act of congress.[]
subsequently congress has often passed resolutions denouncing treaties
or treaty provisions which by their own terms were terminable on notice,
and presidents have usually carried out such resolutions, though not
invariably.[] by the la follette-furuseth seamen's act, approved
march , ,[] president wilson was directed, "within ninety days
after the passage of the act, to give notice to foreign governments that
so much of any treaties as might be in conflict with the [pg ]provisions of
the act would terminate on the expiration of the periods of notice
provided for in such treaties," and the required notice was given.[]
when, however, by section  of the jones merchant marine act of 
the same president was authorized and directed within ninety days to
give notice to the other parties to certain treaties, which the act
infracted, of the termination thereof, he refused to comply, asserting
that he "did not deem the direction contained in section  *** an
exercise of any constitutional power possessed by congress."[] the
same intransigent attitude was continued by presidents harding and
coolidge.
[pg ]
at the same time, there is clear judicial recognition that the president
may without consulting congress validly determine the question whether
specific treaty provisions have lapsed. the following passage from
justice lurton's opinion in charlton v. kelly[] is pertinent: "if
the attitude of italy was, as contended, a violation of the obligation
of the treaty, which, in international law, would have justified the
united states in denouncing the treaty as no longer obligatory, it did
not automatically have that effect. if the united states elected not to
declare its abrogation, or come to a rupture, the treaty would remain in
force. it was only voidable, not void; and if the united states should
prefer, it might waive any breach which in its judgment had occurred and
conform to its own obligation as if there had been no such breach. ***
that the political branch of the government recognizes the treaty
obligation as still existing is evidenced by its action in this case.
*** the executive department having thus elected to waive any right to
free itself from the obligation to deliver up its own citizens, it is
the plain duty of this court to recognize the obligation to surrender
the appellant as one imposed by the treaty as the supreme law of the
land as affording authority for the warrant of extradition."[] so
also it is primarily for the political departments to determine whether
certain provisions of a treaty have survived a war in which the other
contracting state ceased to exist as a member of the international
community.[]
[pg ]
all in all, it would seem that the vast weight both of legislative
practice and of executive opinion supports the proposition that the
power of terminating outright international compacts to which the united
states is party belongs, as a prerogative of sovereignty, to congress
alone, but that the president may, as an incident of his function of
interpreting treaties preparatory to enforcing them, sometimes
authoritatively find that a treaty contract with another power has or
has not been breached by the latter and whether, for that reason, it is
or is not longer binding on the united states.[] at any rate, it is
clear that any such questions which arise concerning a treaty are of a
political nature and will not be decided by the courts. in the words of
justice curtis in taylor v. morton:[] it is not "a judicial
question, whether a treaty with a foreign sovereign has been violated by
him; whether the consideration of a particular stipulation in a treaty,
has been voluntarily withdrawn by one party, so that it is no longer
obligatory on the other; whether the views and acts of a foreign
sovereign, manifested through his representative have given just
occasion to the political departments of our government to withhold the
execution of a promise contained in a treaty, or to act in direct
contravention of such promise. *** these powers have not been confided
by the people to the judiciary, which has no suitable means to exercise
them; but to the executive and the legislative departments of our
government. they belong to diplomacy and legislation, and not to the
administration of existing laws. and it necessarily follows, that if
they are denied to congress and the executive, in the exercise of their
legislative power, they can be found nowhere, in our system of
government." chief justice marshall's language in foster v.
neilson[] is to the same effect.
what power, or powers, does congress exercise when it enacts legislation
for the purpose of carrying treaties of the united states into effect?
when the subject matter of the treaty falls within the ambit of
congress's enumerated powers (those listed in the first  clauses of
article i, section  of the constitution), then it is these powers which
it exercises in carrying such treaty into effect. but if the treaty
deals with a subject which falls normally to the states to legislate
upon, or a subject which falls within the national jurisdiction because
of its international character, then recourse is had to the necessary
and proper clause. thus, of itself, congress would have no power to
confer judicial powers upon foreign consuls in the united states, but
the treaty-power can do this and has done it repeatedly and congress has
supplemented these treaties by appropriate [pg ]legislation.[] again,
congress could not confer judicial power upon american consuls abroad to
be there exercised over american citizens, but the treaty-power can and
has, and congress has passed legislation perfecting such agreements and
such legislation has been upheld.[] again, congress of itself could
not provide for the extradition of fugitives from justice, but the
treaty-power can and has done so scores of times, and congress has
passed legislation carrying our extradition treaties into effect.[]
again, congress could not ordinarily penalize private acts of violence
within a state, but it can punish such acts if they deprive aliens of
their rights under a treaty.[] referring to such legislation the
court has said: "the power of congress to make all laws necessary and
proper for carrying into execution as well the powers enumerated in
section  of article i of the constitution, as all others vested in the
government of the united states, or in any department or the officers
thereof, includes the power to enact such legislation as is appropriate
to give efficacy to any stipulations which it is competent for the
president by and with the advice and consent of the senate to insert in
a treaty with a foreign power."[] in a word, the treaty-power cannot
purport to amend the constitution by adding to the list of congress's
enumerated powers, but having acted, the consequence will often be that
it has provided congress with an opportunity to enact measures which
independently of a treaty congress could not pass; and the only question
that can be raised as to such measures will be whether they are
"necessary and proper" measures for the carrying of the treaty in
question into operation. the matter is further treated under the next
heading.
[pg ]
constitutional limits of the treaty-making power; missouri v.
our system being theoretically opposed to the lodgement anywhere in
government of unlimited power, the question of the scope of this
exclusive power has often been pressed upon the court, which has
sometimes used language vaguely suggestive of limitation, as in the
following passage from justice field's opinion for the court in geofroy
v. riggs,[] which was decided in : "the treaty power, as
expressed in the constitution, is in terms unlimited except by those
restraints which are found in that instrument against the action of the
government or of its departments, and those arising from the nature of
the government itself and of that of the states. it would not be
contended that it extends so far as to authorize what the constitution
forbids, or a change in the character of the government or in that of
one of the states, or a cession of any portion of the territory of the
latter, without its consent. *** but with these exceptions, it is not
perceived that there is any limit to the questions which can be adjusted
touching any matter which is properly the subject of negotiation with a
foreign country."[] the fact is none the less, that no treaty of the
united states nor any provision thereof has ever been found by the court
to be unconstitutional. the most persistently urged proposition in
limitation of the treaty-making power has been that it must not invade
certain reserved powers of the states. in view of the sweeping language
of the supremacy clause, it is hardly surprising that this argument has
not prevailed.[] nevertheless, the court was forced to answer it as
recently as . this was in the case of missouri v. holland,[] in
which the court sustained a treaty between the united states and great
britain providing for the reciprocal protection of migratory birds which
make seasonal flights from canada into the united states and vice versa,
and an act of congress passed in pursuance thereof which authorized the
department of agriculture to draw up regulations to govern the hunting
of such birds, subject to the penalties specified by the act. to the
objection that the treaty and implementing legislation invaded the
acknowledged police power of the state in the protection of game within
its borders, justice holmes, speaking for the court, answered: "acts of
congress are the supreme law of the land only when made in pursuance of
the constitution, while treaties are declared to be so when made under
the authority of the united states. it is open to question whether the
authority of the united states means more than the formal acts
prescribed to make the convention. we do not mean to imply that there
are no qualifications to the treaty-making power; but they must be
ascertained in a different way. it is obvious that there may be matters
of the sharpest exigency for the national well being that an act of
congress could not deal with but that a treaty followed by such an act
could, and it is not lightly to be assumed that, in [pg ]matters requiring
national action, 'a power which must belong to and somewhere reside in
every civilized government' is not to be found. (andrews v. andrews,
 u.s. ,  ()). what was said in that case with regard to the
powers of the states applies with equal force to the powers of the
nation in cases where the states individually are incompetent to act.
*** the treaty in question does not contravene any prohibitory words
to be found in the constitution. the only question is whether it is
forbidden by some invisible radiation from the general terms of the
tenth amendment. we must consider what this country has become in
deciding what that amendment has reserved."[] and again: "here a
national interest of very nearly the first magnitude is involved. it can
be protected only by national action in concert with that of another
power. the subject-matter is only transitorily within the state and has
no permanent habitat therein. but for the treaty and the statute there
soon might be no birds for any powers to deal with. we see nothing in
the constitution that compels the government to sit by while a food
supply is cut off and the protectors of our forests and our crops are
destroyed. it is not sufficient to rely upon the states. the reliance is
vain, and were it otherwise, the question is whether the united states
is forbidden to act. we are of opinion that the treaty and statute must
be upheld."[]
justice sutherland's later assertion in the curtiss-wright case[]
that the powers "to declare and wage war, to conclude peace, to make
treaties," etc., belong to "the federal government as the necessary
concomitants of nationality" leaves even less room for the notion of a
limited treaty-making power, as indeed appears from his further
statement that "as a member of the family of nations, the right and
power of the united states *** are equal to the right and power of the
other members of the international family."[] no doubt there are
specific limitations in the constitution in favor of private rights
which "go to the roots" of all power. but these do not include the
reserved powers of the states; nor do they appear to limit the national
government [pg ]in its choice of matters concerning which it may treat with
other governments.[]
[pg ]
in the early cases of cherokee nation v. georgia[] and worcester
v. georgia[] the court, speaking by chief justice marshall, held,
first, that the cherokee nation was not a foreign state within the
meaning of that clause of the constitution which extends the judicial
power of the united states to controversies "between a state or the
citizens thereof and foreign states, citizens or subjects"; secondly,
that: "the constitution, by declaring treaties already made, as well as
those to be made, to be the supreme law of the land, had adopted and
sanctioned the previous treaties with the indian nations, and
consequently admits their rank among those powers who are capable of
making treaties. the words 'treaty' and 'nation' are words of our own
language, selected in our diplomatic and legislative proceedings, by
ourselves, having each a definite and well understood meaning. we have
applied them to indians, as we have applied them to the other nations of
the earth. they are applied to all in the same sense."[]
later cases established that the power to make treaties with the indian
tribes was coextensive with the power to make treaties with foreign
nations;[] that the states were incompetent to interfere with rights
created by such treaties;[] that as long as the united states
recognized the national character of a tribe, its members were under the
protection of treaties and of the laws of congress and their property
immune from taxation by a state;[] that a stipulation in an indian
treaty that laws forbidding the introduction of liquors into indian
territory was operative without legislation, and binding on the courts
although the territory was within an organized county of [pg ]the
states;[] that an act of congress contrary to a prior indian treaty
repealed it.[]
present status of indian treaties
today indian treaties is a closed account in the constitutional law
ledger. by a rider inserted in the indian appropriation act of march ,
 it was provided "that hereafter no indian nation or tribe within
the territory of the united states shall be acknowledged or recognized
as an independent nation, tribe, or power with whom the united states
may contract by treaty: provided, further, that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to invalidate or impair the obligation of
any treaty heretofore lawfully made and ratified with any such indian
nation or tribe."[] subsequently, the power of congress to withdraw
or modify tribal rights previously granted by treaty has been invariably
upheld. thus the admission of wyoming as a state was found to abrogate,
pro tanto, a treaty guaranteeing certain indians the right to hunt on
unoccupied lands of the united states so long as game may be found
thereon and to bring hunting by the indians within the police power of
the state.[] similarly, statutes modifying rights of members in
tribal lands,[] granting a right of way for a railroad through lands
ceded by treaty to an indian tribe,[] or extending the application of
revenue laws respecting liquor and tobacco over indian territories,
despite an earlier treaty exemption,[] have been sustained. when, on
the other hand, definite property rights have been conferred upon
individual indians, whether by treaty or under an act of congress, they
are protected by the constitution to the same extent and in the same way
as the private rights of other residents or citizens of the united
states. hence it was held that certain indian allottees under an
agreement according to which, in part consideration of their
relinquishment of all their claim to tribal property, they were to
receive in severalty allotments of lands which were to be nontaxable for
a specified period, acquired vested rights of exemption from state
taxation which were protected by the fifth amendment against abrogation
by congress.[]
[pg ]
international agreements without senate approval
the capacity of the united states to enter into agreements with other
nations is not exhausted in the treaty-making power. the constitution
recognizes a distinction between "treaties" and "agreements" or
"compacts," but does not indicate what the difference is; and what
difference there once may have been has been seriously blurred in
practice within recent decades. the president's power to enter into
agreements or compacts with other governments without consulting the
senate must be referred to his powers as organ of foreign relations and
as commander in chief. from an early date, moreover, congress has
authorized executive agreements within the field of its powers, postal
agreements, trade-mark and copyright agreements, reciprocal trade
agreements. executive agreements may also stem from treaties.[]
many types of executive agreements comprise the ordinary daily grist of
the diplomatic mill. among these are such as apply to minor territorial
adjustments, boundary rectifications, the policing of boundaries, the
regulation of fishing rights, private pecuniary claims against another
government or its nationals, in story's words, "the mere private rights
of sovereignty."[] crandall lists scores of such agreements entered
into with other governments by the authorization of the president.[]
such agreements are ordinarily directed to particular and comparatively
trivial disputes and by the settlement the effect of these cease ipso
facto to be operative. also there are such time-honored diplomatic
devices as the "protocol" which marks a stage in the negotiation of a
treaty, and the modus vivendi, which is designed to serve as a
temporary substitute for one. executive agreements become of
constitutional significance when they constitute a determinative factor
of future foreign policy and hence of the country's destiny. within
recent decades, in consequence particularly of our participation in
world war ii and our immersion in the conditions of international
tension which have prevailed both before and after this war, presidents
have entered into agreements with other governments some of which have
approximated temporary alliances. it cannot be justly said, however,
that in so doing they have acted without considerable support from
precedent.
[pg ]
an early instance of executive treaty-making was the agreement by which
president monroe in  brought about a delimitation of armaments on
the great lakes. the arrangement was effected by an exchange of notes,
which nearly a year later was laid before the senate with a query as to
whether it was within the president's power, or whether advice and
consent of the senate were required. the senate approved the agreement
by the required two-thirds vote, and it was forthwith proclaimed by the
president without there having been a formal exchange of
ratifications.[] of a kindred type, and owing much to the president's
capacity as commander in chief, was a series of agreements entered into
with mexico between  and  according each country the right to
pursue marauding indians across the common border.[] commenting on
such an agreement, the court remarked, a bit uncertainly: "while no act
of congress authorizes the executive department to permit the
introduction of foreign troops, the power to give such permission
without legislative assent was probably assumed to exist from the
authority of the president as commander in chief of the military and
naval forces of the united states. it may be doubted, however, whether
such power could be extended to the apprehension of deserters [from
foreign vessels] in the absence of positive legislation to that
effect."[] justice gray and three other justices were of the opinion
that such action by the president must rest upon express treaty or
statute.[]
[pg ]
president mckinley's contribution
notable expansion of presidential power in this field first became
manifest in the administration of president mckinley. at the outset of
war with spain the president proclaimed that the united states would
consider itself bound for the duration by the last three principles of
the declaration of paris, a course which, as professor wright observes,
"would doubtless go far toward establishing these three principles as
international law obligatory upon the united states in future
wars."[] hostilities with spain were brought to an end in august 
by an armistice the conditions of which largely determined the
succeeding treaty of peace,[] just as did the armistice of november
, , determine in great measure the conditions of the final peace
with germany in . it was also president mckinley who in ,
relying on his own sole authority as commander in chief, contributed a
land force of , men and a naval force to cooperate with similar
contingents from other powers to rescue the legations in peking from the
boxers; and a year later, again without consulting either congress or
the senate, accepted for the united states the boxer indemnity protocol
between china and the intervening powers.[] commenting on the peking
protocol willoughby quotes with approval the following remark: "this
case is interesting, because it shows how the force of circumstances
compelled us to adopt the european practice with reference to an
international agreement, which, aside from the indemnity question, was
almost entirely political in character. ***, purely political treaties
are, under constitutional practice in europe, usually made by the
executive alone. the situation in china, however, abundantly justified
president mckinley in not submitting the protocol to the senate. the
remoteness of pekin, the jealousies between the allies, and the shifting
evasive tactics of the chinese government, would have made impossible
anything but an agreement on the spot."[]
[pg ]
it was during this period, too, that john hay, as mckinley's secretary
of state, initiated his "open door" policy, by notes to great britain,
germany, and russia, which were soon followed by similar notes to
france, italy and japan. these in substance asked the recipients to
declare formally that they would not seek to enlarge their respective
interests in china at the expense of any of the others; and all
responded favorably.[] then in  the first roosevelt, seeking to
arrive at a diplomatic understanding with japan, instigated an exchange
of opinions between secretary of war taft, then in the far east, and
count katsura, amounting to a secret treaty, by which the roosevelt
administration assented to the establishment by japan of a military
protectorate in korea.[] three years later secretary of state root
and the japanese ambassador at washington entered into the root-takahira
agreement to uphold the status quo in the pacific and maintain the
principle of equal opportunity for commerce and industry in china.[]
meantime, in , by a "gentlemen's agreement," the mikado's government
had agreed to curb the emigration of japanese subjects to the united
states, thereby relieving the washington government from the necessity
of taking action that would have cost japan loss of face. the final of
this series of executive agreements touching american relations in and
with the far east was the product of president wilson's diplomacy. this
was the lansing-ishii agreement, embodied in an exchange of letters
dated november , , by which the united states recognized japan's
"special interests" in china, and japan assented to the principle of the
open door in that country.[]
the question naturally suggests itself: what sort of obligation does an
agreement of the above description impose upon the united states? the
question was put to secretary lansing himself in  by a member of the
foreign relations committee, as follows: "has the so-called
lansing-ishii agreement any binding force on this country?" and replied
that it had not; that it was simply a declaration of american policy so
long as the president or state department might choose to continue
it.[] actually, it took the washington conference of , two solemn
treaties and an exchange of notes to get rid of it; while the
"gentlemen's agreement," first drawn in , was finally put an end to,
after seventeen years, only by an act of congress.[] that executive
agreements are sometimes cognizable [pg ]by the courts was indicated
earlier. the matter is further treated immediately below.
the executive agreement attained its fullest development as an
instrument of foreign policy under president franklin d. roosevelt, even
at times threatening to replace the treaty-making power, if not formally
yet actually, as a determinative element in the field of foreign policy.
mr. roosevelt's first important utilization of the executive agreement
device took the form of an exchange of notes on november ,  with
maxim m. litvinov, people's commissar for foreign affairs, whereby
american recognition was extended to the union of soviet socialist
republics in consideration of certain pledges, the first of which was
the promise to restrain any persons or organizations "under its direct
or indirect control, ***, from any act overt or covert liable in any
way whatsoever to injure the tranquillity, prosperity, order, or
security of the whole or any part of the united states, ***"[]
united states v. belmont
the litvinov agreement is also noteworthy for giving rise to two cases
which afforded the court the opportunity to evaluate the executive
agreement in terms of constitutional law. the earlier of these was
united states v. belmont,[] decided in . the point at issue was
whether a district court of the united states was free to dismiss an
action by the united states, as assignee of the soviet government, for
certain moneys which were once the property of a russian metal
corporation whose assets had been appropriated by the soviet government.
the court, speaking by justice sutherland, said "no." the president's
act in recognizing the soviet government, and the accompanying
agreements, constituted, said the justice, an international compact
which the president, "as the sole organ" of international relations for
the united states, was authorized to enter upon without consulting the
senate. nor did state laws and policies make any difference in such a
situation; for while the supremacy of treaties is established by the
constitution in express terms, yet the same rule holds "in the case of
all international compacts and agreements from the very fact that
complete power over international affairs is in the national government
and is not and cannot be subject to any curtailment or interference on
the part of the several states."[]
[pg ]
united states v. pink; national supremacy
in the united states v. pink,[] decided five years later, the same
course of reasoning was reiterated with added emphasis. the question
here involved was whether the united states was entitled under the
executive agreement of  to recover the assets of the new york branch
of a russian insurance company. the company argued that the decrees of
confiscation of the soviet government did not apply to its property in
new york, and could not consistently with the constitution of the united
states and that of new york. the court, speaking by justice douglas,
brushed these arguments aside. an official declaration of the russian
government itself settled the question of the extraterritorial operation
of the russian decree of nationalization and was binding on american
courts. the power to remove such obstacles to full recognition as
settlement of claims of our nationals was "a modest implied power of the
president who is the 'sole organ of the federal government in the field
of international relations' *** it was the judgment of the political
department that full recognition of the soviet government required the
settlement of outstanding problems including the claims of our
nationals. *** we would usurp the executive function if we held that
that decision was not final and conclusive on the courts. 'all
constitutional acts of power, whether in the executive or in the
judicial department, have as much legal validity and obligation as if
they proceeded from the legislature, ***'[] *** it is, of
course, true that even treaties with foreign nations will be carefully
construed so as not to derogate from the authority and jurisdiction of
the states of this nation unless clearly necessary to effectuate the
national policy.[] but state law must yield when it is inconsistent
with, or impairs the policy or provisions of, a treaty or of an
international compact or agreement.[] then, the power of a state to
refuse enforcement of rights based on foreign law which runs counter to
the public policy of the form *** must give way before the superior
federal policy evidenced by a treaty or international compact or
agreement.[] *** the action of new york in this case amounts in
substance to a rejection of a part of the policy underlying recognition
by this nation of soviet russia. such power is not accorded a state in
our constitutional system. to permit it would be to sanction a dangerous
invasion of federal authority. for it would 'imperil the amicable
relations between governments and vex the peace of nations.'[] ***
it would tend to disturb that equilibrium in our foreign relations which
the political departments of our national government has diligently
endeavored to establish. *** no state can rewrite our foreign policy
to conform to its own domestic policies. power over external affairs is
not shared by the states; it is vested in the national government
exclusively. it need not be so exercised as to conform to state laws or
state policies, whether they [pg ]be expressed in constitutions, statutes,
or judicial decrees. and the policies of the states become wholly
irrelevant to judicial inquiry when the united states, acting within its
constitutional sphere, seeks enforcement of its foreign policy in the
courts." and while "aliens as well as citizens are entitled to the
protection of the fifth amendment," that amendment did not bar the
federal government "from securing for itself and our nationals priority
[against] creditors who are nationals of foreign countries and whose
claims arose abroad."[]
the fall of france in june  inspired president roosevelt to enter
the following summer into two executive agreements the total effect of
which was to transform the role of the united states from one of strict
neutrality toward the war then waging in europe to one of
semi-belligerency. the first of these agreements was with canada, and
provided that a permanent joint board on defense was to be set up at
once by the two countries which would "consider in the broad sense the
defense of the north half of the western hemisphere."[] the second,
and more important agreement, was the hull-lothian agreement of
september , , under which, in return for the lease to it for
ninety-nine years of certain sites for naval bases in the british west
atlantic, our government handed over to the british government fifty
over-age destroyers which had been recently reconditioned and
recommissioned.[] the transaction, as justified in an opinion by the
attorney general, amounted to a claim for the president, in his capacity
as commander in chief and organ of foreign relations, to dispose of
property of the united states, although the only power to do this which
the constitution mentions is that which it assigns to congress.[]
[pg ]on april , , the state department, in consideration of the fact
that germany had, on april , , occupied denmark, entered into an
executive agreement with the danish minister at washington, whereby the
united states acquired the right to occupy greenland for the duration,
for purposes of defense.[]
that the post-war diplomacy of the united states has been greatly
influenced by such executive agreements as those which are associated
with cairo, teheran, malta, and potsdam, is evident.[] the executive
agreement thus became, in an era in which the instability of
international relations forbade successful efforts at treaty-making, the
principal instrument of presidential initiative in the field of foreign
relations. whether the united nations charter and the atlantic pact
signalize the end of this era will doubtless appear in due course.
[pg ]
"the first known use of the executive agreement under the constitution
of the united states," writes dr. mcclure, "was for the development of
international communication by means of the postal service. the second
congress, in establishing the post office, which had theretofore been
dealt with through legislation carrying it on from year to year, enacted
that 'the postmaster general may make arrangements with the postmasters
in any foreign country for the reciprocal receipt and delivery of
letters and packets, through the post-offices.' it was further provided
that this act, of february , , should 'be in force for the term of
two years, from the *** first day of june next, and no longer.'"[]
reciprocal trade agreements
under later legislation executive agreements, or what in effect were
such, have been authorized by which american patents, copyrights, and
trade-marks have secured protection abroad in return for like protection
by the united states of similar rights of foreign origin.[] but the
most copious source of executive agreements has been legislation which
provided basis for reciprocal trade agreements, with other
countries.[] the culminating act of this species was that of june ,
, which provided, in part, as follows: "***, the president,
whenever he finds as a fact that any existing duties or other import
restrictions of the united states or any foreign country are unduly
burdening and restricting the foreign trade of the united states and
that the purpose above declared will be promoted by the means
hereinafter specified, is authorized from time to time—'() to enter
into foreign trade agreements with foreign governments or
instrumentalities thereof'; and '() to proclaim such modifications of
existing duties and other import restrictions, or such additional import
restrictions, or such continuance, and for such minimum periods, of
[pg ]existing customs or excise treatment of any article covered by foreign
trade agreements, as are required or appropriate to carry out any
foreign trade agreement that the president has entered into hereunder.
no proclamation shall be made increasing or decreasing by more than 
per centum any existing rate of duty or transferring any article between
the dutiable and free lists.'"[] this act, renewed at three-year
intervals, is still in effect, and under it many trade agreements were
negotiated by former secretary of state hull.
the constitutionality of trade agreements
in field v. clark,[] decided in  this type of legislation was
sustained against the objection that it attempted an unconstitutional
delegation "of both legislative and treaty-making powers." the court met
the first objection with an extensive review of similar legislation from
the inauguration of government under the constitution. the second
objection it met with the court statement that, "what has been said is
equally applicable to the objection that the third section of the act
invests the president with treaty-making power. the court is of opinion
that the third section of the act of october , , is not liable to
the objection that it transfers legislative and treaty-making power to
the president."[] although two justices disagreed, the question has
never been revived. however, in altman and co. v. united states,[]
decided twenty years later, a collateral question was passed upon. this
was whether an act of congress which gave the federal circuit courts of
appeal jurisdiction of cases in which "the validity or construction of
any treaty, ***, was drawn in question" embraced a case involving a
trade agreement which had been made under the sanction of the tariff act
of . said the court: "while it may be true that this commercial
agreement, made under authority of the tariff act of , §, was not
a treaty possessing the dignity of one requiring ratification by the
senate of the united states, it was an international compact, negotiated
between the representatives of two sovereign nations and made in the
name and on behalf of the contracting countries, and dealing with
important commercial relations between the two countries, and was
proclaimed by the president. if not technically a treaty requiring
ratification, nevertheless it was a compact authorized by the congress
of the united states, negotiated and proclaimed under the authority of
its president. we think such a compact is a treaty under the circuit
court of appeals act, and, where its construction is directly involved,
as it is here, there is a right of review by direct appeal to this
court."[]
[pg ]
the lend-lease act
the most extensive delegation of authority ever made by congress to the
president to enter into executive agreements occurred within the field
of the cognate powers of the two departments, the field of foreign
relations; and took place at a time when war appeared to be in the
offing, and was in fact only a few months away. the legislation referred
to was the lend-lease act of march , [] by which the president
was empowered for something over two years—and subsequently for
additional periods whenever he deemed it in the interest of the national
defense to do so, to authorize "the secretary of war, the secretary of
the navy, or the head of any other department or agency of the
government," to manufacture in the government arsenals, factories, and
shipyards, or "otherwise procure," to the extent that available funds
made possible, "defense articles"—later amended to include foodstuffs
and industrial products—and "sell, transfer title to, exchange, lease,
lend, or otherwise dispose of," the same to the "government of any
country whose defense the president deems vital to the defense of the
united states," and on any terms that he "deems satisfactory." under
this authorization the united states entered into mutual aid agreements
whereby the government furnished its allies in the recent war forty
billions of dollars worth of munitions of war and other supplies.
the partnership which has developed within recent decades between the
president and congress within the field of their cognate powers is also
illustrated by the act of february , , creating a commission to
effect agreements respecting debts owed this country by certain other
governments, the resulting agreements to be approved by congress;[]
by the circumstances attending the drawing up in  of the united
nations relief and rehabilitation convention;[] by the joint
resolution of june , , by which the president was authorized to
accept membership for the united states in the international labor
office.[] it is altogether apparent in view of developments like
these that the executive agreement power, especially when it is
supported by congressional legislation, today overlaps the treaty-making
power.
[pg ]
in - secretary of state john hay negotiated a series of treaties
providing for the general arbitration of international disputes. article
ii of the treaty with great britain, for example, provided as follows:
"in each individual case the high contracting parties, before appealing
to the permanent court of arbitration, shall conclude a special
agreement defining clearly the matter in dispute and the scope of the
powers of the arbitrators, and fixing the periods for the formation of
the arbitral tribunal and the several stages of the procedure."[] the
senate approved the british treaty by the constitutional majority
having, however, first amended it by substituting the word "treaty" for
"agreement." president theodore roosevelt, characterizing the
"ratification" as equivalent to rejection, sent the treaties to repose
in the archives. "as a matter of historical practice," dr. mcclure
comments, "the compromis under which disputes have been arbitrated
include both treaties and executive agreements in goodly numbers,"[]
a statement supported by both willoughby and moore.[]
article  of the united nations charter provides: ". all members of
the united nations, in order to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security, undertake to make available to the
security council, on its call and in accordance with a special agreement
or agreements, armed forces, assistance, and facilities, including
rights of passage, necessary for the purpose of maintaining
international peace and security. . such agreement or agreements shall
govern the numbers and types of forces, their degree of readiness and
general location, and the nature of the facilities and assistance to be
provided. . the agreement or agreements shall be negotiated as soon as
possible on the initiative of the security council. they shall be
concluded between the security council and members or between the
security council and groups of members and shall be subject to
ratification by the signatory states in accordance with their respective
[pg ]constitutional processes."[] this time the senate did not boggle
over the word "agreement."
the united nations participation act
the united nations participation act of december ,  implements
these provisions as follows: "the president is authorized to negotiate a
special agreement or agreements with the security council which shall be
subject to the approval of the congress by appropriate act or joint
resolution, providing for the numbers and types of armed forces, their
degree of readiness and general location, and the nature of facilities
and assistance, including rights of passage, to be made available to the
security council on its call for the purpose of maintaining
international peace and security in accordance with article  of said
charter. the president shall not be deemed to require the authorization
of the congress to make available to the security council on its call in
order to take action under article  of said charter and pursuant to
such special agreement or agreements the armed forces, facilities, or
assistance provided for therein: provided, that nothing herein
contained shall be construed as an authorization to the president by the
congress to make available to the security council for such purpose
armed forces, facilities, or assistance in addition to the forces,
facilities, and assistance provided for in such special agreement or
agreements."[]
the executive establishment
"an office is a public station, or employment, conferred by the
appointment of government," and "embraces the ideas of tenure duration,
emolument, and duties."[]
the term "ambassadors and other public ministers," comprehends "all
officers having diplomatic functions, whatever their title or
designation."[] it was originally assumed that such offices were
established by the constitution itself, by reference to the law of
nations, with the consequence that appointments might be made to them
whenever the appointing authority—the president and senate—deemed
desirable.[] during the first sixty-five years of the government
congress passed no act purporting to create any diplomatic rank, the
entire question of grades being left with the president. indeed, during
the administrations of washington, adams and jefferson, and the first
[pg ]term of madison, no mention occurs in any appropriation act even, of
ministers of a specified rank at this or that place, but the provision
for the diplomatic corps consisted of so much money "for the expenses of
foreign intercourse," to be expended at the discretion of the president.
in madison's second term the practice was introduced of allocating
special sums to the several foreign missions maintained by the
government, but even then the legislative provisions did not purport to
curtail the discretion of the president in any way in the choice of
diplomatic agents.
in , however, when president madison appointed, during a recess of
the senate, the commissioners who negotiated the treaty of ghent the
theory on which the above legislation was based was drawn into question.
inasmuch, it was argued, as these offices had never been established by
law, no vacancy existed to which the president could constitutionally
make a recess appointment. to this argument it was answered that the
constitution recognizes "two descriptions of offices altogether
different in their nature, authorized by the constitution—one to be
created by law, and the other depending for their existence and
continuance upon contingencies. of the first kind, are judicial,
revenue, and similar offices. of the second, are ambassadors, other
public ministers, and consuls. the first description organize the
government and give it efficacy. they form the internal system, and are
susceptible of precise enumeration. when and how they are created, and
when and how they become vacant, may always be ascertained with perfect
precision. not so with the second description. they depend for their
original existence upon the law, but are the offspring of the state of
our relations with foreign nations, and must necessarily be governed by
distinct rules. as an independent power, the united states have
relations with all other independent powers; and the management of those
relations is vested in the executive."[]
by the opening section of the act of march , , it was provided that
"from and after the thirtieth day of june next, the president of the
united states shall, by and with the advice and consent of the senate,
appoint representatives of the grade of envoys extraordinary and
ministers plenipotentiary," with a specified annual compensation for
each, "to the following countries, ***" in the body of the act was
also this provision: "the president shall appoint no other than citizens
of the united states, who are residents thereof, or who shall be abroad
in the employment of the government at the time [pg ]of their appointment,
***."[] the question of the interpretation of the act having been
referred to attorney general cushing, he ruled that its total effect,
aside from its salary provisions, was recommendatory only. it was "to
say, that if, and whenever, the president shall, by and with the advice
and consent of the senate, appoint an envoy extraordinary and minister
plenipotentiary to great britain, or to sweden, the compensation of that
minister shall be so much and no more."[]
this line of reasoning is today only partially descriptive of facts. the
act of march , , provides that new ambassadorships may be created
only with the consent of congress,[] while the foreign service act of
[] organizes the foreign service, both its diplomatic and its
consular divisions, in detail as to grades, salaries, appointments,
promotions, and in part as to duties. theoretically the act leaves the
power of the president and senate to appoint consular and diplomatic
officials intact, but in practice the vast proportion of the selections
are made in conformance with the civil service rules.
what the president may have lost in consequence of the intervention of
congress in this field, he has made good through his early conceded
right to employ, in the discharge of his diplomatic function, so-called
"special," "personal," or "secret" agents without consulting the senate.
when president jackson's right to resort to this practice was challenged
in the senate in , it was defended by edward livingston, senator
from louisiana, to such good purpose that jackson made him secretary of
state. "the practice of appointing secret agents," said livingston, "is
coeval with our existence as a nation, and goes beyond our
acknowledgment as such by other powers. all those great men who have
figured in the history of our diplomacy, began their career, and
performed some of their most important services in the capacity of
secret agents, with full powers. franklin, adams, lee, were only
commissioners; and in negotiating a treaty with the emperor of morocco,
the selection of the secret agent was left to the ministers appointed to
make the treaty; and, accordingly, in the year , mr. adams and mr.
jefferson appointed thomas barclay, who went to morocco and made a
treaty, which was ratified by the ministers at paris.
"these instances show that, even prior to the establishment of the
federal government, secret plenipotentiaries were known, as well in [pg ]the
practice of our own country as in the general law of nations: and that
these secret agents were not on a level with messengers,
letter-carriers, or spies, to whom it has been found necessary in
argument to assimilate them. on the th march, , in the recess of
the senate, by letters patent under the great broad seal of the united
states, and the signature of their president, (that president being
george washington,) countersigned by the secretary of state, david
humphreys was appointed commissioner plenipotentiary for negotiating a
treaty of peace with algiers. by instructions from the president, he was
afterwards authorized to employ joseph donaldson as agent in that
business. in may, of the same year, he did appoint donaldson, who went
to algiers, and in september of the same year concluded a treaty with
the dey and divan, which was confirmed by humphreys, at lisbon, on the
th november in the same year, and afterwards ratified by the senate on
the —— day of ——, , and an act passed both houses on th may,
, appropriating a large sum, twenty-five thousand dollars annually,
for carrying it into effect."[]
the precedent afforded by humphrey's appointment without reference to
the senate has since been multiplied many times, as witness the mission
of a. dudley mann to hanover and other german states in , of the
same gentleman to hungary in , of nicholas trist to mexico in ,
of commodore perry to japan in , of j.h. blount to hawaii in
.[] the last named case is perhaps the extremest of all. blount,
who was appointed while the senate was in session but without its advice
and consent, was given "paramount authority" over the american resident
minister at hawaii and was further empowered to employ the military and
naval forces of the united states, if necessary to protect american
lives and interests. his mission raised a vigorous storm of protest in
the senate, but the majority report of the committee which was created
to investigate the constitutional question vindicated the president in
the following terms: "a question has been made as to the right of the
president of the united states to dispatch mr. blount to hawaii as his
personal representative for the purpose of seeking the further
information which the president believed was necessary in order to
arrive at a just conclusion regarding the state of affairs in hawaii.
many precedents could be quoted to show that such power has been
exercised by the president on various occasions, without dissent on the
part of congress or the people of the united states. *** these
precedents also show that the senate of the united states, though in
session, need not be consulted as to the appointment of such agents,
***"[] for recent decades the continued vitality of the practice
is attested by such names as colonel house, late norman h. davis, who
filled the role of "ambassador at large" for a succession of
[pg ]administrations of both parties, and professor philip jessup, mr.
averell harriman, and other "ambassadors at large" of the truman
administration.
how is this practice to be squared with the express words of the
constitution? apparently, by stressing the fact that such appointments
or designations are ordinarily merely temporary and for special tasks,
and hence do not fulfill the tests of "office" in the strict sense.
(see p. ). in the same way the not infrequent practice of
presidents of appointing members of congress as commissioners to
negotiate treaties and agreements with foreign governments may be
regularized, notwithstanding the provision of article i, section ,
clause  of the constitution, which provides that "no senator or
representative shall, ***, be appointed to any civil office under the
authority of the united states, which shall have been created," during
his term; and no officer of the united states, "shall be a member of
either house during his continuance in office."[] the treaty of peace
with spain, the treaty to settle the behring sea controversy, the treaty
establishing the boundary line between canada and alaska, were
negotiated by commissions containing senators and representatives.
that the constitution distinguishes between the creation of an office
and appointment thereto for the generality of national offices has never
been questioned. the former is by law, and takes place by virtue of
congress's power to pass all laws necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the powers which the constitution confers upon the government
of the united states and its departments and officers. as incidental to
the establishment of an office congress has also the power to determine
the qualifications of the officer, and in so-doing necessarily limits
the range of choice of the appointing power. first and last, it has laid
down a great variety of qualifications, depending on citizenship,
residence, professional attainments, occupational experience, age, race,
property, sound habits, and so on. it has required that appointees be
representative of a political party, of an industry, of a geographic
region, or of a particular branch of the government. it has confined the
president's selection to a small number of persons to be named by
others.[] indeed, it has contrived at times [pg ]to designate a definite
eligibility, thereby virtually usurping the appointing power.[]
furthermore, congress has very broad powers in regulating the conduct in
office of officers and employees of the united states, especially
regarding their political activities. by an act passed in  it
prohibited "all executive officers or employees of the united states not
appointed by the president, with the advice and consent of the senate,
*** from requesting, giving to, or receiving from, any other officer
or employee of the government, any money or property or other thing of
value for political purposes."[] the validity of this measure having
been sustained,[] the substance of it, with some elaborations, was
incorporated in the civil service act of .[] by the hatch
act[] all persons in the executive branch of the government, or any
department or agency thereof, except the president and vice president
and certain "policy determining" officers, are forbidden to "take an
active part in political management or political campaigns," although
they are still permitted to "express their opinions on all political
subjects and candidates." in the united public workers v.
mitchell[] these provisions were upheld as "reasonable" against
objections based on amendments i, v, ix, and x.
[pg ]
by section a of the hatch act of , it is made "*** unlawful for
any person employed in any capacity by any agency of the federal
government, whose compensation, or any part thereof, is paid from funds
authorized or appropriated by any act of congress, to have membership in
any political party or organization which advocates the overthrow of our
constitutional form of government in the united states."[] in support
of this provision the th congress in its second session incorporated
in its appropriation acts a series of clauses which forbid the use of
any of the funds appropriated to pay the salary of any person who
advocates, or belongs to an organization which advocates, the overthrow
of the government by force; or any person who strikes, or who belongs to
an organization of government employees which asserts the right to
strike against the government.[] the apparent intention of this
proviso is to lay down a rule by which [pg ]the appointing and disbursing
authorities will be bound. since congress has the conceded power to lay
down the qualifications of officers and employees of the united states;
and since few people would contend that officers or employees of the
national government have a constitutional right to advocate its
overthrow or to strike against it, the above proviso would seem to be
entirely constitutional. president truman's "loyalty order"—executive
order —of march , [] is an outgrowth in part of this
legislation.
finally, congress may devolve upon one already in office additional
duties which are germane to his office without thereby "rendering it
necessary that the incumbent should be again nominated and appointed."
such legislation does not constitute an attempt by congress to seize the
appointing power.[]
except the president and the vice president all persons in the civil
service of the national government are appointive, and fall into one of
three categories, those who are appointed by the president, "by and with
the advice and consent of the senate"; inferior officers, whose
appointment congress has vested by law "in the president alone, in the
courts of law, or in the heads of departments"; and employees, a term
which is here used in a peculiar sense. ordinarily it denotes one who
stands in a contractual relationship to his employer, but here it
signifies all subordinate officials of the national government receiving
their appointments at the hands of officials who are not specifically
recognized by the constitution as capable of being vested by congress
with the appointing power.[] inferior officers are usually officers
intended to be subordinate to those in whom their appointment is
vested;[] but the requirement is by no means absolute.[]
[pg ]
nomination
the constitution appears to distinguish three stages in appointments by
the president with the advice and consent of the senate. the first is
the "nomination" of the candidate by the president alone; the second is
the assent of the senate to the candidate's "appointment"; and the third
is the final appointment and commissioning of the appointee, by the
president.[]
senate approval
the fact that the power of nomination belongs to the president alone
prevents the senate from attaching conditions to its approval of an
appointment, such as it may do to its approval of a treaty. in the words
of an early opinion of the attorney general: "the senate cannot
originate an appointment. its constitutional action is confined to the
simple affirmation or rejection of the president's nominations, and such
nominations fail whenever it rejects them. the senate may suggest
conditions and limitations to the president, but it cannot vary those
submitted by him, for no appointment can be made except on his
nomination, agreed to without qualification or alteration."[] this
view is borne out by early opinion[] as well as by the record of
practice under the constitution.
when senate consent is complete
early in january,  the senate requested president hoover to return
its resolution notifying him that it advised and consented to certain
nominations to the federal power commission. in support of its action
the senate invoked a long-standing rule permitting a motion to
reconsider a resolution confirming a nomination within "the next two
days of actual executive session of the senate" and the recall of the
notification to the president of the confirmation. the [pg ]nominees
involved having meantime taken the oath of office and entered upon the
discharge of their duties, the president responded with a refusal,
saying: "i cannot admit the power in the senate to encroach upon the
executive functions by removal of a duly appointed executive officer
under the guise of reconsideration of his nomination." the senate
thereupon voted to reconsider the nominations in question, again
approving two of the nominees, but rejecting the third, against whom it
instructed the district attorney of the district of columbia to
institute quo warranto proceedings in the supreme court of the
district. in united states v. smith[] the supreme court overruled
the proceedings on the ground that the senate had never before attempted
to apply its rule in the case of an appointee who had already been
installed in office on the faith of the senate's initial consent and
notification to the president. in  the late president roosevelt
rejected a similar demand by the senate, action which was not
challenged.[]
section . the president *** shall commission all the
officers of the united states.
commissioning the officer
this, as applied in practice, does not mean that he is under
constitutional obligation to commission those whose appointments have
reached that stage, but merely that it is he and no one else who has the
power to commission them, which he may do at his discretion. the sealing
and delivery of the commission is, on the other hand, by the doctrine of
marbury v. madison, in the case both of appointees by the president
and senate and by the president alone, a purely ministerial act which
has been lodged by statute with the secretary of state and the
performance of which may be compelled by mandamus unless the appointee
has been in the meantime validly removed.[] by an opinion of the
attorney general many years later, however, the president, even after he
has signed a commission, still has a locus poenitentiae and may
withhold it; nor is the appointee in office till he has his
commission.[] this is probably the correct doctrine.[]
[pg ]
clause . the president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that
may happen during the recess of the senate, by granting commissions
which shall expire at the end of their next session.
setting out from the proposition that the very nature of the executive
power requires that it shall always be "in capacity for action,"
attorneys general early came to interpret "happen" to mean "happen to
exist," and long continued practice securely establishes this
construction. it results that whenever a vacancy may have occurred in
the first instance, or for whatever reason, if it still continues after
the senate has ceased to sit and so cannot be consulted, the president
may fill it in the way described.[] but a senate "recess" does not
include holiday or temporary adjournments,[] while by an act of
congress, if the vacancy existed when the senate was in session, the ad
interim appointee may receive no salary until he has been confirmed by
the senate.[]
to be distinguished from the power to make recess appointments is the
power of the president to make temporary or ad interim designations of
officials to perform the duties of other absent officials. usually such
a situation is provided for in advance by a statute which designates the
inferior officer who is to act in place of his immediate superior. but
in the lack of such provision both theory and practice concede the
president the power to make the designation.[]
save for the provision which it makes for a power of impeachment of
"civil officers of the united states," the constitution contains no
[pg ]reference to a power to remove from office; and until its decision in
myers v. united states,[] october ,  the supreme court had
contrived to side-step every occasion for a decisive pronouncement
regarding the removal power, its extent, and location. the point
immediately at issue in the myers case was the effectiveness of an order
of the postmaster general, acting by direction of the president, to
remove from office a first class postmaster, in face of the following
provision of an act of congress passed in : "postmasters of the
first, second, and third classes shall be appointed and may be removed
by the president by and with the advice and consent of the senate, and
shall hold their offices for four years unless sooner removed or
suspended according to law."[] a divided court, speaking through
chief justice taft, held the order of removal valid, and the statutory
provision just quoted void. the chief justice's main reliance was on the
so-called "decision of ," the reference being to congress's course
that year in inserting in the act establishing the department of state a
proviso which was meant to imply recognition that the secretary would be
removable by the president at will. the proviso was especially urged by
madison, who invoked in support of it the opening words of article ii
and the president's duty to "take care that the laws be faithfully
executed." succeeding passages of the chief justice's opinion erect on
this basis a highly selective account of doctrine and practice regarding
the removal power down to the civil war which was held to yield the
following results: "that article ii grants to the president the
executive power of the government, i.e., the general administrative
control of those executing the laws, including the power of appointment
and removal of executive officers—a conclusion confirmed by his
obligation to take care that the laws be faithfully executed; that
article ii excludes the exercise of legislative power by congress to
provide for appointments and removals, except only as granted therein to
congress in the matter of inferior offices; that congress is only given
power to provide for appointments and removals of inferior officers
after it has vested, and on condition that it does vest, their
appointment in other authority than the president with the senate's
consent; that the provisions of the second section of article ii, which
blend action by the legislative branch, or by part of it, in the work of
the executive, are limitations to be strictly construed and not to be
extended by implication; that the president's power of removal is
further established as an incident to his specifically enumerated
function of appointment by and with the advice of the senate, but that
such incident does not by implication extend to removals the senate's
power of checking appointments; and finally that to hold otherwise would
make it impossible for the president, in case of political or other
differences with the senate or congress, to take care that the laws be
faithfully executed."[]
[pg ]the holding in the myers case boils down to the proposition that the
constitution endows the president with an illimitable power to remove
all officers in whose appointment he has participated with the exception
of judges of the united states. the motivation of the holding was not,
it may be assumed, any ambition on the chief justice's part to set
history aright—or awry.[] rather it was the concern which he voiced
in the following passage in his opinion: "there is nothing in the
constitution which permits a distinction between the removal of the head
of a department or a bureau, when he discharges a political duty of the
president or exercises his discretion, and the removal of executive
officers engaged in the discharge of their other normal duties. the
imperative reasons requiring an unrestricted power to remove the most
important of his subordinates in their most important duties must,
therefore, control the interpretation of the constitution as to all
appointed by him."[] thus spoke the former president taft, and the
result of his prepossession was a rule which, as was immediately pointed
out, exposed the so-called "independent agencies," the interstate
commerce commission, the federal trade commission, and the like, to
presidential domination.
[pg ]
"the nature of the office" concept
unfortunately, the chief justice, while professing to follow madison's
leadership had omitted to weigh properly the very important observation
which the latter had made at the time regarding the office of
comptroller of the treasury. "the committee," said madison, "has gone
through the bill without making any provision respecting the tenure by
which the comptroller is to hold his office. i think it is a point
worthy of consideration, and shall, therefore, submit a few observations
upon it. it will be necessary to consider the nature of this office, to
enable us to come to a right decision on the subject; in analyzing its
properties, we shall easily discover they are not purely of an executive
nature. it seems to me that they partake of a judiciary quality as well
as executive; perhaps the latter obtains in the greatest degree. the
principal duty seems to be deciding upon the lawfulness and justice of
the claims and accounts subsisting between the united states and
particular citizens: this partakes strongly of the judicial character,
and there may be strong reasons why an officer of this kind should not
hold his office at the pleasure of the executive branch of the
government."[] in humphrey v. united states,[] decided in ,
the court seized upon "the nature of the office" concept and applied it
as a much needed corrective to the myers holding.
the humphrey case
the material element of this case was that humphrey, a member of the
federal trade commission, was on october , , notified by president
roosevelt that he was "removed" from office, the reason being their
divergent views of public policy. in due course humphrey sued for
salary. distinguishing the myers case, justice sutherland, speaking for
the unanimous court, said: "a postmaster is an executive officer
restricted to the performance of executive functions. he is charged with
no duty at all related to either the legislative or judicial power. the
actual decision in the myers case finds support in the theory that
such an office is merely one of the units in the executive department
and, hence, inherently subject to the exclusive and illimitable power of
removal by the chief executive, whose subordinate [pg ]and aid he is. ***
it goes no farther;—much less does it include an officer who occupies
no place in the executive department and who exercise no part of the
executive power vested by the constitution in the president.
"the federal trade commission is an administrative body created by
congress to carry into effect legislative policies embodied in the
statute *** such a body cannot in any proper sense be characterized as
an arm or eye of the executive. its duties are performed without
executive leave and, in the contemplation of the statute, must be free
from executive control. *** we think it plain under the constitution
that illimitable power of removal is not possessed by the president in
respect of officers of the character of those just named, [the
interstate commerce commission, the federal trade commission, the court
of claims]. the authority of congress, in creating quasi-legislative or
quasi-judicial agencies, to require them to act in discharge of their
duties independently of executive control cannot well be doubted; and
that authority includes, as an appropriate incident, power to fix the
period during which they shall continue in office, and to forbid their
removal except for cause in the meantime. for it is quite evident that
one who holds his office only during the pleasure of another, cannot be
depended upon to maintain an attitude of independence against the
latter's will. ***
"the result of what we now have said is this: whether the power of the
president to remove an officer shall prevail, over the authority of
congress to condition the power by fixing a definite term and precluding
a removal except for cause, will depend upon the character of the
office; the myers decision, affirming the power of the president alone
to make the removal, is confined to purely executive officers; and as to
officers of the kind here under consideration, we hold that no removal
can be made during the prescribed term for which the officer is
appointed, except for one or more of the causes named in the applicable
statute."[]
other phases of presidential removal power
congress may "limit and restrict the power of removal as it deems best
for the public interests" in the case of inferior officers.[] [pg ]but in
the absence of specific legislative provision to the contrary, the
president may remove at his discretion an inferior officer whose term is
limited by statute,[] or one appointed with the consent of the
senate.[] he may remove an officer of the army or navy at any time by
nominating to the senate the officer's successor, provided the senate
approves the nomination.[] in  the president was sustained in
removing dr. e.a. morgan from the chairmanship of tva for refusal to
produce evidence in substantiation of charges which he had levelled at
his fellow directors.[] although no such cause of removal by the
president is stated in the act creating tva, the president's action,
being reasonably required to promote the smooth functioning of tva, was
within his duty to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed." so
interpreted, it did not violate the principle of administrative
independence set forth in humphrey v. united states.[]
presidents have more than once had occasion to stand in a protective
relation to their subordinates, assuming their defense in litigation
brought against them[] or pressing litigation in their behalf,[]
refusing a call for papers from one of the houses of congress which
might be used, in their absence from the seat of government, to their
disadvantage,[] challenging the constitutional validity of
legislation which he deemed detrimental to their interests.[] there
is one matter, moreover, as to which he is able to spread his own
official immunity to them. the courts may not require the divulging of
confidential communications from or to the president, that is,
communications which they choose to regard as confidential.[] whether
a congressional committee of inquiry would be similarly powerless is an
interesting question which has not been adjudicated.[] thus far such
issues between the two departments have been adjusted politically.
[pg ]
section . he shall from time to time give to the congress
information of the state of the union, and recommend to their
consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient;
he may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both houses, or either of
them, and in case of disagreement between them, with respect to the time
of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think
proper; he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers; he
shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed, and ***
legislative role of the president
the above clause, which imposes a duty rather than confers a power, is
the formal basis of the president's legislative leadership, which has
attained great proportions since . this development, [pg ]however,
represents the play of political and social forces rather than any
pronounced change in constitutional interpretation. especially is it the
result of the rise of parties and the accompanying recognition of the
president as party leader, of the appearance of the national nominating
convention and the party platform, and of the introduction of the spoils
system, an ever present help to presidents in times of troubled
relations with congress.[] it is true that certain pre-civil war
presidents, mostly of whig extraction, professed to entertain nice
scruples on the score of "usurping" legislative powers;[] but still
earlier ones, washington, jefferson, and jackson among them, took a very
different line, albeit less boldly and persistently than their later
imitators.[] today there is no subject on which the president may not
appropriately communicate to congress, in as precise terms as he
chooses, his conception of its duty. conversely, the president is not
obliged by this clause to impart information which, in his judgment,
should in the public interest be withheld.[] the president has
frequently summoned both houses into "extra" or "special sessions" for
legislative purposes, and the senate alone for the consideration of
nominations and treaties. his power to adjourn the houses has never been
exercised.
the right of reception
"ambassadors and other public ministers" embraces not only "all possible
diplomatic agents which any foreign power may accredit to the united
states"[] but also, as a practical construction of the constitution,
all foreign consular agents, who therefore may not exercise their
functions in the united states without an exequatur from the
president.[] the power to "receive" ambassadors, etc., includes,
moreover, the right to refuse to receive them, to request their recall,
to dismiss them, and to determine their eligibility under our laws.[]
furthermore, this power makes the president the sole mouthpiece of the
nation in its dealings with other nations.
[pg ]
wrote jefferson in : "the transaction of business with foreign
nations is executive altogether. it belongs, then, to the head of that
department, except as to such portions of it as are specially submitted
to the senate. exceptions are to be construed strictly."[] so when
citizen genet, envoy to the united states from the first french
republic, sought an exequatur for a consul whose commission was
addressed to the congress of the united states, jefferson informed him
that "as the president was the only channel of communication between the
united states and foreign nations, it was from him alone 'that foreign
nations or their agents are to learn what is or has been the will of the
nation;' that whatever he communicated as such, they had a right and
were bound to consider 'as the expression of the nation;' and that no
foreign agent could be 'allowed to question it,' or 'to interpose
between him and any other branch of government, under the pretext of
either's transgressing their functions.' mr. jefferson therefore
declined to enter into any discussion of the question as to whether it
belonged to the president under the constitution to admit or exclude
foreign agents. 'i inform you of the fact,' he said, 'by authority from
the president.' mr. jefferson therefore returned the consul's commission
and declared that the president would issue no exequatur to a consul
except upon a commission correctly addressed."[]
when in  a philadelphia quaker named logan went to paris on his own
to undertake a negotiation with the french government with a view to
averting war between france and the united states his enterprise
stimulated congress to pass "an act to prevent usurpation of executive
functions,"[] which, "more honored in the breach than the
observance," still survives on the statute books.[] the year
following john marshall, then a member of the house of representatives,
defended president john adams for delivering a fugitive from justice to
great britain under the th article of the jay treaty, instead of
leaving the business to the courts. he said: "the president is the sole
organ of the nation in its external relations, and its sole
representative with foreign nations. of consequence, the demand of a
foreign nation can only be made on him. he possesses the whole executive
power. he holds and directs the force of the nation. of consequence, any
act to be performed by the force of the nation is to be performed
through him."[] ninety-nine years later a senate foreign relations
committee took occasion to reiterate marshall's doctrine with
elaboration.[]
[pg ]
in his attack, instigated by jefferson, upon washington's proclamation
of neutrality in , at the outbreak of war between france and great
britain, madison advanced the argument that all large questions of
foreign policy fell within the ambit of congress, by virtue of its power
"to declare war," and in support of this proposition he disparaged the
presidential function of reception, in the following words: "i shall not
undertake to examine, what would be the precise extent and effect of
this function in various cases which fancy may suggest, or which time
may produce. it will be more proper to observe, in general, and every
candid reader will second the observation, that little, if anything,
more was intended by the clause, than to provide for a particular mode
of communication, almost grown into a right among modern nations; by
pointing out the department of the government, most proper for the
ceremony of admitting public ministers, of examining their credentials,
and of authenticating their title to the privileges annexed to their
character by the law of nations. this being the apparent design of the
constitution, it would be highly improper to magnify the function into
an important prerogative, even when no rights of other departments could
be affected by it."[]
hamilton, although he had expressed substantially the same view in the
federalist regarding the power of reception,[] adopted a very
different conception of it in defense of washington's proclamation.
writing over the pseudonym "pacificus," he said: "the right of the
executive to receive ambassadors and other public ministers, may serve
to illustrate the relative duties of the executive and legislative
departments. this right includes that of judging, in the case of a
revolution of government in a foreign country, whether the new rulers
are competent organs of the national will, and ought to be recognized,
or not; which, where a treaty antecedently exists between the united
[pg ]states and such nation, involves the power of continuing or suspending
its operation. for until the new government is acknowledged, the
treaties between the nations, so far at least as regards public
rights, are of course suspended. this power of determining virtually
upon the operation of national treaties, as a consequence of the power
to receive public ministers, is an important instance of the right of
the executive, to decide upon the obligations of the country with regard
to foreign nations. to apply it to the case of france, if there had been
a treaty of alliance, offensive and defensive, between the united states
and that country, the unqualified acknowledgment of the new government
would have put the united states in a condition to become an associate
in the war with france, and would have laid the legislature under an
obligation, if required, and there was otherwise no valid excuse, of
exercising its power of declaring war. this serves as an example of the
right of the executive, in certain cases, to determine the condition of
the nation, though it may, in its consequences, affect the exercise of
the power of the legislature to declare war. nevertheless, the executive
cannot thereby control the exercise of that power. the legislature is
still free to perform its duties, according to its own sense of them;
though the executive, in the exercise of its constitutional powers, may
establish an antecedent state of things, which ought to weigh in the
legislative decision. the division of the executive power in the
constitution, creates a concurrent authority in the cases to which it
relates."[]
nor did jefferson himself officially support madison's point of view, as
the following extract from his "minutes of a conversation," which took
place july , , between himself and citizen genet, show: "he asked
if they [congress] were not the sovereign. i told him no, they were
sovereign in making laws only, the executive was sovereign in executing
them, and the judiciary in construing them where they related to their
department. 'but,' said he, 'at least, congress are bound to see that
the treaties are observed.' i told him no; there were very few cases
indeed arising out of treaties, which they could take notice of; that
the president is to see that treaties are observed. 'if he decides
against the treaty, to whom is a nation to [pg ]appeal?' i told him the
constitution had made the president the last appeal. he made me a bow,
and said, that indeed he would not make me his compliments on such a
constitution, expressed the utmost astonishment at it, and seemed never
before to have had such an idea."[]
in his endeavor in  to minimize the importance of the president's
power of reception madison denied that it involved cognizance of the
question, whether those exercising the government of the accrediting
state have the right along with the possession. he said: "this belongs
to the nation, and to the nation alone, on whom the government operates.
*** it is evident, therefore, that if the executive has a right to
reject a public minister, it must be founded on some other consideration
than a change in the government, or the newness of the government; and
consequently a right to refuse to acknowledge a new government cannot be
implied by the right to refuse a public minister. it is not denied that
there may be cases in which a respect to the general principles of
liberty, the essential rights of the people, or the overruling
sentiments of humanity, might require a government, whether new or old,
to be treated as an illegitimate despotism. such are in fact discussed
and admitted by the most approved authorities. but they are great and
extraordinary cases, by no means submitted to so limited an organ of the
national will as the executive of the united states; and certainly not
to be brought by any torture of words, within the right to receive
ambassadors."[]
hamilton, with the case of genet before him, had taken the contrary
position, which history has ratified. in consequence of his power to
receive and dispatch diplomatic agents, but more especially the former,
the president possesses the power to recognize new states, communities
claiming the status of belligerency, and changes of government in
established states; also, by the same token, the power to decline
recognition, and thereby decline diplomatic relations with such new
states or governments. the affirmative precedents down to  are
succinctly summarized by john bassett moore in his famous digest, as
follows: "in the preceding review of the recognition, respectively, of
the new states, new governments, and belligerency, there has been made
in each case a precise statement of facts, showing how and by whom the
recognition was accorded. in every case, as it appears, of a new
government and of belligerency, the question of recognition was
determined solely by the executive. in the case of the spanish-american
republics, of texas, of hayti, and of liberia, the [pg ]president, before
recognizing the new state, invoked the judgment and cooperation of
congress; and in each of these cases provision was made for the
appointment of a minister, which, when made in due form, constitutes, as
has been seen, according to the rules of international law, a formal
recognition. in numerous other cases, the recognition was given by the
executive solely on his own responsibility."[]
the case of cuba
the question of congress's right also to recognize new states was
prominently raised in connection with cuba's final and successful
struggle for independence. beset by numerous legislative proposals of a
more or less mandatory character, urging recognition upon the president,
the senate foreign relations committee, in , made an elaborate
investigation of the whole subject and came to the following conclusions
as to this power: "the 'recognition' of independence or belligerency of
a foreign power, technically speaking, is distinctly a diplomatic
matter. it is properly evidenced either by sending a public minister to
the government thus recognized, or by receiving a public minister
therefrom. the latter is the usual and proper course. diplomatic
relations with a new power are properly, and customarily inaugurated at
the request of that power, expressed through an envoy sent for the
purpose. the reception of this envoy, as pointed out, is the act of the
president alone. the next step, that of sending a public minister to the
nation thus recognized, is primarily the act of the president. the
senate can take no part in it at all, until the president has [pg ]sent in a
nomination. then it acts in its executive capacity, and, customarily, in
'executive session.' the legislative branch of the government can
exercise no influence over this step except, very indirectly, by
withholding appropriations. *** nor can the legislative branch of the
government hold any communications with foreign nations. the executive
branch is the sole mouthpiece of the nation in communication with
foreign sovereignties. foreign nations communicate only through their
respective executive departments. resolutions of their legislative
departments upon diplomatic matters have no status in international law.
in the department of international law, therefore, properly speaking, a
congressional recognition of belligerency or independence would be a
nullity. *** congress can help the cuban insurgents by legislation in
many ways, but it cannot help them legitimately by mere declarations, or
by attempts to engage in diplomatic negotiations, if our interpretation
of the constitution is correct. that it is correct *** [is] shown by
the opinions of jurists and statesmen of the past."[] congress was
able ultimately to bundle a clause recognizing the independence of cuba,
as distinguished from its government, into the declaration of war of
april ,  against spain. for the most part, the sponsors of the
clause defended it by the following line of reasoning. diplomacy, they
said, was now at an end and the president himself had appealed to
congress to provide a solution for the cuban situation. in response
congress was about to exercise its constitutional power of declaring
war, and it has consequently the right to state the purpose of the war
which it was about to declare.[] the recognition of the union of
soviet socialist republics in  was an exclusively presidential act.
the potentialities of nonrecognition were conspicuously illustrated by
president woodrow wilson when he refused, early in , to recognize
provisional president huerta as the de facto government of mexico,
thereby contributing materially to huerta's downfall the year following.
at the same time wilson announced a general policy of nonrecognition in
the case of any government founded on acts of violence; and while he
observed this rule with considerable discretion, he consistently refused
to recognize the union of soviet socialist republics, and his successors
prior to president franklin d. roosevelt [pg ]did the same. the refusal of
the hoover administration to recognize the independence of the japanese
puppet state of manchukuo early in  was based on kindred grounds.
nonrecognition of the chinese communist government by the truman
administration has proved to be a decisive element of the current ()
foreign policy of the united states.
the relations of president and congress in the diplomatic field have,
first and, last, presented a varied picture of alternate cooperation and
tension,[] from which emerge two outstanding facts: first, the
overwhelming importance of presidential initiative in this area of
power; secondly, the ever increasing dependence of foreign policy on
congressional cooperation and support. first one and then the other
aspect of the relationship is uppermost. thus the united nations
participation act of december ,  appeared to contemplate
cooperation between the president and congress in the carrying out of
the duties of the united states to back up decisions of the security
council involving the use of armed force.[] when, nevertheless, the
first occasion arose such action, namely, to repel the invasion in june,
 of south korea by north korean forces, no such agreement had been
negotiated, and the intervention of the united states was authorized by
the president without referring the question to congress.[]
[pg ]
no president was ever more jealous of his prerogative in the realm of
foreign relations than president woodrow wilson. when, however, strong
pressure was brought to bear upon him by great britain respecting his
mexican policy he was constrained to go before congress and ask for a
modification of the panama tolls act of , which had also aroused
british ire. addressing congress, he said "i ask this of you in support
of the foreign policy of the administration. i shall not know how to
deal with other matters of even greater delicacy and nearer consequence
if you do not grant it to me in ungrudging measure."[] the fact is,
of course, that congress has enormous powers the support of which is
indispensable to any foreign policy. in the long run congress is the
body that lays and collects taxes for the common defense, that creates
armies and maintains navies, although it does not direct them, that
pledges the public credit, that declares war, that defines offenses
against the law of nations, that regulates foreign commerce; and it has
the further power "to make all laws which shall be necessary and
proper"—that is, which it deems to be such—for carrying into
execution not only its own powers but all the powers "of the government
of the united states and of any department or officer thereof."
moreover, its laws made "in pursuance" of these powers are "supreme law
of the land" and the president is bound constitutionally to "take care
that" they "be faithfully executed." in point of fact, congressional
legislation has operated to augment presidential powers in the foreign
field much more frequently than it has to curtail them. the lend-lease
act of march , [] is the classic example, although it only
brought to culmination a whole series of enactments with which congress
had aided and abetted the administration's foreign policy in the years
between  and .[]
it is not within the province of the courts to inquire into the policy
underlying action taken by the "political departments"—congress and the
president—in the exercise of their conceded powers. this [pg ]commonplace
maxim is, however, sometimes given an enlarged application so as to
embrace questions as to the existence of facts and even questions of law
which the court would normally regard as falling within its
jurisdiction. such questions are termed "political questions," and are
especially common in the field of foreign relations. the leading case is
foster v. neilson,[] where the matter in dispute was the validity
of a grant made by the spanish government in  of land lying to the
east of the mississippi river, involved with which question was the
further one whether the region between the perdido and mississippi
rivers belonged in  to spain or the united states. chief justice
marshall held that the court was bound by the action of the political
departments, the president and congress, in claiming the land for the
united states. he said: "if those departments which are intrusted with
the foreign intercourse of the nation, which assert and maintain its
interests against foreign powers, have unequivocally asserted its right
of dominion over a country of which it is in possession, and which it
claims under a treaty; if the legislature has acted on the construction
thus asserted, it is not in its own courts that this construction is to
be denied. a question like this, respecting the boundaries of nations,
is, as has been truly said, more a political than a legal question, and
in its discussion, the courts of every country must respect the
pronounced will of the legislature."[] the doctrine thus clearly
stated is further exemplified, with particular reference to presidential
action, by williams v. the suffolk insurance company.[] in this
case the underwriters of a vessel which had been confiscated by the
argentine government for catching seals off the falkland islands
contrary to that government's orders sought to escape liability by
showing that the argentinian government was the sovereign over these
islands and that, accordingly, the vessel had been condemned for wilful
disregard of legitimate authority. the court decided against the company
on the ground that the president had taken the position that the
falkland islands were not a part of argentina. it said: "can there be
any doubt, that when the executive branch of the government, which is
charged with our foreign relations, shall, in its correspondence with a
foreign nation, assume a fact in regard to the sovereignty of any island
or country, it is conclusive on the judicial department? and in this
view, it is not material to inquire, nor is it the province of the court
to determine, whether the executive be right or wrong. it is enough to
know, that in the exercise of his constitutional functions, he had
decided the question. having done this, under the responsibilities which
belong to him, it is obligatory on the people and government of the
union. if this were not the rule, cases might often arise, in which, on
most important questions of foreign jurisdiction, there would be an
irreconcilable difference between the executive and judicial
departments. by one of these departments, a foreign island or country
might be considered as at peace with the united states; [pg ]whilst the
other would consider it in a state of war. no well-regulated government
has ever sanctioned a principle so unwise, and so destructive of
national character."[] thus the right to determine the boundaries of
the country is a political function;[] as is also the right to
determine what country is sovereign of a particular region;[] to
determine whether a community is entitled under international law to be
considered a belligerent or an independent state;[] to determine
whether the other party has duly ratified a treaty;[] to determine
who is the de jure or de facto ruler of a country;[] to determine
whether a particular person is a duly accredited diplomatic agent to the
united states;[] to determine how long a military occupation shall
continue in fulfillment of the terms of a treaty;[] to determine
whether a treaty is in effect or not, although doubtless an extinguished
treaty could be constitutionally renewed by tacit consent.[]
recent statements of the doctrine
the assumption underlying the refusal of courts to intervene in such
cases is well stated in the recent case of chicago & s. airlines v.
waterman steamship corp.[] here the court refused to review orders of
the civil aeronautics board granting or denying applications by citizen
carriers to engage in overseas and foreign air transportation which by
the terms of the civil aeronautics act[] are subject to approval by
the president and therefore impliedly beyond those provisions of the act
authorizing judicial review of board orders.[] elaborating on the
necessity of judicial abstinence in the conduct of foreign relations,
justice jackson declared for the court: "the president, both as
commander in chief and as the nation's organ for foreign affairs, has
available intelligence services whose reports are not and ought not to
be published to the world. it would be intolerable that courts, without
the relevant information, should review and perhaps nullify actions of
the executive taken on information properly held secret. nor can courts
sit in camera in order to be taken into executive confidences. but
even if courts could require full disclosure, the very nature of
[pg ]executive decisions as to foreign policy is political, not judicial.
such decisions are wholly confided by our constitution on the political
departments of the government, executive and legislative. they are
delicate, complex, and involve large elements of prophecy. they are and
should be undertaken only by those directly responsible to the people
whose welfare they advance or imperil. they are decisions of a kind for
which the judiciary has neither aptitude, facilities nor responsibility
and which has long been held to belong in the domain of political power
not subject to judicial intrusion or inquiry."[]
to the same effect are the court's holding and opinion in ludecke v.
watkins,[] where the question at issue was the power of the president
to order the deportation under the alien enemy act of  of a german
alien enemy after the cessation of hostilities with germany. said
justice frankfurter for the court: "war does not cease with a cease-fire
order, and power to be exercised by the president such as that conferred
by the act of  is a process which begins when war is declared but is
not exhausted when the shooting stops. *** the court would be assuming
the functions of the political agencies of the government to yield to
the suggestion that the unconditional surrender of germany and the
disintegration of the nazi reich have left germany without a government
capable of negotiating a treaty of peace. it is not for us to question a
belief by the president that enemy aliens who were justifiably deemed
fit subjects for internment during active hostilities do not lose their
potency for mischief during [pg ]the period of confusion and conflict which
is characteristic of a state of war even when the guns are silent but
the peace of peace has not come. these are matters of political judgment
for which judges have neither technical competence nor official
responsibility."[]
the president as law enforcer
the constitution does not say that the president shall execute the laws,
but that "he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed,"
i.e., by others, who are commonly, but not always with strict accuracy,
termed his subordinates. what powers are implied from this duty? in this
connection five categories of executive power should be distinguished:
first, there is that executive power which the constitution confers
directly upon the president by the opening clause of article ii and, in
more specific terms, by succeeding clauses of the same article;
secondly, there is the sum total of the powers which acts of congress at
any particular time confer upon the president; thirdly, there is the sum
total of discretionary powers which acts of congress at any particular
time confer upon heads of departments and other executive
("administrative") agencies of the national government; [pg ]fourthly, there
is the power which stems from the duty to enforce the criminal statutes
of the united states; finally, there are so-called "ministerial duties"
which admit of no discretion as to the occasion or the manner of their
discharge. three principal questions arise: first, how does the
president exercise the powers which the constitution or the statutes
confer upon him; second, in what relation does he stand by virtue of the
"take care" clause to the powers of other executive, or administrative
agencies; third, in what relation does he stand to the enforcement of
the criminal laws of the united states?
whereas the british monarch is constitutionally under the necessity of
acting always through agents if his acts are to receive legal
recognition, the president is presumed to exercise certain of his
constitutional powers personally. in the words of an opinion by attorney
general cushing in : "it may be presumed that he, the man
discharging the presidential office, and he alone, grants reprieves and
pardons for offences against the united states, *** so he, and he
alone, is the supreme commander in chief of the army and navy of the
united states, and of the militia of the several states when called into
the actual service of the united states. that is a power
constitutionally inherent in the person of the president. no act of
congress, no act even of the president himself, can, by constitutional
possibility, authorize or create any military officer not subordinate to
the president."[] moreover, the obligation to act personally may be
sometimes enlarged by statute, as, for example, by the act organizing
the president with other designated officials into "an establishment by
name of the smithsonian institute."[] here, says the attorney
general, "the president's name of office is designatio personae." he
is also of opinion that expenditures from the "secret service" fund in
order to be valid, must be vouched for by the president personally.[]
on like grounds the supreme court once held void a decree of a court
martial, because, though it has been confirmed by the secretary of war,
it was not specifically stated to have received the sanction of the
president as required by the th article of war.[] this case has,
however, been virtually overruled, and at any rate such cases are
exceptional.[]
[pg ]the general rule, as stated by the court, is that when any duty is cast
by law upon the president, it may be exercised by him through the head
of the appropriate department, whose acts, if performed within the law,
thus become the president's acts.[] in williams v. united
states[] was involved an act of congress, which prohibited the
advance of public money in any case whatever to disbursing officers of
the united states, except under special direction by the president.[]
the supreme court held that the act did not require the personal
performance by the president of this duty. such a practice, said the
court, if it were possible, would absorb the duties of the various
departments of the government in the personal acts of one chief
executive officer, and be fraught with mischief to the public service.
the president's duty in general requires his superintendence of the
administration; yet he cannot be required to become the administrative
officer of every department and bureau, or to perform in person the
numerous details incident to services which, nevertheless, he is, in a
correct sense, by the constitution and laws required and expected to
perform.[] as a matter of administrative practice, in fact, most
orders and instructions emanating from the heads of the departments,
even though in pursuance of powers conferred by statute on the
president, do not even refer to the president.[]
[pg ]
suppose, that the law casts a duty upon a head of department eo
nomine, does the president thereupon become entitled by virtue of his
duty to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed," to substitute
his own judgment for that of the principal officer regarding the
discharge of such duty? in the debate in the house in  on the
location of the removal power madison argued that it ought to be
attributed to the president alone because it was "the intention of the
constitution, expressed especially in the faithful execution clause,
that the first magistrate should be responsible for the executive
department"; and this responsibility, he held, carried with it the power
to "inspect and control" the conduct of subordinate executive officers.
"vest," said he, "the power [of removal] in the senate jointly with the
president, and you abolish at once the great principle of unity and
responsibility in the executive department, which was intended for the
security of liberty and the public good."[] but this was said with
respect to the office of secretary of state; and when shortly afterward
the question arose as to the power of congress to regulate the tenure of
the comptroller of the treasury, madison assumed a very different
attitude, conceding in effect that this officer was to be an arm of
certain of congress's own powers, and should therefore be protected
against the removal power.[] (see p. ). and in marbury v.
madison,[] chief justice marshall traced a parallel distinction
between the duties of the secretary of state under the original act
which had created a "department of foreign affairs" and those which had
been added by the later act changing the designation of the department
to its present one. the former were, he pointed out, entirely in the
"political field," and hence for their discharge the secretary was left
responsible absolutely to the president. the latter, on the other hand,
were exclusively of statutory origin and sprang from the powers of
congress. for these, therefore, the secretary was "an officer of the
law" and "amenable to the law for his conduct."[]
an opinion rendered by attorney general wirt in  asserted the
proposition that the president's duty under the "take care" clause
required of him scarcely more than that he should bring a criminally
negligent official to book for his derelictions, either by removing him
or by setting in motion against him the processes of impeachment or of
criminal prosecution.[] the opinion entirely overlooked the
[pg ]important question of the location of the power to interpret the law
which is inevitably involved in any effort to enforce it. the
diametrically opposed theory that congress is unable to vest any head of
an executive department, even within the field of congress's
specifically delegated powers, with any legal discretion which the
president is not entitled to control was first asserted in unambiguous
terms in president jackson's protest message of april , ,[]
defending his removal of duane as secretary of the treasury, on account
of the latter's refusal to remove the deposits from the bank of the
united states. here it is asserted "that the entire executive power is
vested in the president"; that the power to remove those officers who
are to aid him in the execution of the laws is an incident of that
power; that the secretary of the treasury was such an officer; that the
custody of the public property and money was an executive function
exercised through the secretary of the treasury and his subordinates:
that in the performance of these duties the secretary was subject to the
supervision and control of the president: and finally that the act
establishing the bank of the united states "did not, as it could not
change the relation between the president and secretary—did not release
the former from his obligation to see the law faithfully executed nor
the latter from the president's supervision and control."[] in short,
the president's removal power, in this case unqualified, was the
sanction provided by the constitution for his power and duty to control
his "subordinates" in all their official actions of public consequence.
five years later the case of kendall v. united states[] arose. the
united states owed one stokes money, and when postmaster general
kendall, at jackson's instigation, refused to pay it, congress passed a
special act ordering payment. kendall, however, still proved
noncompliant, whereupon stokes sought and obtained a mandamus in the
united states circuit court for the district of columbia, and on appeal
this decision was affirmed by the supreme court. while kendall v.
united states, like marbury v. madison, involved the question of the
responsibility of a head of department for the performance of a
ministerial duty, the discussion by counsel before the court and the
court's own opinion covered the entire subject of the relation of the
president to his subordinates in the performance by them of statutory
duties. the lower court had asserted that the duty of the president
under the faithful execution clause gave him no other control over the
officer than to see that he acts honestly, with proper motives, but no
power to construe the law, and see that the executive action conforms to
it. counsel for kendall attacked this [pg ]position vigorously, relying
largely upon statements by hamilton, marshall, james wilson, and story
having to do with the president's power in the field of foreign
relations. the court rejected the implication with emphasis. there are,
it pointed out, "certain political duties imposed upon many officers in
the executive department, the discharge of which is under the direction
of the president. but it would be an alarming doctrine, that congress
cannot impose upon any executive officer any duty they may think proper,
which is not repugnant to any rights secured and protected by the
constitution; and in such cases the duty and responsibility grow out of
and are subject to the control of the law, and not to the direction of
the president. and this is emphatically the case, where the duty
enjoined is of a mere ministerial character."[] in short, the court
recognized the underlying question of the case to be whether the
president's duty to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed"
made it constitutionally impossible for congress ever to entrust the
construction of its statutes to anybody but the president; and it
answered this in the negative.
how does this issue stand today? the answer to this question, so far as
there is one, is to be sought in a comparison of the court's decisions
in the myers and humphrey cases respectively.[] the former decision
is still valid to support the president's right to remove, and hence to
control the decisions of, all officials through whom he exercises the
great political powers which he derives from the constitution; also all
officials—usually heads of departments—through whom he exercises
powers conferred upon him by statute. the humphrey decision assures to
congress the right to protect the tenure, and hence the freedom of
decision of all officials upon whom, in the exercise of its delegated
powers, it confers duties of a "quasi-legislative" or a "quasi-judicial"
nature. the former may be described as duties for the satisfactory
discharge of which congress justifiably feels that a specialized and
informed judgment is requisite. the latter are duties the discharge of
which closely touches private rights and which ought therefore be
accompanied or preceded by a "quasi-judicial" inquiry capable of
affording the claimants of such rights the opportunity to be heard. in
neither case is the president entitled to force his reading of the law
upon the officer, but only to take care that the latter exercise his
powers according to his own best lights.
[pg ]
this matter also came to a head in "the reign of andrew jackson,"
preceding, and indeed foreshadowing, the duane episode by some months.
"at that epoch," wyman relates in his principles of administrative law,
"the first announcement of the doctrine of centralism in its entirety
was set forth in an obscure opinion upon an unimportant matter—the
jewels of the princess of orange,  opin.  (). these jewels ***
were stolen from the princess by one polari, and were seized by the
officers of the united states customs in the hands of the thief.
representations were made to the president of the united states by the
minister of the netherlands of the facts in the matter, which were
followed by request for return of the jewels. in the meantime the
district attorney was prosecuting condemnation proceedings in behalf of
the united states which he showed no disposition to abandon. the
president felt himself in a dilemma, whether if it was by statute the
duty of the district attorney to prosecute or not, the president could
interfere and direct whether to proceed or not. the opinion was written
by taney, then attorney-general; it is full of pertinent illustrations
as to the necessity in an administration of full power in the chief
executive as the concomitant of his full responsibility. it concludes:
if it should be said that, the district attorney having the power to
discontinue the prosecution, there is no necessity for inferring a right
in the president to direct him to exercise it—i answer that the
direction of the president is not required to communicate any new
authority to the district attorney, but to direct him in the execution
of a power he is admitted to possess. the most valuable and proper
measure may often be for the president to order the district attorney to
discontinue prosecution. the district attorney might refuse to obey the
president's order; and if he did refuse, the prosecution, while he
remained in office, would still go on; because the president himself
could give no order to the court or to the clerk to make any particular
entry. he could only act through his subordinate officer the district
attorney, who is responsible to him and who holds his office at his
pleasure. and if that officer still continue a prosecution which the
president is satisfied ought not to continue, the removal of the
disobedient officer and the substitution of one more worthy in his place
would enable the president through him faithfully to execute the law.
and it is for this among other reasons that the power of removing the
district attorney resides in the president."[]
the power accruing to the president from his function of law
interpretation preparatory to law enforcement is daily illustrated in
[pg ]relation to such statutes as the anti-trust acts, the taft-hartley act,
the internal security act, and many lesser statutes. nor is this the
whole story. not only do all presidential regulations and orders based
on statutes which vest power in him or on his own constitutional powers
have the force of law, provided they do not transgress the court's
reading of such statutes or of the constitution,[] but he sometimes
makes law in a more special sense. in the famous neagle case[] an
order of the attorney general to a united states marshal to protect a
justice of the supreme court whose life had been threatened by a suitor
was attributed to the president and held to be "a law of the united
states" in the sense of section  of the revised statutes, and as such
to afford basis for a writ of habeas corpus transferring the said
marshal, who had "got his man," from state to national custody. speaking
for the court, justice miller inquired: "is this duty [the duty of the
president to take care that the laws be faithfully executed] limited to
the enforcement of acts of congress or of treaties of the united states
according to their express terms, or does it include the rights,
duties and obligations growing out of the constitution itself, our
international relations, and all the protection implied by the nature of
the government under the constitution?"[] obviously, an affirmative
answer is assumed to the second branch of this inquiry, an assumption
which is borne out by numerous precedents. and in united states v.
midwest oil company[] it was ruled that the president had, by dint of
repeated assertion of it from an early date, acquired the right to
withdraw, via the land department, public lands, both mineral and
nonmineral, from private acquisition, congress having never repudiated
the practice.
"whenever, by reason of unlawful obstructions, combinations, or
assemblages of persons, or rebellion against the authority of the
government of the united states, it shall become impracticable, in the
judgment of the president, to enforce, by the ordinary course of
judicial proceedings, the laws of the united states within any state or
territory, it shall be lawful for the president to call forth the
militia of any or all the states, and to employ such parts of the land
and naval forces of the united states as he may deem necessary to
enforce the faithful execution of the laws of the united states, or to
[pg ]suppress such rebellion, in whatever state or territory thereof the
laws of the united states may be forcibly opposed, or the execution
thereof forcibly obstructed."[] this provision of the united states
code consolidates a course of legislation which began at the time of the
whiskey rebellion of .[] in martin v. mott,[] which arose
out of the war of , it was held that the authority to decide whether
the exigency has arisen belongs exclusively to the president.[] even
before that time, jefferson had in , in the course of his efforts to
enforce the embargo acts, issued a proclamation ordering "all officers
having authority, civil or military, who shall be found in the vicinity"
of an unruly combination to aid and assist "by all means in their power,
by force of arms and otherwise" the suppression of such
combination.[] forty-six years later attorney general cushing advised
president pierce that in enforcing the fugitive slave act of ,
marshals of the united states, had authority when opposed by unlawful
combinations, to summon to their aid not only bystanders and citizens
generally, but armed forces within their precincts, both state militia
and united states officers, soldiers, sailors, and marines,[] a
doctrine which pierce himself improved upon two years later by
asserting, with reference to the civil war then raging in kansas, that
it lay within his obligation to take care that the laws be faithfully
executed to place the forces of the united states in kansas at the
disposal of the marshal there, to be used as a portion of the posse
comitatus. lincoln's call of april , , for , volunteers was,
on the other hand, a fresh invocation, though of course on a vastly
magnified scale, of jefferson's conception of a posse comitatus
subject to presidential call.[] the provision above extracted from
the united states code ratifies this conception as regards the state
militias and the national forces.
[pg ]
see article i, section , clause , pp. -.
the question of executive power in the presence of civil disorder is
dealt with in modern terms in moyer v. peabody,[] decided in ,
to which the debs case,[] decided in , may be regarded as an
addendum. moyer, a labor leader, brought suit against peabody, for
having ordered his arrest during a labor dispute which occurred while
peabody was governor of colorado. speaking for a unanimous court, one
justice being absent, justice holmes said: "of course the plaintiff's
position is that he has been deprived of his liberty without due process
of law. but it is familiar that what is due process of law depends on
circumstances. it varies with the subject matter and the necessities of
the situation. *** the facts that we are to assume are that a state of
insurrection existed and that the governor, without sufficient reason
but in good faith, in the course of putting the insurrection down held
the plaintiff until he thought that he safely could release him. ***
in such a situation we must assume that he had a right under the state
constitution and laws to call out troops, as was held by the supreme
court of the state. *** that means that he shall make the ordinary use
of the soldiers to that end; that he may kill persons who resist and, of
course, that he may use the milder measure of seizing the bodies of
those whom he considers to stand in the way of restoring peace. such
arrests are not necessarily for punishment, but are by way of precaution
to prevent the exercise of hostile power. so long as such arrests are
made in good faith and in the honest belief that they are needed in
order to head the insurrection off, the governor is the final judge and
cannot be subjected to an action after he is out of office on the ground
that he had not reasonable ground for his belief. *** when it comes to
a decision by the head of the state upon a matter involving its life,
the ordinary rights of individuals must yield to what he deems the
necessities of the moment. public danger warrants the substitution of
executive process for judicial process."[]
the debs case of  arose out of a railway strike which had caused the
president to dispatch troops to chicago the previous year. coincidently
with this move, the united states district attorney stationed there,
acting upon orders from washington, obtained an [pg ]injunction from the
united states circuit court forbidding the strike on account of its
interference with the mails and with interstate commerce. the question
before the supreme court was whether this injunction, for violation of
which debs has been jailed for contempt of court, had been granted with
jurisdiction. conceding, in effect, that there was no statutory warrant
for the injunction, the court nevertheless validated it on the ground
that the government was entitled thus to protect its property in the
mails, and on a much broader ground which is stated in the following
passage of justice brewer's opinion for the court: "every government,
entrusted, by the very terms of its being, with powers and duties to be
exercised and discharged for the general welfare, has a right to apply
to its own courts for any proper assistance in the exercise of the one
and the discharge of the other. *** while it is not the province of
the government to interfere in any mere matter of private controversy
between individuals, or to use its granted powers to enforce the rights
of one against another, yet, whenever the wrongs complained of are such
as affect the public at large, and are in respect of matters which by
the constitution are entrusted to the care of the nation and concerning
which the nation owes the duty to all the citizens of securing to them
their common rights, then the mere fact that the government has no
pecuniary interest in the controversy is not sufficient to exclude it
from the courts, or prevent it from taking measures therein to fully
discharge those constitutional duties."[]
the restrictions imposed by the norris-laguardia act[] on the
issuance of injunctions by the federal courts in cases "involving or
growing out of any labor dispute" later cast a shadow of doubt over the
debs case, which was deepened, if anything, by the court's decision in
, in united states v. united mine workers.[] but such doubts
have been since dispelled by the taft-hartley act, which provides that
whenever in his opinion a threatened or actual strike or lockout
affecting the whole or a substantial part of an industry engaged in
interstate commerce will, "if permitted to occur or continue, imperil
the national health or safety," the president may appoint a board of
[pg ]inquiry and, upon its so finding, "may direct the attorney general to
petition any district court of the united states having jurisdiction of
the parties to enjoin such strike or lockout or the continuing thereof
***," and the court shall have jurisdiction to do so, provided it
shares the president's view of the situation.[] administration and
labor critics of the act did not challenge the constitutionality of this
provision. they questioned its necessity in view of the president's
"inherent powers" in the face of emergency.[]
see art. iv, sec. , p. .
illustrative of the president's duty to discharge the responsibilities
of the united states at international law with a view to avoiding
difficulties with other governments, was the action of president wilson
in closing the marconi wireless station at siasconset, massachusetts on
the outbreak of the european war in , the company having refused
assurance that it would comply with naval censorship regulations.
justifying this drastic invasion of private rights, attorney general
gregory said: "the president of the united states is at the head of one
of the three great coordinate departments of the government. he is
commander in chief of the army and the navy. *** if the president is
of the opinion that the relations of this country with foreign nations
are, or are likely to be, endangered by action deemed by him
inconsistent with a due neutrality, it is his right and duty to protect
such relations; and in doing so, in the absence of any statutory
restrictions, he may act through such executive [pg ]office or department as
appears best adapted to effectuate the desired end. *** i do not
hesitate, in view of the extraordinary conditions existing, to advise
that the president, through the secretary of the navy or any appropriate
department, close down, or take charge of and operate, the plant ***,
should he deem it necessary in securing obedience to his proclamation of
neutrality."[]
the right of the president to use force in vindication of american
rights of person and property abroad was demonstrated in  by the
bombardment of greytown, nicaragua by lieutenant hollins of the u.s.s.
cyane, in default of reparation from the local authorities for an attack
by a mob on the united states consul at that place. upon his return to
the united states hollins was sued in a federal court by one durand for
the value of certain property which was alleged to have been destroyed
in the bombardment. his defense was based upon the orders of the
president and secretary of the navy, and was sustained by justice
nelson, then on circuit, in the following words: "as the executive head
of the nation, the president is made the only legitimate organ of the
general government, to open and carry on correspondence or negotiations
with foreign nations, in matters concerning the interests of the country
or of its citizens. it is to him, also, the citizens abroad must look
for protection of person and of property, and for the faithful execution
of the laws existing and intended for their protection. for this
purpose, the whole executive power of the country is placed in his
hands, under the constitution, and the laws passed in pursuance thereof;
and different departments of government have been organized, through
which this power may be most conveniently executed, whether by
negotiation or by force—a department of state and a department of the
navy.
"now, as it respects the interposition of the executive abroad, for the
protection of the lives or property of the citizen, the duty must, of
necessity, rest in the discretion of the president. acts of lawless
violence, or of threatened violence to the citizen or his property,
cannot be anticipated and provided for; and the protection, to be
effectual or of any avail, may, not unfrequently, require the most
prompt and decided action. under our system of government, the citizen
abroad is as much entitled to protection as the citizen at home. the
great object and duty of government is the protection of the lives,
liberty, and property of the people composing it, whether abroad or at
home; and any government failing in the accomplishment of the object, or
the performance of the duty, is not worth preserving."[]
[pg ]
in his little volume on world policing and the constitution[] mr.
james grafton rogers lists  episodes similar to the greytown affair,
stretching between the undeclared war with france in  and pearl
harbor. while inviting some pruning, the list demonstrates beyond
peradventure the existence in the president, as chief executive and
commander in chief, of power to judge whether a situation requires the
use of available forces to protect american rights of person and
property outside the united states and to take action in harmony with
his decision. such employment of the forces have, it is true, been
usually justifiable acts of self defense rather than acts of war, but
the countries where they occurred were entitled to treat them as acts of
war nevertheless, although they have generally been too feeble to assert
their prerogative in this respect, and have sometimes actually chosen to
turn the other cheek. thus when in  president mckinley, without
consulting congress, contributed a sizable contingent to the joint
forces that went to the relief of the foreign legations in peking, the
chinese imperial government agreed that this action had not constituted
war.[]
the atlantic pact
article v of the atlantic pact builds on such precedents. the novel
feature is its enlarged conception of defensible american interests
abroad. in the words of the published abstract of the report of the
committee on foreign relations on the pact, "article  records what is a
fact, namely, that an armed attack within the meaning of the treaty
would in the present-day world constitute an attack upon the entire
community comprising the parties to the treaty, including the united
states. accordingly, the president and the congress, each within their
sphere of assigned constitutional responsibilities, would be expected to
take all action necessary and appropriate to protect the united states
against the consequences and dangers of an armed attack committed
against any party to the treaty."[] but from the very nature of
things, the discharge of this obligation against overt force will
ordinarily rest with the president in the first instance, just as has
the discharge in the past of the like obligation in the protection of
american rights abroad. furthermore, in the discharge of this obligation
the president will ordinarily be required to use force [pg ]and perform acts
of war. such is the verdict of history, a verdict which was foreseen
more or less definitely by the framers themselves.[]
facts[]
to avert a nation-wide strike of steel workers which he believed would
jeopardize the national defense, president truman, on april th, ,
issued executive order [] directing the secretary of commerce to
seize and operate most of the steel mills of the country. the order
cited no specific statutory authorization, but invoked generally the
powers vested in the president by the constitution and laws of the
united states. secretary sawyer forthwith issued an order seizing the
mills and directing their presidents to operate them as operating
managers for the united states in accordance with his regulations and
directions. the president promptly reported these events to congress,
conceding congress's power to supersede his order; but congress failed
to do anything about the matter either then or a fortnight later, when
the president again brought up the subject in a special message.[] it
had in fact provided other methods of dealing with such situations, in
the elaboration of which it had declined repeatedly to authorize
governmental seizures of property to settle labor disputes. the steel
companies sued the secretary in a federal district court, praying for a
declaratory judgment and injunctive relief. the district court issued a
preliminary injunction, which the court of appeals stayed.[] on
certiorari to the court of appeals, the district court's order was
affirmed by the supreme court by a vote of six justices to three.
justice black delivered the opinion of the court in which justices
frankfurter, douglas, jackson, and burton formally concurred. justice
clark expressly limited his concurrence to the judgment of the court.
all these justices presented what are termed "concurring" opinions. the
chief justice, speaking for himself and justices reed and minton,
presented a dissenting opinion.
[pg ]
the doctrine of the opinion of the court
the chief points urged in the black opinion are the following: there was
no statute which expressly or impliedly authorized the president to take
possession of the property involved. on the contrary, in its
consideration of the taft-hartley act in , congress refused to
authorize governmental seizures of property as a method of preventing
work stoppages and settling labor disputes. authority to issue such an
order in the circumstances of the case was not deducible from the
aggregate of the president's executive powers under article ii of the
constitution; nor was the order maintainable as an exercise of the
president's powers as commander in chief of the armed forces. the power
sought to be exercised was the lawmaking power, which the constitution
vests in the congress alone. even if it were true that other presidents
have taken possession of private business enterprises without
congressional authority in order to settle labor disputes, congress was
not thereby divested of its exclusive constitutional authority to make
the laws necessary and proper to carry out all powers vested by the
constitution "in the government of the united states, or any department
or officer thereof."[]
the factual record
the pivotal proposition of the opinion is, in brief, that inasmuch as
congress could have ordered the seizure of the steel mills, the
president had no power to do so without prior congressional
[pg ]authorization. to support this position no proof is offered in the way
of past opinion, and the following extract from justice clark's opinion
presents a formidable challenge to it: "one of this court's first
pronouncements upon the powers of the president under the constitution
was made by mr. chief justice john marshall some one hundred and fifty
years ago. in little v. barreme,[] he used this characteristically
clear language in discussing the power of the president to instruct the
seizure of the flying fish, a vessel bound from a french port: 'it is
by no means clear that the president of the united states whose high
duty it is to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed," and who
is commander in chief of the armies and navies of the united states,
might not, without any special authority for that purpose, in the then
existing state of things, have empowered the officers commanding the
armed vessels of the united states, to seize and send into port for
adjudication, american vessels which were forfeited by being engaged in
this illicit commerce. but when it is observed that [an act of congress]
gives a special authority to seize on the high seas, and limits that
authority to the seizure of vessels bound or sailing to a french port,
the legislature seems to have prescribed that the manner in which this
law shall be carried into execution, was to exclude a seizure of any
vessel not bound to a french port.' accordingly, a unanimous court held
that the president's instructions had been issued without authority and
that they could not 'legalize an act which without those instructions
would have been a plain trespass.' i know of no subsequent holding of
this court to the contrary."[]
another field which the president and congress have each occupied at
different times is extradition. in  president adams, in order to
execute the extradition provisions of the jay treaty, issued a warrant
for the arrest of one jonathan robbins. as chief justice vinson recites
in his opinion: "this action was challenged in congress on the ground
that no specific statute prescribed the method to be used in executing
the treaty. john marshall, then a member of the house of
representatives, in the course of his successful defense of the
president's action, said: 'congress, unquestionably, may prescribe the
mode, and congress may devolve on others the whole execution of the
contract; but, till this be done, it seems the duty of the executive
department to execute the contract by any means it possesses.'"[] in
 congress enacted a statute governing this subject which confers
upon the courts, both state and federal, the duty of handling
extradition cases.[]
[pg ]the first neutrality proclamation was issued by president washington in
 without congressional authorization.[] the following year
congress enacted the first neutrality statute,[] and since then
proclamations of neutrality have been based on an act of congress
governing the matter. the president may, in the absence of legislation
by congress, control the landing of foreign cables in the united states
and the passage of foreign troops through american territory, and has
done so repeatedly.[] likewise, until congress acts, he may govern
conquered territory[] and, "in the absence of attempts by congress to
limit his power," may set up military commissions in territory occupied
by the armed forces of the united states.[] he may determine, in a
way to bind the courts, whether a treaty is still in force as law of the
land, although again the final power in the field rests with
congress.[] one of the president's most ordinary powers and duties is
that of ordering the prosecution of supposed offenders against the laws
of the united states. yet congress may do the same thing.[] on
september , , president lincoln issued a proclamation suspending
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus throughout the union in
certain classes of cases. by an act passed march , , congress
ratified this action of the president and at the same time brought the
whole subject of military arrests in the united states under legal
control.[] conversely, when president wilson failed in march  to
obtain congress's consent to his arming american merchant vessels with
defensive arms, he went ahead and did it anyway, "fortified not only by
the known sentiments of the majority in congress but also by the advice
of his secretary of state and attorney general."[]
on the specific matter of property seizures, justice frankfurter's
concurring opinion in the youngstown case is accompanied by appendices
containing a synoptic analysis of legislation authorizing seizures [pg ]of
industrial property and also a summary of seizures of industrial plants
and facilities by presidents without definite statutory warrant.
eighteen such statutes are listed, all but the first of which were
enacted between  and . of presidential seizures unsupported by
reference to specific statutory authorization, he lists eight as
occurring during world war i. to justify these it was deemed sufficient
to refer to "the constitution and laws" generally. for the world war ii
period he lists eleven seizures in justification of which no statutory
authority was cited. the first of these was the seizure of the north
american aviation, inc., of englewood, california. in support of this
action attorney general jackson, as chief justice vinson points out in
his dissenting opinion, "vigorously proclaimed that the president had
the moral duty to keep this nation's defense effort a 'going
concern.'"[] said the then attorney general, "the presidential
proclamation rests upon the aggregate of the presidential powers derived
from the constitution itself and from statutes enacted by the congress.
the constitution lays upon the president the duty 'to take care that the
laws be faithfully executed.' among the laws which he is required to
find means to execute are those which direct him to equip an enlarged
army, to provide for a strengthened navy, to protect government
property, to protect those who are engaged in carrying out the business
of the government, and to carry out the provisions of the lend-lease
act. for the faithful execution of such laws the president has back of
him not only each general law-enforcement power conferred by the various
acts of congress but the aggregate of all such laws plus that wide
discretion as to method vested in him by the constitution for the
purpose of executing the laws."[] in the war labor disputes act of
june , ,[] such seizures were put on a statutory basis. as the
chief justice points out, the purpose of this measure, as stated by its
sponsor, was not to augment presidential power but to "let the country
know that the congress is squarely behind the president."[]
in united states v. pewee coal company, inc.[] the court had before
it the claim of a coal mine operator whose property was seized by the
president without statutory authorization, "to avert a nation-wide
strike of miners." the company brought an action in the court of claims
to recover under the fifth amendment for the total operating losses
sustained during the period in which this property was operated by the
united states. the court awarded judgment for $,. and the supreme
court sustained this judgment, a result which implied the validity of
the seizure.[] said justice reed, in his concurring opinion of the
case: "the relatively new technique of temporary taking by eminent
domain is a most useful [pg ]administrative device: many properties, such as
laundries, or coal mines, or railroads, may be subjected to public
operation only for a short time to meet war or emergency needs, and can
then be returned to their owners." the implications of united states
v. pewee coal company, inc.,[] clearly sustained the government in
youngstown, assuming that congress had not acted in the latter case. and
one instance of seizure by executive order justice frankfurter fails to
mention. this was the seizure by president wilson in the late summer of
, following the outbreak of war in europe, of the marconi wireless
station at siasconset when the company refused assurance that it would
comply with naval censorship regulations. attorney general gregory's
justification of this action at the time was quoted on an earlier
page.[]
the doctrine dictated by the above considerations as regards the
exercise of executive power in the field of legislative power was well
stated by mr. john w. davis, principal counsel on the present occasion
for the steel companies, in a brief which he filed nearly forty years
ago as solicitor general, in defense of the action of the president in
withdrawing certain lands from public entry although his doing so was at
the time contrary to express statute. "ours," the brief reads, "is a
self-sufficient government within its sphere. (ex parte siebold, 
u.s. , ; in re debs,  u.s. , .) 'its means are adequate
to its ends' (mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat. , ), and it is
rational to assume that its active forces will be found equal in most
things to the emergencies that confront it. while perfect flexibility is
not to be expected in a government of divided powers, and while division
of power is one of the principal features of the constitution, it is the
plain duty of those who are called upon to draw the dividing lines to
ascertain the essential, recognize the practical, and avoid a slavish
formalism which can only serve to ossify the government and reduce its
efficiency without any compensating good. the function of making laws is
peculiar to congress, and the executive can not exercise that function
to any degree. but this is not to say that all of the subjects
concerning which laws might be made are perforce removed from the
possibility of executive influence. the executive may act upon things
and upon men in many relations which have not, though they might have,
been actually regulated by congress. in other words, just as there are
fields which are peculiar to congress and fields which are peculiar to
the executive, so there are fields which are common to both, in the
sense that the [pg ]executive may move within them until they shall have
been occupied by legislative action. these are not the fields of
legislative prerogative, but fields within which the lawmaking power may
enter and dominate whenever it chooses. this situation results from the
fact that the president is the active agent, not of congress, but of the
nation. as such he performs the duties which the constitution lays upon
him immediately, and as such, also, he executes the laws and regulations
adopted by congress. he is the agent of the people of the united states,
deriving all his powers from them and responsible directly to them. in
no sense is he the agent of congress. he obeys and executes the laws of
congress, not because congress is enthroned in authority over him, but
because the constitution directs him to do so. therefore it follows that
in ways short of making laws or disobeying them, the executive may be
under a grave constitutional duty to act for the national protection in
situations not covered by the acts of congress, and in which, even, it
may not be said that his action is the direct expression of any
particular one of the independent powers which are granted to him
specifically by the constitution. instances wherein the president has
felt and fulfilled such a duty have not been rare in our history,
though, being for the public benefit and approved by all, his acts have
seldom been challenged in the courts."[]
concurring opinions
justice frankfurter begins the material part of his opinion with the
statement: "we must *** put to one side consideration of what powers
the president would have had if there had been no legislation whatever
bearing on the authority asserted by the seizure, or if the seizure had
been only for a short, explicitly temporary period, to be terminated
automatically unless congressional approval were given."[] he then
enters upon a review of the proceedings of congress which attended the
enactment of the taft-hartley act, and concludes that "congress has
expressed its will to withhold this power [of seizure] from the
president as though it had said so in so many words."[]
justice douglas's contribution consists in the argument that: "the
branch of government that has the power to pay compensation for a
seizure is the only one able to authorize a seizure or make lawful one
that the president has effected. that seems to me to be the necessary
result of the condemnation provision in the fifth amendment."[] this
contention overlooks such cases as mitchell v. harmony;[] united
states v. russell;[] portsmouth harbor land and hotel co. v.
united [pg ]states;[] and united states v. pewee coal co.;[] in all
of which a right of compensation was recognized to exist in consequence
of damage to property which resulted from acts stemming ultimately from
constitutional powers of the president. in united states v. pink,[]
justice douglas quotes with approval the following words from the
federalist,[] "all constitutional acts of power, whether in the
executive or in the judicial branch, have as much validity and
obligation as if they proceeded from the legislature." if this is so as
to treaty obligations, then all the more must it be true of obligations
which are based directly on the constitution.[]
justice jackson's opinion contains little that is of direct pertinence
to the constitutional issue. important, however, is his contention,
which, seems to align him with justice frankfurter, that congress had
"not left seizure of private property an open field but has covered it
by three statutory policies inconsistent with this seizure"; from which
he concludes that "*** we can sustain the president only by holding
that seizure of such strike-bound industries is within his domain and
beyond control by congress."[] the opinion concludes: "in view of the
ease, expedition and safety with which congress can grant and has
granted large emergency powers, certainly ample to embrace this crisis,
i am quite unimpressed with the argument that we should affirm
possession of them without statute. such power either has no beginning
or it has no end. if it exists, it need submit to no legal restraint. i
am not alarmed that it would plunge us straightway into dictatorship,
but it is at least a step in that wrong direction. *** but i have no
illusion that any decision by this court can keep power in the hands of
congress if it is not wise and timely in meeting its problems. a crisis
that challenges the president equally, or perhaps primarily, challenges
congress. if not good law, there was worldly wisdom in the maxim
attributed to napoleon that 'the tools belong to the man who can use
them.' we may say that power to legislate for emergencies belongs in the
hands of congress, but only congress itself can prevent power from
slipping through its fingers."[]
justice burton, referring to the taft-hartley act, says: "*** the most
significant feature of that act is its omission of [pg ]authority to seize,"
citing debate on the measure.[] "in the case before us, congress
authorized a procedure which the president declined to follow."[]
justice clark bases his position directly upon chief justice marshall's
opinion in little v. barreme.[] he says: "i conclude that where
congress has laid down specific procedures to deal with the type of
crisis confronting the president, he must follow these procedures in
meeting the crisis; *** i cannot sustain the seizure in question
because here, as in little v. barreme, congress had prescribed methods
to be followed by the president in meeting the emergency at hand."[]
his reference is to the taft-hartley act. at the same time he endorses
the view, "taught me not only by the decision of chief justice marshall
in little v. barreme, but also by a score of other pronouncements of
distinguished members of this bench," that "the constitution does grant
to the president extensive authority in times of grave and imperative
national emergency."[]
dissenting opinion
chief justice vinson launched his opinion of dissent, for himself and
justices reed and minton, with a survey of the elements of the emergency
which confronted the president: the korean war; the obligations of the
united states under the united nations charter and the atlantic pact;
the appropriations acts by which congress has voted vast sums to be
expended in our defense and that of our allies in europe; the fact that
steel is a basic constituent of war matériel. he reproaches the court
for giving no consideration to these things, although no one had
ventured to challenge the president's finding of an emergency on the
basis of them.[] he asks whether the steel seizure, considering the
emergency involved, fits into the picture of presidential emergency
action in the past and musters impressive evidence to show that it does.
and "plaintiffs admit," he asserts, more questionably, "that the
emergency procedures of taft-hartley are not mandatory."[] he
concludes as follows: "the diversity of views expressed in the six
opinions of the majority, the lack of reference to authoritative
precedent, the repeated reliance upon prior dissenting opinions, the
complete disregard of the uncontroverted facts showing the gravity of
the emergency and the temporary nature of the taking all serve to
demonstrate how far afield one must go to affirm the order of the
district court. the broad executive power granted by article ii to an
officer on duty  days a year cannot, it is said, be invoked to avert
disaster. instead, the president, must confine himself to sending a
message to congress recommending action. under this messenger-boy
[pg ]concept of the office, the president cannot even act to preserve
legislative programs from destruction so that congress will have
something left to act upon. there is no judicial finding that the
executive action was unwarranted because there was in fact no basis for
the president's finding of the existence of an emergency for, under this
view, the gravity of the emergency and the immediacy of the threatened
disaster are considered irrelevant as a matter of law."[]
evaluation; presidential emergency power
the doctrine of "the opinion of the court" is that, if congress can do
it under, say, the necessary and proper clause, then the president,
lacking authority from congress, cannot do it on the justification that
an emergency requires it. although four justices are recorded as
concurring in the opinion, their accompanying opinions whittle their
concurrence in some instances to the vanishing point. justice douglas's
supplementary argument on the basis of amendment v logically confines
the doctrine of the opinion to executive seizures of property. justices
frankfurter and burton and, less clearly, justice jackson insist in
effect that congress had exercised its power in the premises of the case
in opposition to seizure. justice clark, on the basis of chief justice
marshall's opinion in little v. barreme, holds unambiguously that,
congress having entered the field, its evident intention to rule out
seizures supplied the law of the case. that the president does possess a
residual of resultant power above, or in consequence of, his granted
powers to deal with emergencies in the absence of restrictive
legislation is explicitly asserted by justice clark, and impliedly held,
with certain qualifications, by justice frankfurter and, again less
clearly, by justice jackson; and is the essence of the position of the
three dissenting justices. finally, the entire court would in all
probability agree to the proposition that any action of the president
touching the internal economy of the country for which the justification
of emergency is pleaded is always subject to revision and disallowance
by the legislative power. it would seem to follow that whenever the
president so acts on his own initiative he should at once report his
action to congress, and thenceforth bring the full powers of his office
to the support of the desires of the houses once these are clearly
indicated.
by the decision of the court in state of mississippi v. johnson,[]
in , the president was put beyond the reach of judicial direction in
the exercise of any of his powers, whether constitutional or statutory,
political or otherwise. an application for an injunction to forbid
president johnson to enforce the reconstruction acts, on the [pg ]ground of
their unconstitutionality, was answered by attorney general stanbery as
follows: "it is not upon any peculiar immunity that the individual has
who happens to be president; upon any idea that he cannot do wrong; upon
any idea that there is any particular sanctity belonging to him as an
individual, as is the case with one who has royal blood in his veins;
but it is on account of the office that he holds that i say the
president of the united states is above the process of any court or the
jurisdiction of any court to bring him to account as president. there is
only one court or quasi court that he can be called upon to answer to
for any dereliction of duty, for doing anything that is contrary to law
or failing to do anything which is according to law, and that is not
this tribunal but one that sits in another chamber of this
capitol."[] speaking by chief justice chase, the court agreed: "the
congress is the legislative department of the government; the president
is the executive department. neither can be restrained in its action by
the judicial department; though the acts of both, when performed, are,
in proper cases, subject to its cognizance. the impropriety of such
interference will be clearly seen upon consideration of its possible
consequences. suppose the bill filed and the injunction prayed for
allowed. if the president refuse obedience, it is needless to observe
that the court is without power to enforce its process. if, on the other
hand, the president complies with the order of the court and refuses to
execute the acts of congress, is it not clear that a collision may occur
between the executive and legislative departments of the government? may
not the house of representatives impeach the president for such refusal?
and in that case could this court interfere, in behalf of the president,
thus endangered by compliance with its mandate, and restrain by
injunction the senate of the united states from sitting as a court of
impeachment? would [not?] the strange spectacle be offered to the public
world of an attempt by this court to arrest proceedings in that
court?"[] the court further indicated that the same principle would
apply to an application for a mandamus ordering the president to
exercise any of his powers.
but while the courts are unable to compel the president to act or to
keep him from acting, yet his acts, when performed are in proper cases
subject to judicial review and disallowance.[] moreover, the
subordinates through whom he acts may always be prohibited by writ of
injunction from doing a threatened illegal act which might lead to
irreparable damage,[] or be compelled by writ of mandamus to perform
a duty definitely required by law,[] such suits being usually brought
in the united states district court for the district of columbia.[]
[pg ]also, by common law principles, a subordinate executive officer is
personally liable under the ordinary law for any act done in excess of
authority.[] indeed, by a recent holding, district courts of the
united states are bound to entertain suits for damages arising out of
alleged violation of plaintiff's constitutional rights, even though as
the law now stands the court is powerless to award damages.[] but
congress may, in certain cases, exonerate the officer by a so-called act
of indemnity,[] while as the law stands at present, any officer of
the united states who is charged with a crime under the laws of a state
for an act done under the authority of the united states is entitled to
have his case transferred to the national courts.[]
section . the president, vice president and all civil officers
of the united states, shall be removed from office on impeachment for,
and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and
misdemeanors.
impeachment
a member of congress is not a civil officer within the meaning of this
section; nor is a private citizen subject to impeachment;[] but
resignation of an officer does not give immunity from impeachment for
acts committed while in office.[]
[pg ]
most of the states have drafted their constitutional provisions on this
subject in similar language. as there is no enumeration of offenses
comprised under the last two categories, no little difficulty has been
experienced in defining offenses in such a way that they fall within the
meaning of the constitutional provisions. but impeachable offenses were
not defined in england, and it was not the intention that the
constitution should attempt an enumeration of crimes or offenses for
which an impeachment would lie. treason and bribery have always been
offenses whose nature was clearly understood. other high crimes and
misdemeanors which might be made causes for the impeachment of civil
officers were those which embraced any misbehavior while in office.
madison, whose objection led to the insertion of the more definite
phrase high crimes and misdemeanors, was the strongest advocate of a
broad construction of the impeachment power. he argued that incapacity,
negligence, or perfidy of the chief magistrate should be ground for
impeachment.[] again, in discussing the president's power of removal,
he maintained that the wanton removal from office of meritorious
officers would be an act of maladministration, and would render the
president liable to impeachment.[] hamilton thought the proceeding
could "never be tied down by such strict rules, either in the
delineation of the offense by the prosecutors, or in the construction of
it by the judges, as in common cases serve to limit the discretion of
the courts in favor of personal security."[]
the above relatively flexible conception of "high crimes and
misdemeanors" was, however, early replaced by a much more rigid one in
consequence of jefferson's efforts to diminish the importance of the
supreme court, the first step in which enterprise was the impeachment in
 of justice samuel chase. the theory of chase's enemies was given
its extremest expression by jefferson's henchman, senator giles of
virginia, as follows: "impeachment is nothing more than an enquiry, by
the two houses of congress, whether the office of any public man might
not be better filled by another. *** the power of impeachment was
given without limitation to the house of representatives; and the power
of trying impeachments was given equally without limitation to the
senate; *** a trial and removal of a judge upon impeachment need not
imply any criminality or corruption in him. *** [but] was nothing more
than a declaration [pg ]of congress to this effect: you hold dangerous
opinions, and if you are suffered to carry them into effect you will
work the destruction of the nation. we want your offices, for the
purpose of giving them to men who will fill them better."[] to this
theory chase's counsel opposed the proposition that "high crimes and
misdemeanors" meant offenses indictable at common law; and chase's
acquittal went far to affix this reading to the phrase till after the
war between the states.
but with the impeachment of president johnson in  for "high crimes
and misdemeanors," the controversy was revived. representative bingham,
leader of the house managers of the impeachment, defined an impeachable
offense as follows: "an impeachable high crime or misdemeanor is one in
its nature or consequences subversive of some fundamental or essential
principle of government or highly prejudicial to the public interest,
and this may consist of a violation of the constitution, of law, of an
official oath, or of duty, by an act committed or omitted, or, without
violating a positive law, by the abuse of discretionary powers from
improper motives or for an improper purpose."[] former justice
benjamin r. curtis stated the position of the defense in these words:
"my first position is, that when the constitution speaks of 'treason,
bribery, and other high crimes and misdemeanors,' it refers to, and
includes only, high criminal offences against the united states, made so
by some law of the united states existing when the acts complained of
were done, and i say that this is plainly to be inferred from each and
every provision of the constitution on the subject of impeachment."[]
with johnson's acquittal, the narrow view of "high crimes and
misdemeanors" appeared again to win out. two successful impeachments of
lower federal judges in recent years have, however, restored something
like the broader conception of the term which madison and hamilton had
endorsed. in  judge archbald of the commerce court was removed from
office by the impeachment process, and disqualified to hold and enjoy
any office of honor, profit or trust under the constitution, for
soliciting for himself and friends valuable favors from railroad
companies some of which were at the time litigants in [pg ]his court,
although it was conceded that in so doing he had not committed an
indictable offense;[] and in  judge ritter of the florida
district court was similarly removed for conduct in relation to a
receivership case which evoked serious doubts as to his integrity,
although on the specific charges against him he was acquitted.[] it
is probable that in both these instances the final result was influenced
by the consideration that judges of the united states hold office during
"good behavior" and that the impeachment process is the only method
indicated by the constitution for determining whether a judge's behavior
has been "good." in other words, as to judges of the united states at
least lack of "good behavior" and "high crimes and misdemeanors" are
overlapping if not precisely coincidental concepts.[]
notes
[] as is pointed out by hamilton in the federalist no. .
[] charles c. thach, the creation of the presidency, -
(baltimore, ), -.
[] ibid. .
[] max farrand, records, ii, .
[] ibid. ii,  (september ), .
[] annals of congress ff.
[] ibid. -; -. for a thorough-going review and
evaluation of this debate, see james hart, the american presidency in
action, - (new york, ).
[] works of alexander hamilton, vii, , - (j.c. hamilton,
ed., new york, ). hamilton was here simply interpreting the
executive power clause in light of the views of blackstone, locke, and
montesquieu as to the location of power in the conduct of foreign
relations. see edward s. corwin, the president, office and powers (d
ed.), -. for a parallel argument to hamilton's respecting "the
judicial power of the united states," article , section , clause ,
see justice brewer's opinion in kansas v. colorado,  u.s. , 
[] myers v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -, . see also ibid.  citing u.s.
senate reports, committee on foreign relations, vol. , p.  (february
[] ibid. , citing panama refining co. v. ryan,  u.s.
[] in youngstown co. v. sawyer,  u.s.  () the
doctrine is advanced that the president has no power in the field of
congress' legislative powers except such as are delegated him by
congress. this doctrine is considered below in the light of previous
practice and adjudication. see pp. -.
[] see e.g., abel upshur, a brief inquiry into the true
nature and character of our federal government (), -.
[] the federalist no. , .
[] james hart, the american presidency in action (new york,
[]  dall.  ().
[] messages and papers of the presidents, i, .
[] corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.),
-, -, , , . "the executive [branch of the
government], possessing the rights of self-government from nature,
cannot be controlled in the exercise of them but by a law, passed in the
forms of the constitution." thomas jefferson, official opinion () 
ford, ed.  (new york, -). "in times of peace the people look
most to their representatives; but in war, to the executive solely."
letter to caesar a. rodney, () monticello,  ford, ed. .
[] corwin -, and citations.
[] ibid. -, and citations.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. . see also ibid. .
[] ford, the rise and growth of american politics (new york,
[] as to the meaning of "the fourth day of march", see
charles warren, political practice and the constitution,  univ. of pa.
l. rev. (june, ) -.
[] on the anti-third term tradition, see corwin, the
president, office and powers (d ed.), -, -.
[] mcpherson v. blacker,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] max farrand, ii, .
[] in re green,  u.s. , - ().
[] united states v. hartwell,  wall. ,  ().
[] hawke v. smith,  u.s.  ().
[] burroughs v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte yarbrough,  u.s.  ().
[] burroughs v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . during the recent war, congress laid claim in
the act of september , , to the power "in time of war" to secure
to every member of the armed forces the right to vote for members of
congress and presidential electors notwithstanding any provisions of
state law relating to the registration of qualified voters or any poll
tax requirement under state law. the constitutional validity of this act
was open to serious question and by the act of april ,  was
abandoned. the latter act established a war ballot commission which was
directed to prepare an adequate number of official war ballots, whereby
the service men would be enabled in certain contingencies to vote for
members of congress and presidential electors; but the validity of such
ballots was left to be determined by state election officials under
state laws.  (app.) u.s.c.a. §§-, , .
[] see pp. -.
[]  stat. .
[] public law , th cong., st sess. by section  (a)
of public law  of the th cong., st sess., approved july , ,
that is, eight days after public law , the "secretary of war" and the
"secretary of the navy" were stricken from the line of succession and
the "secretary of defense" whose office public law  created, was
inserted instead.
[] cf.  op. atty. gen.  (), holding that a
specific tax by the united states upon the salary of an officer, to be
deducted from the amount which otherwise would by law be payable as such
salary, is a diminution of the compensation to be paid to him, which, in
the case of the president of the united states, would be
unconstitutional if the act of congress levying the tax was passed
during his official term.
[] the federalist no. , , .
[] story's commentaries, ii, §.
[] fleming v. page,  how. , ,  ().
[] ex parte milligan,  wall. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  (). see also martin
v. mott,  wheat. , - (), asserting the finality of the
president's judgment of the existence of a state of facts requiring his
exercise of the powers conferred by the act of .
[] messages and papers of the presidents, vii, .
[]  bl.  ().
[] messages and papers of the presidents, vii, , ,
[]  bl. at -.
[]  stat.  ().
[] james g. randall, constitutional problems under lincoln,
- (new york, ).
[] see the government's brief in united states v.
montgomery ward and co.,  f. d  ().
[] united states v. curtiss-wright export corp.,  u.s.
[] see white house digest of provisions of law which would
become operative upon proclamation of a national emergency by the
president. the digest is dated december , . it was released to the
press on december th.
[]  stat. .
[] cong. rec. th cong., d sess., vol. , pt. , p. 
(september , ).
[]  u.s.c.a. war, app. . for emergency war agencies
that were functioning at any particular time, consult the united states
government manual of the approximate date. the executive order creating
an agency is cited by number. for a chronological list of wartime
agencies (including government corporations) and some account of their
creation down to the close of , see chapter on war powers and
their administration by dean arthur t. vanderbilt in  annual survey
of american law (new york university school of law, ), pp. -.
at the close of the war there were  agencies grouped under oem, of
which ocd, wmc, and oc were the first to fold up. at the same date there
were  separate government corporations, engaged variously in
production, transportation, power-generation, banking and lending,
housing, insurance, merchandising, and other lines of business and
enjoying the independence of autonomous republics, being subject to
neither congressional nor presidential scrutiny, nor to audit by the
general accounting office.
[]  f. d.  ().
[] see corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.)
[] exec. order ,  fed. reg. .
[]  stat. .
[] hirabayashi v. united states,  u.s. , -
[] korematsu v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] new york times, june , .
[]  fed. reg. .
[]  stat. .
[] "during the course of the year [] the president
directed the seizure of many of the nation's industries in the course of
labor disputes. the total number of facilities taken over is
significant: two railroad systems, one public utility, nine industrial
companies, the transportation systems of two cities, the motor carriers
in one city, a towing company and a butadiene plant. in addition thereto
the president on april  seized  bituminous coal mines belonging to
 companies and on may ,  more bituminous mines of  additional
companies. the anthracite coal industry fared no better; on may  and
may  all the mines of  companies and operators were taken away from
the owners, and on october  the president ordered the seizure of 
plants and pipe lines of  petroleum producing companies in addition to
four taken over prior thereto.
"during the year disputes between railroad companies and the
brotherhoods resulted in the establishment of twelve railroad emergency
boards to investigate disputes and to report to the president. the
president also established on october  a railway express emergency
board to investigate the dispute between the railway express and a
union.
"to implement the directives of the national war labor board, the office
of economic stabilization directed the cancellation of all priority
applications, allocation applications and outstanding priorities and
allocations in the cases of three clothing companies and one
transportation system which refused to comply with orders of the
national war labor board." arthur t. vanderbilt, war powers and their
administration, , annual survey of american law (new york university
school of law), pp. -.
[]  fed. reg. .
[]  stat. .
[] ibid. -.
[] see corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.)
[] charles fairman, the law of martial rule (chicago, ),
-. albert venn dicey, introduction to the study of the law of the
constitution (th ed.), -.
[] dicey, introduction to the study of the law of the
constitution, chap. viii, -.
[]  how.  (). see also martin v. mott,  wheat.
[]  bl.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -. in ex parte vallandigham the court had held
while war was still flagrant that it had no power to review by
certiorari the proceedings of a military commission ordered by a general
officer of the army, commanding a military department.  wall. 
[]  stat. , .
[] duncan v. kahanamoku,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ex parte quirin,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , -.
[] ibid. -.
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] see leo gross, the criminality of aggressive war, 
american political science review (april, ), -.
[] fleming v. page,  how. ,  ().
[] madsen v. kinsella,  u.s. ,  (). see also
johnson v. eisentrager,  u.s. ,  ().
[] totten v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] hamilton v. dillin,  wall.  (); haver v.
yaker,  wall.  ().
[] mitchell v. harmony,  how.  (); united states
v. russell,  wall.  (); totten v. united states, note 
above;  op. atty. gen. - ().
[] cf. the protocol of august , , which largely
foreshadowed the peace of paris; and president wilson's fourteen points,
which were incorporated in the armistice of november , .
[] fleming v. page,  how. ,  ().
[] santiago v. nogueras,  u.s.  (). as to
temporarily occupied territory, see dooley v. united states, 
[] swaim v. united states,  u.s.  (); and cases
there reviewed. see also givens v. zerbst,  u.s.  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  and note;  ibid. ; cf. 
ibid. , , where the contrary view is stated by attorney general
wirt.
[] ex parte quirin,  u.s. , - ().
[] general orders, no. , official records, war of
rebellion, ser. iii, vol. iii; april , .
[] see e.g., mimmack v. united states,  u.s. , 
(); united states v. corson,  u.s.  ().
[] mullan v. united states,  u.s.  (); wallace
v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] surrogate's court, dutchess county, new york, ruling july
,  that the estate of franklin d. roosevelt was not entitled to
tax benefits under sections  and  of the internal revenue code,
which extends certain tax benefits to persons dying in the military
service of the united states. new york times, july , , p. , col.
[] farrand, i, , , ; ii, , , -, ,
- (passim).
[] heads of executive departments except the postmaster
general have no fixed legal terms. for the history of legislation on the
subject. see  op. atty. gen. - (april , ); also everett
s. brown, the tenure of cabinet officers,  american political science
review - (june, ).
[] see corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.),
new york university press, , -, , -, , -,
-, -, -. the only question of a constitutional nature
that has arisen concerning the cabinet meeting is as to its right to
meet, on the call of the secretary of state, in the president's absence.
ibid. .
[] united states v. wilson,  pet. , - ().
[] ibid. -.
[] armstrong v. united states,  wall. ,  ().
in brown v. walker,  u.s.  (), the court had said: "it is
almost a necessary corollary of the above propositions that, if the
witness has already received a pardon, he cannot longer set up his
privilege, since he stands with respect to such offence as if it had
never been committed." ibid. , citing british cases.
[] biddle v. perovich,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cf. w.h. humbert, the pardoning power of the president,
american council on public affairs (washington, ) .
[]  u.s. at .
[]  op. atty. gen.  (); illinois central r. co.
v. bosworth,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte wells,  how.  (). for the contrary view
see some early opinions of attorney general,  opins. atty. gen. 
();  ibid.  ();  ibid.  (); cf.  ibid. ;
united states v. wilson,  pet. ,  ().
[] ex parte united states,  u.s.  (). amendment of
sentence, however, (within the same term of court) by shortening the
term of imprisonment, although defendant had already been committed, is
a judicial act and no infringement of the pardoning power. united states
v. benz,  u.s.  ().
[] see messages and papers of the presidents, i, , ;
[] united states v. klein,  wall. ,  (). see
also united states v. padelford,  wall.  ().
[] ex parte garland,  wall. ,  ().
[] f.w. maitland, constitutional history of england
(cambridge, ), -;  op. atty. gen.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. , .
[]  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] knote v. united states,  u.s. , - ().
[] united states v. klein,  wall. , ,  ().
[] the laura,  u.s.  ().
[] brown v. walker,  u.s.  ().
[] farrand, ii, .
[] ibid. -.
[] the federalist no. .
[] farrand, iii, .
[] washington sought to use the senate as a council, but the
effort proved futile, principally because the senate balked. for the
details see corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.),
[] united states v. curtiss-wright export corp.,  u.s.
[] corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.),
[] "obviously the treaty must contain the whole contract
between the parties, and the power of the senate is limited to a
ratification of such terms as have already been agreed upon between the
president, acting for the united states, and the commissioners of the
other contracting power. the senate has no right to ratify the treaty
and introduce new terms into it, which shall be obligatory upon the
other power, although it may refuse its ratification, or make such
ratifications conditional upon the adoption of amendments to the
treaty." fourteen diamond rings v. united states,  u.s. , 
[] cf. article i, section , clause ; also missouri
pacific r. co. v. kansas,  u.s. , - ().
[] see samuel crandall, treaties, their making and
enforcement (d ed., washington, ), §, for instances.
[] foster v. neilson,  pet. ,  (). "though
several writers on the subject of government place that [the
treaty-making] power in the class of executive authorities, yet this is
evidently an arbitrary disposition; for if we attend carefully to its
operation, it will be found to partake more of the legislative than of
the executive character, though it does not seem strictly to fall within
the definition of either. the essence of the legislative authority is to
enact laws, or, in other words, to prescribe rules for the regulation of
the society; while the execution of the laws, and the employment of the
common strength, either for this purpose, or for the common defence,
seem to comprise all the functions of the executive magistrate. the
power of making treaties is, plainly, neither the one nor the other. it
relates neither to the execution of the subsisting laws, nor to the
enaction of new ones; and still less to an exertion of the common
strength. its objects are contracts with foreign nations, which have
the force of law, but derive it from the obligations of good faith. they
are not rules prescribed by the sovereign to the subject, but agreements
between sovereign and sovereign. the power in question seems therefore
to form a distinct department, and to belong, properly, neither to the
legislative nor to the executive." hamilton in the federalist no. .
[] head money cases,  u.s. ,  (). for treaty
provisions operative as "law of the land" ("self-executing"), see
crandall, treaties (d ed.), -, - (passim), , -, ,
-, , , , -. for treaty provisions of an "executory"
character, see ibid. -, , , , , , , , .
[] see crandall, chap. iii, -.
[]  dall.  ().
[]  cr.  ().
[] "in chirac v. chirac ( wheat. ), it was held by
this court that a treaty with france gave to her citizens the right to
purchase and hold land in the united states, removed the incapacity of
alienage and placed them in precisely the same situation as if they had
been citizens of this country. the state law was hardly adverted to, and
seems not to have been considered a factor of any importance in this
view of the case. the same doctrine was reaffirmed touching this treaty
in carneal v. banks ( wheat. ) and with respect to the british
treaty of , in hughes v. edwards ( wheat. ). a treaty
stipulation may be effectual to protect the land of an alien from
forfeiture by escheat under the laws of a state. orr v. hodgson (
wheat. ). by the british treaty of , 'all impediment of alienage
was absolutely levelled with the ground despite the laws of the states.
it is the direct constitutional question in its fullest conditions. yet
the supreme court held that the stipulation was within the
constitutional powers of the union. fairfax's devisees v. hunter's
lessee,  cr. ; see ware v. hylton,  dall. .'  op.
attys-gen. . mr. calhoun, after laying down certain exceptions and
qualifications which do not affect this case, says: 'within these limits
all questions which may arise between us and other powers, be the
subject-matter what it may, fall within the treaty-making power and may
be adjusted by it.' treat. on the const. and gov. of the u.s. .
"if the national government has not the power to do what is done by such
treaties, it cannot be done at all, for the states are expressly
forbidden to 'enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation.'
const., art. i. sect. .
"it must always be borne in mind that the constitution, laws, and
treaties of the united states are as much a part of the law of every
state as its own local laws and constitution. this is a fundamental
principle in our system of complex national polity."  u.s. at
[] see also de geofroy v. riggs,  u.s.  ();
sullivan v. kidd,  u.s.  (); nielsen v. johnson,  u.s.
 (). but a right under treaty to acquire and dispose of property
does not except aliens from the operation of a state statute prohibiting
conveyances of homestead property by any instrument not executed by both
husband and wife. todok v. union state bank,  u.s.  (). nor
was a treaty stipulation guaranteeing to the citizens of each country,
in the territory of the other, equality with the natives of rights and
privileges in respect to protection and security of person and property,
violated by a state statute which denied to a nonresident alien wife
of a person killed within the state, the right to sue for wrongful
death, although such right was afforded to native resident relatives.
maiorano v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s.  (). the treaty in
question having been amended in view of this decision, the question
arose whether the new provision covered the case of death without fault
or negligence in which, by the pennsylvania workmen's compensation act,
compensation was expressly limited to resident parents; the supreme
court held that it did not. liberato v. royer,  u.s.  ().
[] terrace v. thompson,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also takahashi v. fish and
game comm.,  u.s.  (), in which a california statute
prohibiting the issuance of fishing licenses to persons ineligible to
citizenship is disallowed, both on the basis of amendment xiv and on the
ground that the statute invaded a field of power reserved to the
national government, namely, the determination of the conditions on
which aliens may be admitted, naturalized, and permitted to reside in
the united states. for the latter proposition hines v. davidowitz, 
u.s. ,  () was relied upon.
[] this occurred in the much advertised case of sei fujii
v. state of california,  p. d,  (). a lower california
court had held that the legislation involved was void under the united
nations charter, but the california supreme court was unanimous in
rejecting this view. the charter provisions invoked in this connection
[arts. , , and ], said chief justice gibson, "we are satisfied
*** were not intended to supersede domestic legislation".
[] clark v. allen,  u.s.  ().
[]  cr. ,  ().
[] foster v. neilson,  pet. ,  (); strother
v. lucas,  pet. ,  (); edye v. robertson (head money
cases),  u.s. , ,  (); united states v. rauscher, 
u.s. ,  (); bacardi corp. v. domenech,  u.s.  ().
[] the doctrine of political questions is not always
strictly adhered to in cases of treaty interpretation. in the case of
the "appam" it was conspicuously departed from. this was a british
merchant vessel which was captured by a german cruiser early in  and
brought by a german crew into newport news, virginia. the german
imperial government claimed that under the treaties of  and 
between the united states and prussia, the vessel was entitled to remain
in american waters indefinitely. secretary of state lansing ruled
against the claim, and the supreme court later did the same, but
ostensibly on independent grounds and without reference to the attitude
of the department of state. the steamship appam,  u.s.  ().
although it is a principle of international law that, as respects the
rights of the signatory parties, a treaty is binding from the date of
signature, a different rule applies in this country as to a treaty as
"law of the land" and as such a source of human rights. before a treaty
can thus operate it must have been approved by the senate. haver v.
yaker,  wall.  ().
[] see crandall, treaties, their making and enforcement,
(d ed.), -, with citations.
[] madison writings (hunt ed.), .
[] "we express no opinion as to whether congress is bound to
appropriate the money *** it is not necessary to consider it in this
case, as congress made prompt appropriation of the money stipulated in
the treaty" (the treaty of paris of  between spain and the united
states). de lima v. bidwell,  u.s. ,  (). for a list of
earlier appropriations of the same kind, see crandall, -, n.
[] willoughby, on the constitution, i (d ed., new york,
), . see also h. rept. , th cong., d sess., for an
exhaustive review of the subject.
[] edye v. robertson (head money cases),  u.s. ,
- (). the repealability of treaties by act of congress was
first asserted in an opinion of the attorney general in  ( op.
atty. gen. ). the year following the doctrine was adopted judicially
in a lengthy and cogently argued opinion of justice curtis, speaking for
a united states circuit court in taylor v. morton,  fed. cas. no.
, (). the case turned on the following question: "if an act of
congress should levy a duty upon imports, which an existing commercial
treaty declares shall not be levied, so that the treaty is in conflict
with the act, does the former or the latter give the rule of decision in
a judicial tribunal of the united states, in a case to which one rule or
the other must be applied?"
citing the supremacy clause of the constitution, justice curtis said:
"there is nothing in the language of this clause which enables us to
say, that in the case supposed, the treaty, and not the act of congress,
is to afford the rule. ordinarily, treaties are not rules prescribed by
sovereigns for the conduct of their subjects, but contracts, by which
they agree to regulate their own conduct. this provision of our
constitution has made treaties part of our municipal law. but it has not
assigned to them any particular degree of authority in our municipal
law, nor declared whether laws so enacted shall or shall not be
paramount to laws otherwise enacted. *** [this] is solely a question
of municipal, as distinguished from public law. the foreign sovereign
between whom and the united states a treaty has been made, has a right
to expect and require its stipulations to be kept with scrupulous good
faith; but through what internal arrangements this shall be done, is,
exclusively, for the consideration of the united states. whether the
treaty shall itself be the rule of action of the people as well as the
government, whether the power to enforce and apply it shall reside in
one department, or another, neither the treaty itself, nor any
implication drawn from it, gives him any right to inquire. if the people
of the united states were to repeal so much of their constitution as
makes treaties part of their municipal law, no foreign sovereign with
whom a treaty exists could justly complain, for it is not a matter with
which he has any concern. *** by the eighth section of the first
article of the constitution, power is conferred on congress to regulate
commerce with foreign nations, and to lay duties, and to make all laws
necessary and proper for carrying those powers into execution. that the
act now in question is within the legislative power of congress, unless
that power is controlled by the treaty, is not doubted. it must be
admitted, also, that in general, power to legislate on a particular
subject, includes power to modify and repeal existing laws on that
subject, and either substitute new laws in their place, or leave the
subject without regulation, in those particulars to which the repealed
laws applied. there is therefore nothing in the mere fact that a treaty
is a law, which would prevent congress from repealing it. unless it is
for some reason distinguishable from other laws, the rule which it gives
may be displaced by the legislative power, at its pleasure. *** i
think it is impossible to maintain that, under our constitution, the
president and senate exclusively, possess the power to modify or repeal
a law found in a treaty. if this were so, inasmuch as they can change or
abrogate one treaty, only by making another inconsistent with the first,
the government of the united states could not act at all, to that
effect, without the consent of some foreign government; for no new
treaty, affecting, in any manner, one already in existence, can be made
without the concurrence of two parties, one of whom must be a foreign
sovereign. that the constitution was designed to place our country in
this helpless condition, is a supposition wholly inadmissible. it is not
only inconsistent with the necessities of a nation, but negatived by the
express words of the constitution. ***" see also the cherokee
tobacco,  wall.  (); united states v. forty-three gallons of
whiskey,  u.s. ,  (); botiller v. dominguez,  u.s. 
(); chae chan ping v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
whitney v. robertson,  u.s. ,  (); fong yue ting v.
united states,  u.s. ,  (); etc. "congress by legislation,
and so far as the people and authorities of the united states are
concerned, could abrogate a treaty made between this country and another
country which had been negotiated by the president and approved by the
senate." la abra silver mining co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
(). cf. reichert v. felps,  wall. , - (), where it
is stated obiter that "congress is bound to regard the public treaties,
and it had no power *** to nullify [indian] titles confirmed many
years before ***"
[] united states v. schooner peggy,  cr.  ().
[] foster v. neilson,  pet.  ().
[] united states v. percheman,  pet.  ().
[] willoughby, on the constitution, i, (d ed.), .
[] ibid. -.
[] it is arguable that the maximum leget posteriores is
not the most eligible rule for determining conflicts between "laws of
the united states *** made in pursuance thereof" (i.e. of the
constitution) and "treaties made *** under the authority of the united
states". it may be that the former, being mentioned immediately after
"this constitution" and before "treaties," are entitled always to
prevail over the latter, just as both acts of congress and treaties
yield to the constitution.
[]  stat. .
[]  dall.  ().
[] crandall, treaties (d ed.), ; see messages and
papers of the presidents, iv, ; and benton,  abridgment of the
debates of congress, . mangum of north carolina denied that congress
could authorize the president to give notice: "he entertained not a
particle of doubt that the question never could have been thrown upon
congress unless as a war or quasi war measure. *** congress had no
power of making or breaking a treaty." he owned, however, that he might
appear singular in his view of the matter. ibid. .
[] crandall, -; wright, the control of american
foreign relations, .
[]  stat. .
[] crandall, .
[] see jesse s. reeves, the jones act and the denunciation
of treaties,  american journal of international law (january, )
-. among other precedents which call into question the exclusive
significance of the legislative role in the termination of treaties as
international conventions is one mentioned by mr. taft: "in my
administration the lower house passed a resolution directing the
abrogation of the russian treaty of , couched in terms which would
have been most offensive to russia, and it did this by a vote so nearly
unanimous as to indicate that in the senate, too, the same resolution
would pass. it would have strained our relations with russia in a way
that seemed unwise. the treaty was an old one, and its construction had
been constantly the subject of controversy between the two countries,
and therefore, to obviate what i felt would produce unnecessary trouble
in our foreign relations, i indicated to the russian ambassador the
situation, and advised him that i deemed it wise to abrogate the treaty,
which, as president, i had the right to do by due notice couched in a
friendly and courteous tone and accompanied by an invitation to begin
negotiations for a new treaty. having done this, i notified the senate
of the fact, and this enabled the wiser heads of the senate to
substitute for the house resolution a resolution approving my action,
and in this way the passage of the dangerous resolution was avoided."
the resolution in question, it should be added, was a joint resolution,
and purported to ratify the president's action. the president himself
had asked only for ratification and approval of his course by the
senate. william howard taft, the presidency (new york, ), -.
two other precedents bearing on outright abrogation of treaties are the
following. the question whether to regard the extradition article of the
treaty of  with great britain as void on account of certain acts of
the british government was laid before congress by president grant in a
special message dated june , , in the following terms: "it is for
the wisdom of congress to determine whether the article of the treaty
relating to extradition is to be any longer regarded as obligatory on
the government of the united states or as forming part of the supreme
law of the land. should the attitude of the british government remain
unchanged, i shall not, without an expression of the wish of congress
that i should do so, take any action either in making or granting
requisitions for the surrender of fugitive criminals under the treaty of
." messages and papers of the presidents, ix, , . three
years later congress passed a resolution requiring the president to
abrogate articles v and vi of the treaty of  with china. president
hayes vetoed it, partly on the ground that "the power of modifying an
existing treaty, whether by adding or striking out provisions, is a part
of the treaty-making power under the constitution. ***" at the same
time, he also wrote: "the authority of congress to terminate a treaty
with a foreign power by expressing the will of the nation no longer to
adhere to it is as free from controversy under our constitution as is
the further proposition that the power of making new treaties or
modifying existing treaties is not lodged by the constitution in
congress, but in the president, by and with the advice and consent of
the senate, as shown by the concurrence of two-thirds of that body."
ibid. -. the veto would seem to have been based on a quibble.
[] ibid. -.
[] clark v. allen,  u.s.  ().
[] charlton v. kelly,  u.s.  ().
[] fed. cas. no. , ().
[]  pet. ,  ().
[] acts of march ,  and of february , ;  stat.
 and  stat. .
[] in re ross,  u.s.  (), where the treaty
provisions involved are given. the supplementary legislation was later
reenacted as rev. stat. §§-.
[] baldwin v. franks,  u.s. ,  ().
[] neely v. henkel,  u.s. ,  (). a different
theory is offered by justice story in his opinion for the court in prigg
v. pennsylvania,  pet.  (), in the following words: "treaties
made between the united states and foreign powers, often contain special
provisions, which do not execute themselves, but require the
interposition of congress to carry them into effect, and congress has
constantly, in such cases, legislated on the subject; yet, although the
power is given to the executive, with the consent of the senate, to make
treaties, the power is nowhere in positive terms conferred upon congress
to make laws to carry the stipulations of treaties into effect. it has
been supposed to result from the duty of the national government to
fulfil all the obligations of treaties." ibid. . story was here in
quest of arguments to prove that congress had power to enact a fugitive
slave law, which he based on its power "to carry into effect rights
expressly given and duties expressly enjoined" by the constitution.
ibid. -. but the treaty-making power is neither a right nor a
duty, but one of the powers "vested by this constitution in the
government of the united states." article i, section , clause .
[] geofroy v. riggs,  u.s.  (). see also fort
leavenworth railroad co. v. lowe,  u.s. ,  (), which is
cited in the field opinion in support of the idea that no cession of any
portion of a state's territory could be effected without the state's
consent. the statement is the purest obiter.
[] ibid. .
[] the majority of the cases, as was pointed out earlier,
dealt with the competence of the treaty-making power to grant aliens the
right to inherit real property contrary to state law. the nearest the
court ever came to lending countenance to the state rights argument in
this connection was in frederickson v. louisiana,  how.  ().
see ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . "the treaty-making power vested in our
government extends to all proper subjects of negotiation with foreign
governments. it can, equally with any of the former or present
governments of europe, make treaties providing for the exercise of
judicial authority in other countries by its officers appointed to
reside therein." in re ross,  u.s. ,  ().
[] jefferson excepted out of the treaty-making power the
delegated powers of congress, though just what he meant by this
exception is uncertain. he may have meant that no international
agreement could be constitutionally entered into by the united states
within the sphere of such powers, or only that treaty-provisions dealing
with matters which are also subject to the legislative power of congress
must, in order to become law of the land, receive the assent of
congress. the latter interpretation, however, does not state a
limitation on the power of making treaties in the sense of international
conventions, but rather a necessary procedure before certain conventions
are cognizable by the courts in the enforcement of rights under them,
while the former interpretation has been contradicted in practice from
the outset.
various other limitations to the treaty-making power have been suggested
from time to time. thus, it has been contended that the territory of a
state of the union could not be ceded without such state's consent, see
above; also, that while foreign territory can be annexed to the united
states by the treaty-making power, it could not be incorporated with the
united states except with the consent of congress; also, that while the
treaty-making power can consent to the united states being sued for
damages in an international tribunal for an alleged incorrect decision
of a court of the united states, it could not consent to an appeal being
taken from one of its courts to an international tribunal.
the first of these alleged limitations may be dismissed as resting on
the unallowable idea that the united states is not as to its powers a
territorial government, but only the agent of the states. in the words
of chancellor kent: "the better opinion would seem to be, that such a
power of cession of the territory of a state without its consent does
reside exclusively in the treaty-making power, under the constitution of
the united states, yet sound discretion would forbid the exercise of it
without the consent of the local government who are interested, except
in cases of great necessity, in which the consent might be presumed." 
comm. - and note. this seems also to have been substantially the
view of marshall and story. see willoughby, on the constitution, i (d
ed., ), -. the second suggested limitation, which was urged at
tremendous length by chief justice white in his concurring opinion for
himself and three other justices, in downes v. bidwell,  u.s. ,
- (), boils down simply to the question of correct
constitutional procedure for the effectuation of a treaty; and much the
same may be said of the third alleged limitation. this limitation was
first suggested in connection with the hague convention of 
providing for an international prize court as a result of appeal from
the prize courts of belligerents. to this arrangement president taft
objected that the treaty-making power could not transfer to a tribunal
not known to the constitution part of the "judicial power of the united
states," and upon this view of the matter dispensation was finally
granted the united states in a special protocol whereby this nation was
allowed, in lieu of granting appeals from its prize courts to the
international court, to be mulcted in damages in the latter for
erroneous decisions in the former. it is submitted that president taft's
position was fallacious, for the simple reason that not even the whole
american nation is entitled to judge finally of its rights or of those
of its citizens under the law which binds all nations and determines
their rights; and that, therefore, the whole american nation never had
any authority to create a judicial power vested with any such
jurisdiction. see edye v. robertson (head money cases),  u.s.
,  (). the law of nations seems of itself to presuppose a
tribunal of nations with coextensive jurisdiction. thus there is no
reason why a completely independent nation like the united states may
not consent to be bound by the decisions of such a tribunal without any
derogation from its rightful sovereignty. and if "the authority of the
united states" is the authority of the nation in the field of foreign
relations—if the national government has constitutional powers
coextensive with its international responsibilities—we must conclude
that such consent can be validly given through the existing
treaty-making power. see favoring membership of the united states in
the permanent court of international justice, h. rept. , th cong.,
d sess.
[]  pet.  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] holden v. joy,  wall. ,  (); united states
v.  gallons of whiskey, etc.,  u.s. ,  (); dick v.
united states,  u.s. , - ().
[] the new york indians,  wall.  ().
[] the kansas indians,  wall. ,  ().
[] united states v.  gallons of whiskey, etc.,  u.s.
[] the cherokee tobacco,  wall.  (). see also
ward v. race horse,  u.s. ,  (); and thomas v.. gay,
[]  stat. , ; rev. stat §.
[] ward v. race horse,  u.s.  ().
[] lone wolf v. hitchcock,  u.s.  ().
[] cherokee nation v. southern kansas r. co.,  u.s. 
[] the cherokee tobacco,  wall. ,  ().
[] choate v. trapp,  u.s. , - (); jones
v. meehan,  u.s.  ().
[] for an effort to distinguish "treaties," "compacts,"
"agreements," "conventions," etc., see chief justice taney's opinion
in holmes v. jennison,  pet. , - (). vattel is taney's
chief reliance.
[] story, comm. §. the president has the power in the
absence of legislation by congress, to control the landing of foreign
cables on the shores of the united states,  op. atty. gen.  and 
[] crandall, treaties (d ed.) chap. viii. see also
mcclure, international executive agreements (columbia university press,
), chaps. i and ii.
[] crandall, ; mcclure, -.
[] crandall, -; mcclure, -.
[] tucker v. alexandroff,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. . the first of these conventions, signed july
, , had asserted its constitutionality in very positive terms.
"the power to make and enforce such a temporary convention respecting
its own territory is a necessary incident to every national government,
and adheres where the executive power is vested. such conventions are
not treaties within the meaning of the constitution, and, as treaties,
supreme law of the land, conclusive on the courts, but they are
provisional arrangements, rendered necessary by national differences
involving the faith of the nation and entitled to the respect of the
courts. they are not a casting of the national will into the firm and
permanent condition of law, and yet in some sort they are for the
occasion an expression of the will of the people through their political
organ, touching the matters affected; and to avoid unhappy collision
between the political and judicial branches of the government, both
which are in theory inseparably all one, such an expression to a
reasonable limit should be followed by the courts and not opposed,
though extending to the temporary restraint or modification of the
operation of existing statutes. just as here, we think, this particular
convention respecting san juan should be allowed to modify for the time
being the operation of the organic act of this territory [washington] so
far forth as to exclude to the extent demanded by the political branch
of the government of the united states, in the interest of peace, all
territorial interference for the government of that island." wright, the
control of american foreign relations, , quoting watts v. united
states,  wash. terr., ,  ().
[] quincy wright, the control of american foreign relations
(new york, ), .
[] crandall, -.
[] ibid. .
[] willoughby, on the constitution, i, .
[] wallace mcclure, international executive agreements
(columbia university press, ), .
[] tyler dennett, roosevelt and the russo-japanese war (new
york, ), -.
[] mcclure, international executive agreements, -.
[] ibid. -.
[] willoughby, on the constitution, i, .
[] wallace mcclure, international executive agreements
(columbia university press, ), , .
[] mcclure, international executive agreements, .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -. citing the federalist, no. .
[] ibid. . citing guaranty trust co. v. united states,
[] ibid. -. citing nielsen v. johnson,  u.s. 
[] ibid. . citing santovincenzo v. egan,  u.s. 
(); united states v. belmont,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -. citing oetjen v. central leather co.,
[]  u.s. at - passim. chief justice stone and
justice roberts dissented, chiefly on the question of the interpretation
of the litvinov agreement, citing guaranty trust co. v. united states,
note  above.
[] mcclure, p. .
[] ibid. -; united states department of state
bulletin, september , , pp. -.
[] mcclure, -; cf. the constitution, article iv,
section , clause . when president john adams signed a deed conveying
property for a legation to the queen of portugal, he was informed by his
attorney general that only congress was competent to grant away public
property. see w.b. bryan, a history of the national capitol from its
foundation through the period of the adoption of the organic act, i,
-;  american state papers, misc., . see also chief justice
hughes, for the court, in ashwander v. tennessee valley authority, 
[]  state department bulletin, april , , pp.
[] what purports to be the correct text of these agreements
was published in the new york times of march , . the joint
statement by the united states, great britain, and france on arms aid
for the middle east which was released by the white house on may ,
 (see a.p. dispatches of that date) bears the earmarks of an
executive agreement. and the same may be said of the following
communique issued by the north atlantic council at the close of its
sixth session at brussels on december , .
"the north atlantic council acting on recommendations of the defense
committee today completed the arrangements initiated in september last
for the establishment in europe of an integrated force under centralized
control and command. this force is to be composed of contingents
contributed by the participating governments.
"the council yesterday unanimously decided to ask the president of the
united states to make available general of the army dwight d. eisenhower
to serve as supreme commander. following receipt this morning of a
message from the president of the united states that he had made general
eisenhower available, the council appointed him. he will assume his
command and establish his headquarters in europe early in the new year.
he will have the authority to train the national units assigned to his
command and to organize them into an effective integrated defense force.
he will be supported by an international staff drawn from the nations
contributing to the force.
"the council, desiring to simplify the structure of the north atlantic
treaty organization in order to make it more effective, asked the
council deputies to initiate appropriate action. in this connection the
defense committee, meeting separately on december th, had already
taken action to establish a defense production board with greater powers
than those of the military production and supply board which it
supersedes. the new board is charged with expanding and accelerating
production and with furthering the mutual use of the industrial
capacities of the member nations.
"the council also reached unanimous agreement regarding the part which
germany might assume in the common defense. the german participation
would strengthen the defense of europe without altering in any way the
purely defensive character of the north atlantic treaty organization.
the council invited the governments of france, the united kingdom and
the united states to explore the matter with the government of the
german federal republic.
"the decisions taken and the measures contemplated have the sole purpose
of maintaining and consolidating peace. the north atlantic nations are
determined to pursue this policy until peace is secure." department of
state release to the press of december ,  (no. ).
[] mcclure, international executive agreements, ;  stat.
-; reenacted in  stat. , .
[] mcclure, -; crandall, -.
[] crandall, -.
[]  stat. . section  of the civil aeronautics act of
 ( stat. ) "clearly anticipates the making of agreements with
foreign countries concerning civil aviation."  op. atty. gen. , 
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  stat. . one specific donation was of a destroyer to
the queen of holland, a refugee at the time in great britain.
[]  stat. , , -; extended by  stat. .
[] see corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.)
 and notes.
[]  stat. .
[] mcclure, -.
[] ibid. .
[] "there have been numerous instances in which the senate
has approved treaties providing for the submission of specific matters
to arbitration, leaving it to the president to determine exactly the
form and scope of the matter to be arbitrated and to appoint the
arbitrators. professor j.b. moore, in the article to which reference has
already been made, enumerates thirty-nine instances in which provision
has thus been made for the settlement of pecuniary claims. twenty of
these were claims against foreign governments, fourteen were claims
against both governments, and five against the united states alone."
willoughby, on the constitution, i, .
[] a decade of american foreign policy, s. doc. , st
cong., st sess., .
[] a decade of american foreign policy, s. doc. , st
cong., st sess., .
[] united states v. hartwell,  wall. ,  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  ().
[] it was so assumed by senator william maclay. see
journal of william maclay (new york, ), -.
[]  benton, abridgment of the debates of congress, -; 
letters and other writings of james madison (philadelphia, ),
[]  stat. , .
[]  op. atty. gen. .
[]  stat. ; see also the act of march , , 
stat. , which purported to authorize the president to appoint
ambassadors in certain cases.
[]  benton, abridgement of the debates of congress,
[] s. misc. doc. , th cong., st sess., .
[] s. rept. , d cong., d sess., . at the outset of
our entrance into world war i president wilson dispatched a mission to
"petrograd," as it was then called, without nominating the members of it
to the senate. it was headed by mr. elihu root, with "the rank of
ambassador," while some of his associates bore "the rank of envoy
extraordinary."
[] see george frisbie hoar, autobiography, ii, -.
[] justice brandeis, dissenting in myers v. united states,
[] see data in corwin, the president, office and powers
(d ed.) . congress has repeatedly designated individuals, sometimes
by name, more frequently by reference to a particular office, for the
performance of specified acts or for posts of a nongovernmental
character; e.g., to paint a picture (jonathan trumbull), to lay out a
town, to act as regents of smithsonian institution, to be managers of
howard institute, to select a site for a post office or a prison, to
restore the manuscript of the declaration of independence, to erect a
monument at yorktown, to erect a statue of hamilton, and so on and so
forth.  harvard law review, , -. in his message of april ,
, president monroe stated the thesis that, "as a general principle,
*** congress have no right under the constitution to impose any
restraint by law on the power granted to the president so as to prevent
his making a free selection of proper persons for these [newly created]
offices from the whole body of his fellow-citizens." messages and papers
of the presidents, ii, , . the statement is ambiguous, but its
apparent intention is to claim for the president unrestricted power in
determining who are proper persons to fill newly created offices.
[]  stat. ,  ().
[] in ex parte curtis,  u.s.  (), chief justice
waite reviews early congressional legislation regulative of conduct in
office. "the act now in question is one regulating in some particulars
the conduct of certain officers and employés of the united states. it
rests on the same principle as that originally passed in  at the
first session of the first congress, which makes it unlawful for certain
officers of the treasury department to engage in the business of trade
or commerce, or to own a sea vessel, or to purchase public lands or
other public property, or to be concerned in the purchase or disposal of
the public securities of a state, or of the united states (rev. stat.,
sect. ); and that passed in , which makes it an offence for a
clerk in the same department to carry on trade or business in the funds
or debts of the states or of the united states, or in any kind of public
property (id., sect. ); and that passed in , which makes is
unlawful for a judge appointed under the authority of the united states
to exercise the profession of counsel or attorney, or to be engaged in
the practice of the law (id., sect. ); and that passed in , which
prohibits every officer of the united states or person holding any place
of trust or profit, or discharging any official function under or in
connection with any executive department of the government of the united
states, or under the senate or house of representatives, from acting as
an agent or attorney for the prosecution of any claim against the united
states (id., sect. ); and that passed in , prohibiting members
of congress from practicing in the court of claims (id., sect. );
and that passed in , punishing, by dismissal from service, an
officer or employé of the government who requires or requests any
workingman in a navy-yard to contribute or pay any money for political
purposes (id., sect. ); and that passed in , prohibiting members
of congress from being interested in contracts with the united states
(id., sect. ); and another, passed in , which provides that no
officer, clerk, or employé in the government of the united states shall
solicit contributions from other officers, clerks, or employés for a
gift to those in a superior official position, and that no officials or
[clerical superiors shall receive any gift or] present as a contribution
to them from persons in government employ getting a less salary than
themselves, and that no officer or clerk shall make a donation as a gift
or present to any official superior (id., sect. ). many others of a
kindred character might be referred to, but these are enough to show
what has been the practice in the legislative department of the
government from its organization, and, so far as we know, this is the
first time the constitutionality of such legislation has ever been
presented for judicial determination." ibid. -.
[]  stat. ,  ().
[] see bills listed in index to digest of public general
bills, th cong., d sess.
[]  fed reg. .
[] shoemaker v. unite states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. germaine,  u.s.  () is the
leading case. for further citations see auffmordt v. hedden, 
u.s. ,  (). the court will, nevertheless, be astute to ascribe
to a head of department an appointment made by an inferior of such head.
nishimura ekiu v. united states,  u.s. ,  (). for the
view that there is an intrinsic difference between a "public office" and
a "public employment" see mechem, public officers, pp. -.
[] ex parte hennen,  pet. , - (); united
states v. germaine,  u.s. ,  (). the statement on the
point is in both instances obiter.
[] ex parte siebold,  u.s. ,  ().
[] "they [the clauses of the constitution] seem to
contemplate three distinct operations: st. the nomination. this is the
sole act of the president, and is completely voluntary. d. the
appointment. this is also the act of the president, and is also a
voluntary act, though it can only be performed by and with the advice
and consent of the senate. d. the commission. to grant a commission to
a person appointed, might, perhaps, be deemed a duty enjoined by the
constitution. 'he shall,' says that instrument, 'commission all the
officers of the united states.'" marbury v. madison,  cr. ,
- (). marshall's statement that the appointment "is the act of
the president," conflicts with the more generally held, and sensible
view that when an appointment is made with its consent, the senate
shares the appointing power.  kent's comm. ;  story comm. §;
ex parte hennen,  pet. ,  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  ().
[]  story comms., §;  writings of jefferson (ford,
ed.),  ();  writings of madison (hunt, ed.), - ().
[] corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.), .
[] marbury v. madison,  cr. , -,  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  ().
[] it should be remembered that, for various reasons,
marbury got neither commission nor office. the case assumes, in fact,
the necessity of possession of his commission by the appointee.
[] opins. atty. gen.  ();  ibid.  ();  ibid.
 ();  ibid.  ();  ibid.  ();  ibid. 
();  ibid.  ();  ibid.  ();  ibid.  (); 
ibid.  ();  ibid.  ();  ibid.  ();  ibid. 
();  ibid.  ();  ibid.  ();  ibid.  (). in
 opins. atty. gen. ,  (), the general doctrine was held not
to apply to a yet unfilled office which was created during the previous
session of congress, but this distinction is rejected in  ibid. 
();  ibid. ; and  ibid. .
[]  opins. atty. gen.  ();  ibid.  (). a
"recess" may, however, be merely "constructive," as when a regular
session succeeds immediately upon a special session. it was this kind of
situation that gave rise to the once famous crum incident. see
willoughby, iii, -.
[]  opins. atty. gen.  ();  ibid.  (); 
ibid.  ();  ibid.  ().
[]  stat. , .
[] the reticence of the constitution respecting removal left
room for four possibilities, first, the one suggested by the common
law doctrine of "estate in office," from which the conclusion followed
that the impeachment power was the only power of removal intended by the
constitution; second, that the power of removal was an incident of the
power of appointment and hence belonged, at any rate in the absence of
legal or other provision to the contrary, to the appointing authority;
third, that congress could, by virtue of its power "to make all laws
which shall be necessary and proper," etc., determine the location of
the removal of power; fourth, that the president by virtue of his
"executive power" and his duty "to take care that the laws be faithfully
executed," possesses the power of removal over all officers of the
united states except judges. in the course of the debate on the act to
establish a department of foreign affairs (later changed to department
of state) all of these views were put forward, with the final result
that a clause was incorporated in the measure which implied, as pointed
out above, that the head of the department would be removable by the
president at his discretion. contemporaneously and indeed until after
the civil war, this action by congress, in other words "the decision of
," was interpreted as establishing "a practical construction of the
constitution" with respect to executive officers appointed without
stated terms. however, in the dominant opinion of those best authorized
to speak on the subject, the "correct interpretation" of the
constitution was that the power of removal was always an incident of the
power of appointment, and that therefore in the case of officers
appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate the
removal power was exercisable by the president only with the advice and
consent of the senate. see hamilton in the federalist no. ;  kent's
comm. ;  story comm. §§ and ; ex parte hennen,  pet. ,
- (). the doctrine of estate in office was countenanced by
chief justice marshall in his opinion in marbury v. madison,  cr.
, - (), but has long been rejected. see crenshaw v.
united states,  u.s. ,  (). the three remaining views are
treated by the chief justice, at some cost in terms of logic as well as
of history, as grist to his mill.
[]  u.s. at .
[] annals of congress, cols. -.
[]  u.s.  (). the case is also styled rathbun,
executor v. united states, humphrey having, like myers before him,
died in the course of his suit for salary.
[]  u.s. at. -, -. justice sutherland's
statement, quoted above, that a federal trade commissioner "occupies no
place in the executive department" (see also to the same effect p. 
of the opinion) was not necessary to the decision of the case, was
altogether out of line with the same justice's reasoning in springer
v. philippine islands,  u.s. , - (), and seems later
to have caused the author of it much perplexity. see robert e.
cushman, the independent regulatory commissions (oxford university
press, ), -. as professor cushman adds: "every officer and
agency created by congress to carry laws into effect is an arm of
congress. *** the term may be a synonym; it is not an argument." ibid.
[] united states v. perkins,  u.s.  ().
[] parsons v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] shurtleff v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] blake v. united states,  u.s.  ();
quackenbush v. united states,  u.s.  (); wallace v. united
states,  u.s.  ().
[] morgan v. tva,  f. supp.  (), certiorari
refused march , .  u.s. , .
[] see united public workers v. mitchell,  u.s. 
(); also ex parte curtis,  u.s.  (); and  op. atty.
gen.  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  (); in re neagle,  u.s. 
[] united states v. lovett,  u.s.  ().
[] messages and papers of the presidents, ii,  (january
[] see  u.s. at .
[] in this connection the following colloquy between
attorney general lincoln and the court in course of the proceedings in
marbury v. madison is of first importance: "mr. lincoln,
attorney-general, having been summoned, and now called, objected to
answering. *** on the one hand he respected the jurisdiction of this
court, and on the other he felt himself bound to maintain the rights of
the executive. he was acting as secretary of state at the time when this
transaction happened. he was of opinion, and his opinion was supported
by that of others whom he highly respected, that he was not bound, and
ought not to answer, as to any facts which came officially to his
knowledge while acting as secretary of state. he did not think himself
bound to disclose his official transactions while acting as secretary of
state; *** the court said, that if mr. lincoln wished time to consider
what answers he should make, they would give him time; but they had no
doubt he ought to answer. there was nothing confidential required to be
disclosed. if there had been he was not obliged to answer it; and if he
thought that any thing was communicated to him in confidence he was not
bound to disclose it; ***"  cr. , - ().
[] the following letter, dated april , , from attorney
general jackson to hon. carl vinson, chairman of the house committee on
naval affairs is of interest in this connection: "my dear mr. vinson: i
have your letter of april , requesting that your committee be
furnished with all federal bureau of investigation reports since june
, together with all future reports, memoranda, and correspondence of
the federal bureau of investigation, or the department of justice, in
connection with 'investigations made by the department of justice
arising out of strikes, subversive activities in connection with labor
disputes, or labor disturbances of any kind in industrial establishments
which have naval contracts, either as prime contractors or
subcontractors.' your request to be furnished reports of the federal
bureau of investigation is one of the many made by congressional
committees. i have on my desk at this time two other such requests for
access to federal bureau of investigation files. the number of these
requests would alone make compliance impracticable, particularly where
the requests are of so comprehensive a character as those contained in
your letter. in view of the increasing frequency of these requests, i
desire to restate our policy at some length, together with the reasons
which require it. it is the position of this department, restated now
with the approval of and at the direction of the president, that all
investigative reports are confidential documents of the executive
department of the government, to aid in the duty laid upon the president
by the constitution to 'take care that the laws be faithfully executed,'
and that congressional or public access to them would not be in the
public interest.
"disclosure of the reports could not do otherwise than seriously
prejudice law enforcement. counsel for a defendant or prospective
defendant, could have no greater help than to know how much or how
little information the government has, and what witnesses or sources of
information it can rely upon. this is exactly what these reports are
intended to contain. ***
"in concluding that the public interest does not permit general access
to federal bureau of investigation reports for information by the many
congressional committees who from time to time ask it, i am following
the conclusions reached by a long line of distinguished predecessors in
this office who have uniformly taken the same view. example of this are
to be found in the following letters, among others:
"letter of attorney general knox to the speaker of the house, dated
april , , declining to comply with a resolution of the house
requesting the attorney general to furnish the house with all papers and
documents and other information concerning the investigation of the
northern securities case.
"letter of attorney general bonaparte to the speaker of the house, dated
april , , declining to comply with a resolution of the house
requesting the attorney general to furnish to the house information
concerning the investigation of certain corporations engaged in the
manufacture of wood pulp or print paper.
"letter of attorney general wickersham to the speaker of the house,
dated march , , declining to comply with a resolution of the house
directing the attorney general to furnish to the house information
concerning an investigation of the smelter trust.
"letter of attorney general mcreynolds to the secretary to the
president, dated august , , stating that it would be incompatible
with the public interest to send to the senate in response to its
resolution, reports made to the attorney general by his associates
regarding violations of law by the standard oil co.
"letter of attorney general gregory to the president of the senate,
dated february , , declining to comply with a resolution of the
senate requesting the attorney general to report to the senate his
findings and conclusions in the investigation of the smelting industry.
"letter of attorney general sargent to the chairman of the house
judiciary committee, dated june , , declining to comply with his
request to turn over to the committee all papers in the files of the
department relating to the merger of certain oil companies. ***
"this discretion in the executive branch has been upheld and respected
by the judiciary. the courts have repeatedly held that they will not and
cannot require the executive to produce such papers when in the opinion
of the executive their production is contrary to the public interests.
the courts have also held that the question whether the production of
the papers would be against the public interest is one for the executive
and not for the courts to determine." mr. jackson cites marbury v.
madison,  cr. ,  (); and more than a dozen other cases,
federal and state, most of which involved "privileged communications" in
ordinary court proceedings. the doctrine of the equality of the three
departments is also invoked by him.— op. atty. gen. .
[] see norman j. small, some presidential interpretations
of the presidency (johns hopkins press, ); henry c. black, the
relation of the executive power to legislation (princeton, ); w.e.
binkley, the president and congress (new york, ); edward s. corwin,
the president, office and powers (d ed., ), chaps. i and vii,
passim.
[] the first harrison, polk, taylor, and fillmore all
fathered sentiments to this general effect. see messages and papers of
the president, iv, ; v, ; vi, -, -, , .
[] note , above.
[] charles warren, presidential declarations of
independence,  boston university law review, no.  (january, );
willoughby, on the constitution, iii, -.
[]  op. atty. gen. ,  ().
[]  moore, international law digest, -.
[]  ibid. -;  ibid. -.
[] opinion on the question whether the senate has the right
to negative the grade of persons appointed by the executive to fill
foreign missions, april , ; padover, the complete jefferson (new
york, ), .
[]  moore, international law digest, -.
[] this measure, amended by the act of march ,  (
stat. ), is now  u.s.c.a. §.
[] see memorandum on the history and scope of the laws
prohibiting correspondence with a foreign government, s. doc. , th
cong., d sess., (). the author was mr. charles warren, then
assistant attorney general. further details concerning the observance of
the "logan" act are given in corwin, the president, office and powers
(d ed.) -, -. early in october,  president harold
stassen of the university of pennsylvania announced that he had written
premier stalin offering to confer with him respecting issues between the
two governments.
[] benton abridgment of the debates of congress, -.
[] s. doc. , th cong., d sess., ().
[] the federalist, containing the letters of pacificus and
helvidius (new ed., ) ; see also p. , n. .
[] the federalist no. , where he wrote: "the president is
also to be authorized to receive ambassadors, and other public
ministers. this, though it has been a rich theme of declamation, is more
a matter of dignity than of authority. it is a circumstance which will
be without consequence in the administration of the government; and it
was far more convenient that it should be arranged in this manner, than
that there should be a necessity of convening the legislature, or one of
its branches, upon every arrival of a foreign minister; though it were
merely to take the place of a departed predecessor." ibid. .
[] "letters of pacificus,"  works (hamilton ed.) ,
[] moore, international law digest, iv, -.
[] the federalist containing the letters of pacificus and
helvidius (new ed. ) -.
[] moore, international law digest, i, -. the course
of the monroe administration in inviting the cooperation of congress in
connection with recognition of the spanish-american republics, although
it was prompted mainly by the consideration that war with spain might
result, was nonetheless opposed by secretary of state john quincy adams.
"instead," said he, "of admitting the senate or house of representatives
to any share in the act of recognition, i would expressly avoid that
form of doing it which would require the concurrence of those bodies. it
was i had no doubt, by our constitution an act of the executive
authority. general washington had exercised it in recognizing the french
republic by the reception of mr. genet. mr. madison had exercised it by
declining several years to receive, and by finally receiving, mr. onis;
and in this instance i thought the executive ought carefully to preserve
entire the authority given him by the constitution, and not weaken it by
setting the precedent of making either house of congress a party to an
act which it was his exclusive right and duty to perform. mr. crawford
said he did not think there was anything in the objection to sending a
minister on the score of national dignity, and that there was a
difference between the recognition of a change of government in a nation
already acknowledged as sovereign, and the recognition of a new nation
itself. he did not, however, deny, but admitted, that the recognition
was strictly within the powers of the executive alone, and i did not
press the discussion further.'" ibid., -; citing memoirs of john
quincy adams, iv, -.
[] s. doc. , th cong., d sess., pp. -.
[] said senator nelson of minnesota: "the president has
asked us to give him the right to make war to expel the spaniards from
cuba. he has asked us to put that power in his hands; and when we are
asked to grant that power—the highest power given under the
constitution—we have the right, the intrinsic right, vested in us by
the constitution, to say how and under what conditions and with what
allies that war-making power shall be exercised."  cong. record, pt.
, p. .
[] see in this connection a long list of resolutions or
bills originating in the house of representatives appertaining to
foreign relations. h. rept.  ("confidential"), th cong., d sess.
(february , ).
[] see a decade of american foreign policy, s. doc. ,
st cong., st sess., p. .
[] president truman's statement of june , , a.p.
release: "the security council called upon all members of the united
nations to render every assistance to the united nations in the
execution of this resolution.
"in these circumstances i have ordered united states air and sea forces
to give the korean government troops cover and support.
"the attack upon korea makes it plain beyond all doubt that communism
has passed beyond the use of subversion to conquer independent nations
and will now use armed invasion and war.
"it has defied the orders of the security council of the united nations
issued to preserve international peace and security. in these
circumstances the occupation of formosa by communist forces would be a
direct threat to the security of the pacific area and to united states
forces performing their lawful and necessary functions in that area.
"accordingly i have ordered the seventh fleet to prevent any attack on
formosa. as a corollary of this action i am calling upon the chinese
government on formosa to cease all air and sea operations against the
mainland. the seventh fleet will see that this is done. the
determination of the future status of formosa must await the restoration
of security in the pacific, a peace settlement with japan, or
consideration by the united nations.
"i have also directed that united states forces in the philippines be
strengthened and that military assistance to the philippine government
be accelerated.
"i have similarly directed acceleration in the furnishing of military
assistance to the forces of france and the associated states in
indo-china and the dispatch of a military mission to provide close
working relations with those forces."
[] messages and papers of the presidents, xvii, (),
[]  stat. ;  u.s.c. (), supp. iv, §§-.
[] james f. green, the president's control of foreign
policy, foreign policy reports (april , ), -; corwin, the
president, office and powers (d ed.), -; -, -.
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] foster v. neilson, supra.
[] williams v. suffolk ins. co.,  pet.  ().
[] united states v. palmer,  wheat.  ().
[] doe v. braden,  how. ,  ().
[] jones v. united states,  u.s.  (); oetjen
v. central leather co.,  u.s.  ().
[] in re baiz,  u.s.  ().
[] neely v. henkel,  u.s.  ().
[] terlinden v. ames,  u.s.  (); charlton v.
kelly,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. §.
[] chicago & s. airlines v. waterman s.s. corp.,  u.s.
,  (). see also oetjen v. central leather co.,  u.s.
 (); ricaud v. american metal co.,  u.s.  (); and
compania espanola de navegacion maritima, s.a. v. the navemar, 
u.s. ,  (). in this last case the court declared: "the vessel of
a friendly government in its possession and service is a public vessel,
even though engaged in the carriage of merchandise for hire, and as such
is immune from suit in the courts of admiralty of the united states.
*** it is open to a friendly government to assert that such is the
public status of the vessel and to claim her immunity from suit, either
through diplomatic channels or, if it chooses, as a claimant in the
courts of the united states. if the claim is recognized and allowed by
the executive branch of the government, it is then the duty of the
courts to release the vessel upon appropriate suggestion by the attorney
general of the united states, or other officer acting under his
direction. *** the foreign government is also entitled as of right
upon a proper showing, to appear in a pending suit, there to assert its
claim to the vessel, and to raise the jurisdictional question in its own
name or that of its accredited and recognized representative."
similarly, it has been held that courts may not exercise their
jurisdiction by the seizure and detention of the property of a friendly
sovereign, so as to embarrass the executive arm of the government in
conducting foreign relations. ex parte republic of peru,  u.s. 
[] ibid. , . four justices dissented, by justice
black, who said: "the court *** holds, as i understand its opinion,
that the attorney general can deport him whether he is dangerous or not.
the effect of this holding is that any unnaturalized person, good or
bad, loyal or disloyal to this country, if he was a citizen of germany
before coming here, can be summarily seized, interned and deported from
the united states by the attorney general, and that no court of the
united states has any power whatever to review, modify, vacate, reverse,
or in any manner affect the attorney general's deportation order. ***
i think the idea that we are still at war with germany in the sense
contemplated by the statute controlling here is a pure fiction.
furthermore, i think there is no act of congress which lends the
slightest basis to the claim that after hostilities with a foreign
country have ended the president or the attorney general, one or both,
can deport aliens without a fair hearing reviewable in the courts. on
the contrary, when this very question came before congress after world
war i in the interval between the armistice and the conclusion of formal
peace with germany, congress unequivocally required that enemy aliens be
given a fair hearing before they could be deported." ibid. -. see
also woods v. miller,  u.s.  (), where the continuation of
rent control under the housing and rent act of , enacted after the
termination of hostilities was unanimously held to be a valid exercise
of the war power, but the constitutional question raised was asserted to
be a proper one for the court. said justice jackson, in a concurring
opinion: "particularly when the war power is invoked to do things to the
liberties of people, or to their property or economy that only
indirectly affect conduct of the war and do not relate to the management
of the war itself, the constitutional basis should be scrutinized with
care." ibid. -.
[]  op. atty. gen. , - ().
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c. §§ and .
[] cf.  stat. . the provision has long since dropped
out of the statute book.
[] runkle v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] cf. in re chapman,  u.s. , - (), where
it is held that presumptions in favor of official action "preclude
collateral attack on the sentences of courts-martial." see also united
states v. fletcher,  u.s. , - (); and bishop v. united
states,  u.s. , - (); both of which in effect repudiate
runkle v. united states.
[] "the president, in the exercise of his executive powers
under the constitution, may act through the head of the appropriate
executive department. the heads of departments are his authorized
assistants in the performance of his executive duties, and their
official acts, promulgated in the regular course of business, are
presumptively his acts." wilcox v. jackson ex dem mcconnel,  pet.
,  (). see also, united states v. eliason,  pet. 
(); williams v. united states,  how. ,  (); united
states v. jones,  how. ,  (); united states v. clarke
(confiscation cases),  wall.  (); united states v. farden, 
u.s.  (); wolsey v. chapman,  u.s.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  how. at -.
[] "it is manifestly impossible for the president to execute
every duty, and every detail thereof, imposed upon him by the congress.
the courts have recognized this and have further recognized that he
usually and properly acts through the several executive departments.
every reasonable presumption of validity is to be indulged with respect
to the performance by the head of a department of a duty imposed upon
the president and executed by the department head ostensibly in behalf
of the president. nevertheless, the authorities indicate that the
president cannot, without statutory authority, delegate a discretionary
duty, relieving himself of all responsibility, so that the duty when
performed will not be his act but wholly the act of another. williams
v. united states,  how. ,  (); runkle v. united states,
 u.s. ,  (); united states v. fletcher,  u.s. , 
(); french v. weeks,  u.s. ,  ()";  op. atty. gen.
[]  annals of congress, cols. -.
[] ibid. cols. -.
[]  cr.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] op. atty. gen.  ().
[] messages and papers of the presidents, iii, .
[] ibid. .
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] bruce wyman, the principles of the administrative law
governing the relations of public officers (st. paul, ), -.
[] united states v. eliason,  pet. , - ();
kurtz v. moffitt,  u.s. ,  (); smith v. whitney, 
[] ibid. . the phrase "a law of the united states" came
from the act of march ,  ( stat. ). however, in  u.s.c. 
(c) (), as it stands following the amendment of may , , c. ,
the phrase is replaced by the term an act of congress, thereby
eliminating the basis of the holding in in re neagle.
[]  u.s.  (); mason v. united states,  u.s.
[] rev. stat. §;  u.s.c. §.
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ();  stat. 
();  stat.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] "federal aid in domestic disturbances," s. doc. , th
cong.,  sess., p.  ().
[] op. atty. gen.  (). by the posse comitatus act of
 ( stat. ) it was provided that "*** it shall not be lawful
to employ any part of the army of the united states, as a posse
comitatus, or otherwise, for the purpose of executing the laws, except
in such cases and under such circumstances as such employment of said
force may be expressly authorized by the constitution or by act of
congress ***" the effect of this prohibition, however, was largely
nullified by a ruling of the attorney general "that by revised statutes
§§ and , the military forces, under the direction of the
president, could be used to assist a marshal.  op. atty. gen. ."
bennett milton rich, the presidents and civil disorder (the brookings
institution, ),  fn. .
[]  stat (app.) .
[] in re debs,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. at -. see also sterling v. constantin,
 u.s.  (), which endorses moyer v. peabody, while
emphasizing the fact that it applies only to a condition of disorder.
[]  u.s. at , . some years earlier, in the united
states v. san jacinto tin co., the courts sustained the right of the
attorney general and of his assistants to institute suits simply by
virtue of their general official powers. "if," the court said, "the
united states in any particular case has a just cause for calling upon
the judiciary of the country, in any of its courts, for relief ***" in
the question of appealing to them "must primarily be decided by the
attorney general ***" and if restrictions are to be placed upon the
exercise of this authority it is for congress to enact them.  u.s.
,  (). cf. hayburn's case,  dall.  (), in which the
court rejected attorney general randolph's contention that he had the
right ex officio to move for a writ of mandamus ordering the united
states circuit court for pennsylvania to put the invalid pension act
into effect.
[]  u.s.c. §§-;  stat.  ().
[]  u.s. . here it was held that the norris-laguardia
act did not apply to a case brought by the government as operator, under
the war labor disputes act of , of a large proportion of the
nation's soft coal mines. in reaching this result chief justice vinson
invoked the "rule that statutes which in general terms divest
preexisting rights or privileges will not be applied to the sovereign
without express words to that effect." standing by itself these words
would seem to save the debs case. but they do not stand by themselves,
for the chief justice presently added "that congress, in passing the
[norris-laguardia] act, did not intend to permit the united states to
continue to intervene by injunction in purely private labor disputes.
*** where some public interest was thought to have become involved,"
words which seem intended to repudiate the debs case. however, the chief
justice goes on at once to say, "*** whether congress so intended or
not is a question different from the one before us now." ibid. ,
[] public law , th cong., st sess., §§-.
[] see louis stark in new york times, february , ;
labor relations, hearings before the senate committee on labor and
public welfare on s. , st cong., st sess., pp. , , , ,
; julius and lillian cohen, the divine rights of presidents, 
nebraska law review, p. , march .
[]  op. atty. gen. , , .
[] durand v. hollins,  blatch. ,  ().
[] published by world peace foundation (boston, ) see
also, for the period  to , j. reuben clark's memorandum as
solicitor of the department of state entitled right to protect citizens
in foreign countries by landing forces (government printing office,
, ). the great majority of the landings were for "the simple
protection of american citizens in disturbed areas," and only about a
third involved belligerent action.
[]  moore, international law digest, -, passim.
[] a decade of american foreign policy, s. doc. , st
cong., st sess., p. .
[] see max farrand, records, ii, -.
[] youngstown co. v. sawyer,  u.s.  ().
[]  fed. reg. -.
"whereas on december , , i proclaimed the existence of a national
emergency which requires that the military, naval, air, and civilian
defenses of this country be strengthened as speedily as possible to the
end that we may be able to repel any and all threats against our
national security and to fulfill our responsibilities in the efforts
being made throughout the united nations and otherwise to bring about a
lasting peace; and
"whereas american fighting men and fighting men of other nations of the
united nations are now engaged in deadly combat with the forces of
aggression in korea, and forces of the united states are stationed
elsewhere overseas for the purpose of participating in the defense of
the atlantic community against aggression; and
"whereas the weapons and other materials needed by our armed forces and
by those joined with us in the defense of the free world are produced to
a great extent in this country, and steel is an indispensable component
of substantially all of such weapons and materials; and
"whereas steel is likewise indispensable to the carrying out of programs
of the atomic energy commission of vital importance to our defense
efforts; and
"whereas a continuing and uninterrupted supply of steel is also
indispensable to the maintenance of the economy of the united states,
upon which our military strength depends; and
"whereas a controversy has arisen between certain companies in the
united states producing and fabricating steel and the elements thereof
and certain of their workers represented by the united steel workers of
america, cio, regarding terms and conditions of employment; and
"whereas the controversy has not been settled through the processes of
collective bargaining or through the efforts of the government,
including those of the wage stabilization board, to which the
controversy was referred on december , , pursuant to executive
order no. , and a strike has been called for : a.m., april ,
; and
"whereas a work stoppage would immediately jeopardize and imperil our
national defense and the defense of those joined with us in resisting
aggression, and would add to the continuing danger of our soldiers,
sailors, and airmen engaged in combat in the field; and
"whereas in order to assure the continued availability of steel and
steel products during the existing emergency, it is necessary that the
united states take possession of and operate the plants, facilities, and
other property of the said companies as hereinafter provided:
"now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the
constitution and laws of the united states, and as president of the
united states and commander in chief of the armed forces of the united
states, it is hereby ordered as follows:
". the secretary of commerce is hereby authorized and directed to take
possession of all or such of the plants, facilities, and other property
of the companies named in the list attached hereto, or any part thereof,
as he may deem necessary in the interests of national defense; and to
operate or to arrange for the operation thereof and to do all things
necessary for, or incidental to, such operation.
". in carrying out this order the secretary of commerce may act through
or with the aid of such public or private instrumentalities or persons
as he may designate; and all federal agencies shall cooperate with the
secretary of commerce to the fullest extent possible in carrying out the
purposes of this order.
". the secretary of commerce shall determine and prescribe terms and
conditions of employment under which the plants, facilities, and other
properties possession of which is taken pursuant to this order shall be
operated. the secretary of commerce shall recognize the rights of
workers to bargain collectively through representatives of their own
choosing and to engage in concerted activities for the purpose of
collective bargaining, adjustment of grievances or other mutual aid or
protection, provided that such activities do not interfere with the
operation of such plants, facilities, and other properties.
". except so far as the secretary of commerce shall otherwise provide
from time to time, the managements of the plants, facilities, and other
properties possession of which is taken pursuant to this order shall
continue their functions, including the collection and disbursement of
funds in the usual and ordinary course of business in the names of their
respective companies and by means of any instrumentalities used by such
companies.
". except so far as the secretary of commerce may otherwise direct,
existing rights and obligations of such companies shall remain in full
force and effect, and there may be made, in due course, payments of
dividends on stock, and of principal, interest, sinking funds, and all
other distributions upon bonds, debentures, and other obligations, and
expenditures may be made for other ordinary corporate or business
purposes.
". whenever in the judgment of the secretary of commerce further
possession and operation by him of any plant, facility, or other
property is no longer necessary or expedient in the interest of national
defense, and the secretary has reason to believe that effective future
operation is assured, he shall return the possession and operation of
such plant, facility, or other property to the company in possession and
control thereof at the time possession was taken under this order.
". the secretary of commerce is authorized to prescribe and issue such
regulations and orders not inconsistent herewith as he may deem
necessary or desirable for carrying out the purposes of this order; and
he may delegate and authorize subdelegation of such of his functions
under this order as he may deem desirable. harry s. truman. the white
house, april , ."
[] ibid. .
[]  cr.  ().
[]  u.s. , , citing  annals of congress, 
(). see also p. .
[]  stat. ; r.s. §§-.
[] for the controversy thereby precipitated between hamilton
("pacificus") and madison (helvidius), see edward s. corwin, the
president's control of foreign relations (princeton university press,
), chap. i.
[] the act of june , ;  stat. . the act was the
direct outcome of suggestions made by washington in his message of
december , .  richardson .
[]  opins. a.g.  (); tucker v. alexandroff, 
u.s. ,  (). an act was passed may ,  ( stat. ) which
requires presidential license for the landing and operation of cables
connecting the united states with foreign countries. quincy wright, the
control of american foreign relations (new york, )  fn. .
[] santiago v. nogueras,  u.s.  ().
[] madsen v. kinsella,  u.s.  ().
[] charlton v. kelly,  u.s.  (). see also
botiller v. dominguez,  u.s.  ().
[] sinclair v. united states,  u.s. , , 
[]  stat. .
[] berdahl, war powers of the executive in the united states
(university of illinois, ), .
[]  cong. rec.  ().
[]  stat. .
[] see hooe v. united states,  u.s. , -
(); united states v. north american co.,  u.s. ,  ().
cf. larson v. domestic and foreign corp.,  u.s. , -
[] see p. .
[] brief for the united states, no. , october term, ,
pp. , -, quoted by the chief justice in  u.s. , -.
assistant attorney general knaebel's name was also on the brief.
[] ibid. .
[]  how.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] federalist no. .
[] see also  op. atty. gen. ,  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[]  cr.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] kendall v. united states,  pet.  (); united
states v. lee,  u.s.  (). it should be noted, however, that
if the president fails to act, or if he adopts a narrow construction of
a statute which he dislikes, and on this ground professes inability to
act, the only remedy available against him is impeachment.
[] noble v. union river logging r. co.,  u.s. 
(); philadelphia co. v. stimson,  u.s.  ().
[] kendall v. united states, above; united states v.
schurz,  u.s.  (); united states ex rel. dunlap v. black,
 u.s.  (). cf. decatur v. paulding,  pet.  (); and
riverside oil co. v. hitchcock,  u.s.  (), where the rule is
reiterated that neither injunction nor mandamus will lie against an
officer to control him in the exercise of an official duty which
requires the exercise of his judgment and discretion.
[] this was originally on the theory that the supreme court
of the district had inherited, via the common law of maryland, the
jurisdiction of the king's bench "over inferior jurisdictions and
officers."  pet. at  and -.
[] little v. barreme,  cr.  (); united states v.
lee, above; spaulding v. vilas,  u.s.  ().
[] bell v. hood,  u.s.  (). the decision is
based on an interpretation of  u.s.c. §().
[] mitchell v. clark,  u.s.  (). an official
action is indemnifiable if congress could have authorized it in the
first place, or if it was done under "imperative orders which could not
be resisted," or "under necessity or mistake." ibid. -.
[] tennessee v. davis,  u.s.  (); in re neagle,
 u.s.  (). cf. maryland v. soper,  u.s.  ().
[]  op. atty. gen.  (). see also hinds'
precedents, iii, §§- ().
[] the belknap case, ibid. §.
[] elliot, debates, v, , .
[] ibid. iv, .
[] the federalist no. . for the above see william s.
carpenter, judicial tenure in the united states (yale university press,
[] john quincy adams, memoirs, i, ,  ().
[] trial of andrew johnson, i, (government printing office,
[] ibid. . johnson and his cabinet were much concerned
over rumors that it was the intention of his enemies in the house,
following impeachment and pending the trial, to put him under arrest
and/or suspend him from office. gideon welles, diary, iii, , , ,
, , , , , , , , , . but no such step was
attempted. several state constitutions contain provisions authorizing
suspension from office in such a case.
[] carpenter, judicial tenure, -.
[] senate proceedings in cong. record, vol. , pp.
-, (april , ).
[] on this account, as well as because of the cumbersomeness
of the impeachment process and the amount of time it is apt to consume,
it has been suggested that a special court could, and should, be created
to try cases of alleged misbehavior in office of inferior judges of the
united states, this type of officer having furnished the great majority
of cases of impeachment under the constitution. see memorandum on
removal power of congress with respect to the supreme court, senate
judiciary committee, th cong., st sess.; also burke shartel,
federal judges—appointment, supervision, and removal—some
possibilities under the constitution,  mich. l. rev., - (may
). is impeachment the only way in which congress, or either house
thereof, is constitutionally entitled to call the president to account
for his conduct in office? cf. george wharton pepper, family quarrels,
the president, the senate, and the house (new york, ), ff.; and
corwin, the president, office and powers (d ed.), -.
[pg ]
[pg ]
section . the judicial power, courts, judges: page
characteristics and attributes of judicial power 
"judicial power" 
"shall be vested" 
finality of judgment 
taney doctrine 
award of execution 
ancillary powers 
contempt power; the act of  
an inherent power 
contempt power exalted 
recession of the doctrine 
bridges v. california 
summary punishment of contempt; misbehavior of counsel 
punishment of counsel; the sacher case 
contempt by disobedience of orders 
criminal versus civil contempts 
judicial power aids administrative power 
power to issue writs; the act of  
common law powers of the district of columbia courts 
habeas corpus 
congress limits the inquisition power 
injunctions under the emergency price control act of  
rule-making power and powers over process 
limits to the power 
appointment of referees, masters, and special aids 
power to admit and disbar attorneys 
organization of courts; compensation of judges 
"one supreme court" 
inferior courts made and abolished 
abolition of the commerce court 
compensation 
diminution of salaries 
courts of specialized jurisdiction 
emergency court of appeals of  
judicial review restrained 
legislative courts; canter case 
other legislative courts 
powers of congress over legislative courts 
status of the court of claims 
a judicial paradox 
status of the courts of the district of columbia.' 
section . jurisdiction 
clause . scope of jurisdiction 
"cases and controversies" 
two classes of "cases and controversies" 
adverse litigants 
stockholders' suits 
substantial interest doctrine 
substantial interest in suits by states 
abstract, contingent, and hypothetical questions 
political questions 
origin of the concept 
exemplifications of the doctrine 
recent cases 
advisory opinions 
declaratory judgments 
declaratory judgment act of  
"case or controversy" test in declaratory judgment proceedings 
cases arising under the constitution, laws, and treaties of the united states 
definition 
judicial review 
judicial review and national supremacy 
judicial review of acts of congress 
hamilton's argument 
marbury v. madison 
marshall's argument 
importance of marbury v. madison 
limits to the exercise of judicial review 
the doctrine of "strict necessity" 
the doctrine of political questions 
the "reasonable doubt" doctrine 
exclusion of extra-constitutional tests 
disallowance by statutory interpretation 
stare decisis in constitutional law 
allegations of federal question 
corporations chartered by congress 
removal from state courts of suits against federal officials 
tennessee v. davis 
supreme court review of state court decisions 
suits affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls 
when ambassadors, etc., are affected 
cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction 
origin and characteristics 
congressional interpretation of the admiralty clause 
judicial approval of congressional interpretation 
two types of cases 
maritime torts 
prize cases, forfeitures, etc. 
proceedings in rem 
absence of a jury 
territorial extent of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction 
admiralty jurisdiction versus state power 
exclusive of admiralty jurisdiction 
concessions to state power 
the jensen case and its sequelae 
power of congress to modify maritime law; the "lottawanna" 
cases to which the united states is a party; right of united states to sue 
suits against states 
immunity of united states from suit 
waiver of immunity by congress 
united states v. lee 
difficulties created by the lee case 
official immunity today 
classification of suits against officers 
suits against government corporations 
suits between two or more states 
boundary disputes; the law applied 
modern types of suits between states 
cases in which the court has declined jurisdiction 
problem of enforcement; virginia v. west virginia 
controversies between a state and citizens of another state 
nonjusticiable controversies 
jurisdiction confined to civil cases 
suits by a state as parens patriae; jurisdiction declined 
suits by a state as parens patriae; jurisdiction accepted 
georgia v. pennsylvania railroad 
controversies between citizens of different states 
the meaning of "state," hepburn v. ellzey 
extension of jurisdiction by act of  
citizenship, natural persons 
citizenship, corporations 
black and white taxicab case 
the law applied in diversity cases; swift v. tyson 
extension of the tyson case 
the tyson rule protested 
erie railroad v. tompkins; tyson case overruled 
extension of the tompkins rule 
controversies between citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of different states 
controversies between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens, or subjects 
suits by foreign states 
indian tribes 
narrow construction of the jurisdiction 
clause . original and appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court 
original jurisdiction of the supreme court 
an autonomous jurisdiction 
cannot be enlarged; marbury v. madison 
concurrent jurisdiction of the lower federal courts 
appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court 
subject to limitation by congress 
mccardle case 
power of congress to regulate the jurisdiction of lower federal courts 
martin v. hunter's lessee 
plenary power of congress over jurisdiction 
judicial power under the emergency price control act 
legislative control over writs 
injunctions in labor disputes; norris-laguardia act 
judicial power equated with due process of law 
judicial versus nonjudicial functions 
federal-state court relations 
problems raised by concurrency 
disobedience of supreme court orders by state courts 
worcester v. georgia 
conflicts of jurisdiction; comity 
jurisdiction of the res 
state interference by injunction with federal jurisdiction 
federal interference by injunction with state jurisdiction 
federal injunctions against state official action 
ex parte young 
state interference by habeas corpus proceedings with federal jurisdiction 
federal interference, by removal and habeas corpus 
comity as a principle of statutory construction 
comity as cooperation 
early use of state courts in enforcement of federal law 
retreat from this practice 
resumption of this practice 
state obligation to enforce federal law 
right of foreign corporations to resort to federal courts 
clause . trial by jury. [see pp. - under amendment vi] 
section . treason 
clause . treason defined 
definition 
levying war 
the burr trial 
aid and comfort to the enemy; the cramer case 
the haupt case 
the kawakita case 
doubtful state of the law of treason today 
clause . punishment of treason 
corruption of blood and forfeiture 
[pg ]
article iii
section . the judicial power of the united states, shall be
vested in one supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the congress
may from time to time ordain and establish. the judges, both of the
supreme and inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good
behaviour, and shall, at stated times, receive for their services, a
compensation, which shall not be diminished during their continuance in
office.
characteristics and attributes of judicial power
judicial power, as justice miller defined it in , is the power "of a
court to decide and pronounce a judgment and carry it into effect
between persons and parties who bring a case before it for decision";[]
or in the words of the court in muskrat v. united states,[] it is
"the right to determine actual controversies arising between adverse
litigants, duly instituted in courts of proper jurisdiction."[]
although the terms "judicial power" and "jurisdiction" are frequently
used interchangeably and jurisdiction is defined as the power to hear
and determine the subject matter in controversy between parties to a
suit,[] or as the "power to entertain the suit, consider the merits and
render a binding decision thereon,"[] the cases and commentaries
support and, for that matter, necessitate a distinction between the two
concepts. jurisdiction is the authority of a court to exercise judicial
power in a specific case and is, of course, a prerequisite to the
exercise of judicial power, which is the totality of powers a court
exercises when it assumes jurisdiction and hears and decides a case.[]
included with the general power to decide cases are the ancillary powers
of courts to punish for contempts of their authority,[] to issue writs
in aid of jurisdiction when authorized by statute;[] to make rules
governing their process in the absence of statutory authorizations or
prohibitions;[] inherent equitable powers over their own process to
prevent abuse, oppression and injustice, and to protect their own
jurisdiction and officers in the protection of property in custody of
[pg ]law;[] the power to appoint masters in chancery, referees, auditors,
and other investigators;[] and to admit and disbar attorneys.[]
the distinction between judicial power and jurisdiction is especially
pertinent to the meaning of the words "shall be vested." whereas all of
the judicial power of the united states is vested in the supreme court
and the lower federal judiciary, neither has ever been vested with all
the jurisdiction they are capable of receiving under article iii. except
for the original jurisdiction of the supreme court, which flows directly
from the constitution,[] two prerequisites to jurisdiction must be
present. first, the constitution must have given the courts the capacity
to receive it; second, an act of congress must have conferred it.[]
since  the federal courts have emphasized finality of judgment as an
essential attribute of judicial power. in hayburn's case[] a motion
for mandamus was filed in the supreme court to direct the circuit court
for the district of pennsylvania to act upon a petition for a pension
under the pensions act which placed the administration of pensions in
the judges of the federal courts, but which made the action of the
courts on application subject to review by congress and the secretary of
war. the court took the case under advisement, but congress changed the
law by the act of february , , before decision was rendered. in
view of the attitude of the circuit courts of the united states for the
districts of new york, north carolina and pennsylvania there can be no
doubt what the decision would have [pg ]been. the judges of the circuit
courts in each of these districts refused to administer the pensions,
because the revisory powers of congress and the secretary of war were
regarded as making the administration of the law nonjudicial in nature.
at the time of this episode, chief justice jay and justice cushing were
members of the circuit court in the new york district, justices wilson
and blair in pennsylvania and justice iredell in north carolina.
the taney doctrine
on these foundations chief justice taney posthumously erected finality
into a judicial absolute.[] the original act creating the court of
claims provided for an analogous procedure with appeals to the supreme
court after which judgments in favor of claimants were to be referred to
the secretary of the treasury for payments out of the general
appropriation for the payment of private claims. however, section  of
the act provided that no money should be paid out of the treasury for
any claims "till after an appropriation therefor shall be estimated by
the secretary of the treasury." in gordon v. united states,[] the
court refused to hear an appeal, probably for the reasons given in chief
justice taney's opinion which he did not deliver because of his death
before the court reconvened but which was published many year later.[]
in any event the reiteration of taney's opinion in subsequent cases made
much of it good law. because the judgment of the court of claims and the
supreme court depended for execution upon future action of the secretary
of the treasury and of congress, the chief justice regarded it as
nothing more than a certificate of opinion and in no sense a judicial
judgment. congress, therefore, could not authorize the supreme court to
take appeals from an auditor or require it to express an opinion in a
case where its judicial power could not be exercised, where its judgment
would not be final and conclusive upon the parties, and where processes
of execution were not awarded to carry it into effect. the chief justice
then proceeded to formulate a rule, repeated in many subsequent cases
until modified in  and reversed in , to the effect that the
award of execution is a part and an essential part of every judgment
passed by a court exercising judicial powers; it was no judgment in the
legal sense of the term without it.[] this rule was given rigid
application in liberty warehouse co. v. grannis,[] where the supreme
court sustained a district court in refusing to entertain a declaratory
proceeding for lack of jurisdiction because such a proceeding was
regarded as nonjudicial. one year later, the court applied the extreme
of the rule in liberty warehouse v. burley tobacco growers
association,[] when it ruled that it could exercise no appellate
jurisdiction in a declaratory proceeding in a state court.
[pg ]
award of execution
meanwhile in  the supreme court began to qualify its insistence upon
an award of execution, holding in fidelity national bank and trust co.
v. swope[] that an award of execution is not an indispensable
adjunct of the judicial process. this ruling prepared the way for
nashville, chattanooga and st. louis r. co. v. wallace[] which
reversed the decision in the grannis case, sustained an appeal from a
state court to the supreme court in a declaratory proceeding, and
effectively interred the rule that award of execution is essential to
judicial power. regardless, nevertheless, of the fate of an award of
execution, the rule that finality of judgment is an essential attribute
of judicial power remains unimpaired.
[pg ]
ancillary powers
the summary power of the courts of the united states to punish contempts
of their authority had its origin in the law and practice of england
where disobedience of court orders was regarded as contempt of the king
himself and attachment was a prerogative process derived from presumed
contempt of the sovereign.[] by the latter part of the eighteenth
century summary power to punish was extended to all contempts whether
committed in or out of court.[] in the united states, the judiciary
act of  in section [] conferred power on all courts of the
united states "to punish by fine or imprisonment, at the discretion of
said courts, all contempts of authority in any cause or hearing before
the same." the only limitation placed on this power was that summary
attachment was made a negation of all other modes of punishment. the
abuse of this extensive power led, following the unsuccessful
impeachment of judge james h. peck of the federal district court of
missouri, to the passage of the act of  limiting the power of the
federal courts to punish contempts to misbehavior in the presence of the
courts, "or so near thereto as to obstruct the administration of
justice," to the misbehavior of officers of courts in their official
capacity, and to disobedience or resistance to any lawful writ, process
or order of the court.[]
an inherent power
the validity of the act of  was sustained forty-three years later in
ex parte robinson,[] where justice field for the court propounded
principles full of potentialities for conflict. he declared: "the power
to punish for contempts is inherent in all courts; its existence is
essential to the preservation of order in judicial proceedings, and to
the enforcement of the judgments, orders, and writs of the courts, and
consequently to the due administration of justice. the moment the courts
of the united states were called into existence and invested with
jurisdiction over any subject, they become possessed of this power."
expressing doubts concerning the validity of the act as to the supreme
court, he declared, however, there could be no question of its validity
as applied to the lower courts on the ground that they are created by
congress and that their "powers and duties depend upon the act calling
them into existence, or subsequent acts extending or limiting their
jurisdiction."[] with the passage of time, [pg ]later adjudications,
especially after , came to place more emphasis on the inherent power
of courts to punish contempts than upon the power of congress to
regulate summary attachment. by  the court was saying that the
contempt power must be exercised by a court without referring the issues
of fact or law to another tribunal or to a jury in the same
tribunal.[] in michaelson v. united states[] the supreme court
intentionally placed a narrow interpretation upon those sections of the
clayton act[] relating to punishment for contempt of court by
disobedience to injunctions in labor disputes. the sections in question
provided for a jury trial upon the demand of the accused in contempt
cases in which the acts committed in violation of district court orders
also constituted a crime under the laws of the united states or of those
of the state where they were committed. although justice sutherland
reaffirmed earlier rulings establishing the authority of congress to
regulate the contempt power, he went on to qualify this authority and
declared that "the attributes which inhere in that power [to punish
contempt] and are inseparable from it can neither be abrogated nor
rendered practically inoperative." the court mentioned specifically "the
power to deal summarily with contempts committed in the presence of the
courts or so near thereto as to obstruct the administration of justice,"
and the power to enforce mandatory decrees by coercive means.[]
the contempt power exalted
the phrase "in the presence of the court or so near thereto as to
obstruct the administration of justice" was interpreted in toledo
newspaper co. v. united states[] so broadly as to uphold the action
of a district court judge in punishing for contempt a newspaper for
publishing spirited editorials and cartoons on questions at issue in a
contest between a street railway company and the public over rates. a
majority of the court held that the test to be applied in determining
the obstruction of the administration of justice is not the actual
obstruction resulting from an act, but "the character of the act done
and its direct tendency to prevent and obstruct the discharge of
judicial duty." similarly the test of whether a particular act is an
attempt to influence or intimidate a court is not the influence exerted
upon the mind of a particular judge but "the reasonable tendency of the
acts done to influence or bring about the baleful result *** without
reference to the consideration of how far they may have been without
influence in a particular case."[] in craig v. hecht[] these
criteria were applied to sustain the imprisonment of [pg ]the comptroller of
new york city for writing and publishing a letter to a public service
commissioner which criticized the action of a united states district
judge in receivership proceedings.
recession of the doctrine
the decision in the toledo newspaper case did not follow earlier
decisions interpreting the act of  and was grounded on historical
error. for these reasons it was reversed in nye v. united states[]
and the theory of constructive contempt based on the "reasonable
tendency" rule rejected in a proceeding wherein defendants in a civil
suit, by persuasion and the use of liquor, induced a plaintiff feeble in
mind and body to ask for dismissal of the suit he had brought against
them. the events in the episode occurred more than  miles from where
the court was sitting, and were held not to put the persons responsible
for them in contempt of court.
bridges v. california
although nye v. united states is exclusively a case of statutory
construction, it is significant from a constitutional point of view in
that its reasoning is contrary to that of earlier cases narrowly
construing the act of  and asserting broad inherent powers of courts
to punish contempts independently of and contrary to congressional
regulation of this power. bridges v. california,[] though dealing
with the power of state courts to punish contempts, in the face of the
due process clause of the fourteenth amendment, is significant for the
dictum of the majority that the contempt power of all courts, federal as
well as state, is limited by the guaranty of the first amendment against
interference with freedom of speech or of the press.
summary punishment of contempt; misbehavior of counsel
there have been three notable cases within the last half century raising
questions concerning the power of a trial judge to punish counsel
summarily for alleged misbehavior in the course of a trial. in ex
parte terry,[] decided in , terry had been jailed by the united
states circuit court of california for assaulting in its presence a
united states marshal. the supreme court denied his petition for a writ
of habeas corpus. in cooke v. united states,[] however, decided in
, the court remanded for further proceedings a [pg ]judgment of the
united states circuit court of texas sustaining the judgment of a united
states district judge sentencing to jail an attorney and his client for
presenting the judge a letter which impugned his impartiality with
respect to their case, still pending before him. distinguishing the case
from that of terry, chief justice taft, speaking for the unanimous
court, said: "the important distinction *** is that this contempt was
not in open court. *** to preserve order in the court room for the
proper conduct of business, the court must act instantly to suppress
disturbance or violence or physical obstruction or disrespect to the
court when occurring in open court. there is no need of evidence or
assistance of counsel before punishment, because the court has seen the
offense. such summary vindication of the court's dignity and authority
is necessary. it has always been so in the courts of the common law and
the punishment imposed is due process of law."[] the chief justice
then added: "another feature of this case seems to call for remark. the
power of contempt which a judge must have and exercise in protecting the
due and orderly administration of justice and in maintaining the
authority and dignity of the court is most important and indispensable.
but its exercise is a delicate one and care is needed to avoid arbitrary
or oppressive conclusions. this rule of caution is more mandatory where
the contempt charged has in it the element of personal criticism or
attack upon the judge. the judge must banish the slightest personal
impulse to reprisal, but he should not bend backward and injure the
authority of the court by too great leniency. the substitution of
another judge would avoid either tendency but it is not always possible.
of course where acts of contempt are palpably aggravated by a personal
attack upon the judge in order to drive the judge out of the case for
ulterior reasons, the scheme should not be permitted to succeed. but
attempts of this kind are rare. all of such cases, however, present
difficult questions for the judge. all we can say upon the whole matter
is that where conditions do not make it impracticable, or where the
delay may not injure public or private right, a judge called upon to act
in a case of contempt by personal attack upon him, may, without
flinching from his duty, properly ask that one of his fellow judges take
his place. cornish v. united states,  f. , ; toledo newspaper
co. v. united states,  f. , . the case before us is one in
which the issue between the judge and the parties had come to involve
marked personal feeling that did not make for an impartial and calm
judicial consideration and conclusion, as the statement of the
proceedings abundantly shows."[]
[pg ]
contempt power: punishment of counsel; sacher case
this case[] is an outgrowth of the trial of the eleven communists,[]
in which sacher et al. were counsel for the defense. the facts of the
case were as follows: on receiving the verdict of conviction of the
defendants, trial judge medina at once issued a certificate under rule
 (a) of federal rules of criminal procedure, finding counsel guilty of
criminal contempt and imposing various jail terms up to six months. the
immediate question raised was whether the contempt charged was one which
the judge was authorized to determine for himself, or one which under
rule  (b) could only be passed upon by another judge and after notice
and hearing; but behind this issue loomed the same constitutional issue
which was dealt with by the court in the cooke case, of the requirements
of due process of law. the court sustained the circuit court of appeals
in affirming the convictions and sentences, at the same time, however,
reversing some of judge medina's specifications of contempt, one of
these being the charge that the petitioners entered into an agreement
deliberately to "impair my health." "we hold," said justice jackson,
speaking for the majority, "that rule  allows the trial judge, upon
the occurrence in his presence of a contempt, immediately and summarily
to punish it, if, in his opinion, delay will prejudice the trial. we
hold, on the other hand, that if he believes the exigencies of the trial
require that he defer judgment until its completion he may do so without
extinguishing his power. *** we are not unaware or unconcerned that
persons identified with unpopular causes may find it difficult to enlist
the counsel of their choice. but we think it must be ascribed to causes
quite apart from fear of being held in contempt, for we think few
effective lawyers would regard the tactics condemned here as either
necessary or helpful to a successful defense. that such clients seem to
have thought these tactics necessary is likely to contribute to the
bar's reluctance to appear for them rather more than fear of contempt.
but that there may be no misunderstanding, we make clear that this
court, if its aid be needed, will unhesitatingly protect counsel in
fearless, vigorous and effective performance of every duty pertaining to
the office of the advocate on behalf of any person whatsoever. but it
will not equate contempt with courage or insults with independence. it
will also protect the processes of orderly trial, which is the supreme
object of the lawyer's calling."[]
[pg ]
contempt by disobedience of orders
disobedience of injunction orders, particularly in labor disputes, has
been a fruitful source of cases dealing with contempt of court. in
united states v. united mine workers[] the court held that
disobedience of a temporary restraining order issued for the purpose of
maintaining existing conditions, pending the determination of the
court's jurisdiction, is punishable as criminal contempt where the issue
is not frivolous but substantial. secondly, the court held that an order
issued by a court with jurisdiction over the subject matter and person
must be obeyed by the parties until it is reversed by orderly and proper
proceedings, even though the statute under which the order is issued is
unconstitutional. thirdly, on the basis of united states v. shipp,[]
it was held that violations of a court's order are punishable as
criminal contempt even though the order is set aside on appeal as in
excess of the court's jurisdiction or though the basic action has become
moot. finally, the court held that conduct can amount to both civil and
criminal contempt, and the same acts may justify a court in resorting to
coercive and to punitive measures, which may be imposed in a single
proceeding.
[pg ]
criminal versus civil contempts
prior to the united mine workers case, the court had distinguished
between criminal and civil contempts on the basis of the vindication of
the authority of the courts on the one hand and the preservation and
enforcement of the rights of the parties on the other. a civil contempt
consists of the refusal of a person in a civil case to obey a mandatory
order. it is incomplete in nature and may be purged by obedience to the
court order. in criminal contempt, however, the act of contempt has been
completed, punishment is imposed to vindicate the authority of the
court, and a person cannot by subsequent action purge himself of such
contempt.[] in a dictum in ex parte grossman,[] chief justice taft,
while holding for the court on the main issue that the president may
pardon a criminal contempt, declared that he may not pardon a civil
contempt. in an analogous case, the court was emphatic in a dictum that
congress cannot require a jury trial where the contemnor has failed to
perform a positive act for the relief of private parties.[]
judicial power aids administrative power
proceedings to enforce the orders of administrative agencies and
subpoenas issued by them to appear and produce testimony have become
increasingly common since the leading case of interstate commerce
commission v. brimson,[] where it was held that the contempt power
of the courts might by statutory authorization be utilized in aid of the
interstate commerce commission in enforcing compliance with its orders.
in  a proceeding to enforce a subpoena duces tecum issued by the
securities and exchange commission during the course of an investigation
was ruled to be civil in character on the ground that the only sanction
was a penalty designed to compel obedience. the court then enunciated
the principle that where a fine or imprisonment imposed on the contemnor
is designed to coerce him to do what he has refused to do, the
proceeding is one for civil contempt.[]
[pg ]
from the beginning of government under the constitution of  congress
has assumed under the necessary and proper clause, its power to
establish inferior courts, its power to regulate the jurisdiction of
federal courts and the power to regulate the issuance of writs. the
thirteenth section of the judiciary act of  authorized the circuit
courts to issue writs of prohibition to the district courts, and the
supreme court to issue such writs to the circuit courts. the supreme
court was also empowered to issue writs of mandamus "in cases warranted
by the principles and usages of law, to any courts appointed, or persons
holding office, under the authority of the united states."[] section
 provided that all courts of the united states should "have power to
issue writs of scire facias, habeas corpus, and all other writs not
specially provided for by statute, which may be necessary for the
exercise of their respective jurisdictions, and agreeable to the
principles and usages of law."[] issuance of the writ of habeas
corpus was limited in that it was to extend only to persons in custody
under or by color of authority of the united states. although the act of
 left the power over writs subject largely to the common law, it is
significant as a reflection of the belief, in which the courts have on
the whole concurred, that an act of congress is necessary to confer
judicial power to issue writs.
common law powers of the district of columbia courts
that portion of section  which authorized the supreme court to issue
writs of mandamus in the exercise of its original jurisdiction was held
invalid in marbury v. madison,[] as an unconstitutional enlargement
of the supreme court's original jurisdiction. after two more futile
efforts to obtain a writ of mandamus, in cases in which the court found
that power to issue the writ had not been vested by statute in the
courts of the united states except in aid of already existing
jurisdiction,[] a litigant was successful in kendall v. united
states ex rel. stokes[] in finding a court which would take
jurisdiction in a mandamus proceeding. this was the circuit court of the
united states for the district of columbia which was held to have
jurisdiction, on the theory that the common law, in force in maryland
when the cession of that part of the state which became the district of
columbia was made to the united states, remained in force in the
district. at an early time, therefore, the federal courts established
the rule that mandamus can be issued only when authorized by a
constitutional statute and within the limits imposed by the common law
and the separation of powers.
[pg ]
habeas corpus
although the writ of habeas corpus has something of a special status
by virtue of article i, section , paragraph , the power of a specific
court to issue the writ has long been held to have its authorization
only in written law.[] in ex parte yerger,[] where the petitioner
was held in custody by the military authorities under the reconstruction
acts, the court, referring to the prohibition against the suspension of
the writ of habeas corpus, clearly indicated that congress is not
bound to provide for the protection of federal rights by investing the
federal courts with jurisdiction to protect them. furthermore, the case
also incorporates the rule that power to issue the writ may be withdrawn
even in pending cases.[] the rules pertaining to mandamus and habeas
corpus are applicable to the other common law and statutory writs, the
power to issue which, though judicial in nature, must be derived from
the statutes and cannot go beyond them.
congress limits the inquisition power
although the speculations of some publicists and some judicial dicta[]
support the idea of an inherent power of the federal courts sitting in
equity to issue injunctions independently of statutory limitations,
neither the course taken by congress nor the specific rulings of the
supreme court support any such principle. congress has repeatedly
exercised its power to limit the use of the injunction in the federal
courts. the first limitation on the equity jurisdiction of the federal
courts is to be found in section  of the judiciary act of , which
provided that no equity suit should be maintained where there was a full
and adequate remedy at law. although this provision did no more than
declare a pre-existing rule long applied in chancery courts,[] it did
assert the power of congress to regulate the equity powers of the
federal courts. the act of march , ,[] prohibited the issuance of
any injunction by any court of the united states to stay proceedings in
state courts except where such injunctions may be authorized by any law
relating to bankruptcy proceedings. in subsequent statutes congress has
prohibited the issuance of injunctions in the federal courts to restrain
the collection of taxes;[] provided for a three-judge court, as a
prerequisite to the issuance of injunctions to restrain the enforcement
of state statutes for unconstitutionality,[] for enjoining federal
statutes for unconstitutionality,[] and for enjoining orders of the
interstate commerce commission;[] limited the power to issue
injunctions restraining rate orders of state public utility
commissions,[] and the use of injunctions in labor disputes;[] and
placed a very rigid restriction of the power to enjoin orders of the
administrator under the emergency price control act.[]
[pg ]all of these restrictions have been sustained by the supreme court as
constitutional and applied with varying degrees of thoroughness. the
court has made exceptions to the application of the prohibition against
the stay of proceedings in state courts,[] but has on the whole
adhered to the statute. the exceptions raise no constitutional issues,
and the later tendency is to contract the scope of the exceptions.[]
in duplex printing company v. deering,[] the supreme court placed a
narrow construction upon the labor provisions of the clayton act and
thereby contributed in part to the more extensive restriction by
congress of the use of injunctions in labor disputes in the
norris-laguardia act of  which has not only been declared
constitutional,[] but has been applied liberally,[] and in such a
manner as to repudiate the notion of an inherent power to issue
injunctions contrary to statutory provisions.
[pg ]
injunctions under the emergency price control act of 
lockerty v. phillips[] justifies the same conclusion. here the
validity of the special appeals procedure of the emergency price control
act of  was sustained. this act provided for a special emergency
court of appeals which, subject to review by the supreme court, was
given exclusive jurisdiction to determine the validity of regulations,
orders, and price schedules issued by the office of price
administration. the emergency court and the emergency court alone was
permitted to enjoin regulations or orders of opa, and even it could
enjoin such orders only after finding that the order was not in
accordance with law, or was arbitrary or capricious. the emergency court
was expressly denied power to issue temporary restraining orders or
interlocutory decrees; and in addition the effectiveness of any
permanent injunction it might issue was to be postponed for thirty days.
if review was sought in the supreme court by certiorari, effectiveness
was to be postponed until final disposition. a unanimous court speaking
through chief justice stone declared that there "is nothing in the
constitution which requires congress to confer equity jurisdiction on
any particular inferior federal court." all federal courts, other than
the supreme court, it was asserted, derive their jurisdiction solely
from the exercise of the authority to ordain and establish inferior
courts conferred on congress by article iii, §, of the constitution.
this power, which congress is left free to exercise or not, was held to
include the power "'of investing them with jurisdiction either limited,
concurrent, or exclusive, and of withholding jurisdiction from them in
the exact degrees and character which to congress may seem proper for
the public good.'"[] although the court avoided passing upon the
constitutionality of the prohibition against interlocutory decrees, the
language of the court was otherwise broad enough to support it, as was
the language of yakus v. united states[] which sustained a different
phase of the special procedure for appeals under the emergency price
control act.
among the incidental powers of courts is that of making all necessary
rules governing their process and practice and for the orderly conduct
of their business.[] however, this power too is derived from the
statutes and cannot go beyond them. the landmark case is wayman v.
southard[] which sustained the validity of the process acts of 
and  as a valid exercise of authority under the necessary and proper
clause. although chief justice marshall regarded the rule-making power
as essentially legislative in nature, he ruled that congress could
delegate to the courts the power to vary minor regulations in the
outlines marked out by the statute. fifty-seven years later in [pg ]fink
v. o'neil,[] in which the united states sought to enforce by summary
process the payment of a debt, the supreme court ruled that under the
process acts the law of wisconsin was the law of the united states and
hence the government was required to bring a suit, obtain a judgment,
and cause execution to issue. justice matthews for a unanimous court
declared that the courts have "no inherent authority to take any one of
these steps, except as it may have been conferred by the legislative
department; for they can exercise no jurisdiction, except as the law
confers and limits it."
limits to the power
the principal function of court rules is that of regulating the practice
of courts as regards forms, the operation and effect of process, and the
mode and time of proceedings. however, rules are sometimes employed to
state in convenient form principles of substantive law previously
established by statutes or decisions. but no such rule "can enlarge or
restrict jurisdiction. nor can a rule abrogate or modify the substantive
law." this rule is applicable equally to courts of law, equity, and
admiralty, to rules prescribed by the supreme court for the guidance of
lower courts, and to rules "which lower courts make for their own
guidance under authority conferred."[] as incident to the judicial
power, courts of the united states possess inherent authority to
supervise the conduct of their officers, parties, witnesses, counsel,
and jurors by self-preserving rules for the protection of the rights of
litigants and the orderly administration of justice.[]
the courts of the united states possess inherent equitable powers over
their process to prevent abuse, oppression and injustice, and to protect
their jurisdiction and officers in the protection of property in the
custody of law.[] such powers are said to be essential to and inherent
in the organization of courts of justice.[] the courts of the united
states also possess inherent power to amend their records, correct the
errors of the clerk or other court officers, and to rectify defects or
omissions in their records even after the lapse of a term, subject,
however, to the qualification that the power to amend records conveys no
power to create a record or re-create one of which no evidence
exists.[]
[pg ]
the administration of insolvent enterprises, investigations into the
reasonableness of public utility rates, and the performance of other
judicial functions often require the special services of masters in
chancery, referees, auditors, and other special aids. the practice of
referring pending actions to a referee was held in heckers v.
fowler[] to be coeval with the organization of the federal courts. in
the leading case of ex parte peterson[] a united states district court
appointed an auditor with power to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of testimony. the court authorized him to conduct a
preliminary investigation of facts and file a report thereon for the
purpose of simplifying the issues for the jury. this action was neither
authorized nor prohibited by statute. in sustaining the action of the
district judge, justice brandeis, speaking for the court, declared:
"courts have (at least in the absence of legislation to the contrary)
inherent power to provide themselves with appropriate instruments
required for the performance of their duties. *** this power includes
authority to appoint persons unconnected with the court to aid judges in
the performance of specific judicial duties, as they may arise in the
progress of a cause."[] the power to appoint auditors by federal
courts sitting in equity has been exercised from their very beginning,
and here it was held that this power is the same whether the court sits
in law or equity.
subject to general statutory qualifications for attorneys, the power of
the federal courts to admit and disbar attorneys rests on the common law
from which it was originally derived. according to chief justice taney,
it was well settled by the common law that "it rests exclusively with
the court to determine who is qualified to become one of its officers,
as an attorney and counsellor, and for what cause he ought to be
removed." such power, he made clear, however, "is not an arbitrary and
despotic one, to be exercised at the pleasure of the court, or from
passion, prejudice, or personal hostility; but it is the duty of the
court to exercise and regulate it by a sound and just judicial
discretion, whereby the rights and independence of the bar may be as
scrupulously guarded and maintained by the court, as the right and
dignity of the court itself."[] the test-oath act of july , ,
which purported to exclude former confederates from the practice of law
in the federal courts, was invalidated in ex parte garland.[] in the
course of his opinion for the court, justice field discussed generally
the power to admit and disbar attorneys. the exercise of such a power,
he declared, is judicial power. the attorney is an officer of the court
and though congress may prescribe qualifications [pg ]for the practice of
law in the federal courts, it may not do so in such a way as to inflict
punishment contrary to the constitution or to deprive a pardon of the
president of its legal effect.[]
organization of courts, tenure and compensation of judges
the constitution is almost completely silent concerning the organization
of the federal judiciary. although it provides for one supreme court, it
makes no reference to the size and composition of the court, the time or
place for sitting, or its internal organization save for the reference
to the chief justice in the impeachment provision of article i, §,
relating to impeachment of the president. all these matters are
therefore confided to congressional determination. under the terms of
the judiciary act of , the court consisted of a chief justice and
five associate justices. this number was gradually increased until it
reached a total of ten judges under the act of march , . due to the
exigencies of reconstruction and the tension existing between congress
and the president the number was reduced to seven as vacancies should
occur, by the act of april , . the number never actually fell
below eight, and on april , , with andrew johnson out of the white
house, congress restored the number to nine, where it has since
remained. there have been proposals at various times for an organization
of the court into sections or divisions. no authoritative judicial
expression is available, although chief justice hughes in a letter to
senator wheeler of march , , expressed doubts concerning the
validity of such a device and stated that "the constitution does not
appear to authorize two or more supreme courts functioning in effect as
separate courts."[] congress has also determined the time and place of
sessions of the court, going so far in  as to change its terms so
that for fourteen months, between december,  and february,  the
court did not convene.
by article i, §, paragraph , congress is expressly declared to have
the power to constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court, and the
power is repeated in a different formula in article iii, §, when
provision is also made for tenure during good behavior and for a
compensation which shall not be diminished. since  [pg ]congress, with
repeated judicial acquiescence and concurrence, has interpreted both of
these sections as leaving it free to establish inferior courts or not,
as it deems fit in the exercise of a boundless discretion. by the
judiciary act of , congress constituted thirteen district courts
which were to have four sessions annually[] and three circuit courts
which were to consist jointly of the supreme court judges and the
district judge of such districts which were to meet annually at the time
and places designated by the statute.[] by the judiciary act of
february , , passed in the closing weeks of the adams
administration, the number of judges of the supreme court was to be
reduced to five after the next vacancy, the districts were reorganized,
and six circuit courts consisting of three judges each and organized
independently of the supreme court and the district courts were
created.[] whatever merits this plan of organization possessed were
lost in the fierce partisanship of the period, which led the expiring
federalist administration to appoint federalists almost exclusively to
the new judgeships to the dismay of the jeffersonians who, upon coming
into power, set plans in motion to repeal the act. in a bitter debate
the major constitutional issue to emerge centered about the abolition of
courts once they were created in the light of the provision for tenure
during good behavior. suffice it to say, the repeal bill was passed and
approved by the president on march , [] without any provision for
the displaced judges. the validity of the act of  was questioned in
stuart v. laird,[] where justice paterson in a terse opinion, which
hardly touched charles lee's argument that congress lacked power to
abolish or destroy courts and judges, held for the court that congress
has the power to establish inferior courts from time to time as it may
think proper and to transfer a cause from one tribunal to another. in
answer to the argument that supreme court justices could not
constitutionally sit as circuit judges, he pointed to practice and
acquiescence contemporaneous with the constitution as an interpretation
too strong and obstinate to be shaken or controlled.
abolition of the commerce court
since  congress has many times exercised its power to constitute
inferior courts, but not until  did it again abolish a court. [pg ]this
was the unfortunately launched commerce court from which so much was
expected and so little came. again, as in , there was a
constitutional debate on the power of congress to abolish courts without
providing for the displaced judges, but unlike the act of  the act
of [] provided for the redistribution of the commerce court judges
among the circuit courts of appeals and the transfer of its jurisdiction
to the district courts.[]
the prohibition against the diminution of judicial salaries has
presented very little litigation. in  in evans v. gore[] the
court invalidated the application of the income tax as applied to a
federal judge, over the strong dissent of justice holmes, who was joined
by justice brandeis. this ruling was extended in miles v. graham[]
to exempt the salary of a judge of the court of claims appointed
subsequent to the enactment of the taxing act. evans v. gore was
disapproved and miles v. graham in effect overruled in o'malley,
collector of internal revenue v. woodrough,[] where the court
upheld section  of the revenue act of  (now  u.s.c.a.  (a))
which extended the application of the income tax to salaries of judges
taking office after june , . such a tax was regarded neither as an
unconstitutional diminution of the compensation of judges nor as an
encroachment on the independence of the judiciary.[] to subject
judges who take office after a stipulated date to a nondiscriminatory
tax laid generally on an income, said the court, "is merely to recognize
that judges are also citizens, and that their particular function in
government does not generate an immunity from sharing with their fellow
citizens the material burden of the government whose constitution and
laws they are charged with administering."[]
diminution of salaries
the appropriations act of  reduced "the salaries and retired pay of
all judges (except judges whose compensation may not, under the
constitution, be diminished during their continuance in office)," by
-/ per cent if below $,, or to $, if above that figure.
while this provision presented no questions of its own
constitutionality, it did raise the question of what judges' salaries
could be constitutionally [pg ]reduced. in o'donoghue v. united
states[] the section was held inapplicable to the salaries of judges
of the courts of the district of columbia on the ground that as to their
organization and tenure and compensation, congress was limited by the
provisions of article iii. in williams v. united states,[] on the
other hand, it was ruled that the reduction was applicable to the
salaries of the judges of the court of claims, that being a legislative
court created in pursuance of the power of congress to pay the debts of
the united states and to consent to suits against the united states. as
such it is not within the provisions of article iii respecting the
tenure and compensation of judges.
by virtue of its power "to ordain and establish" courts congress has
occasionally created courts under article iii to exercise a specialized
jurisdiction. otherwise these tribunals are like other article iii
courts in that they exercise "the judicial power of the united states,"
and only that power, that their judges must be appointed by the
president and the senate and must hold office during good behavior
subject to removal by impeachment only, and that the compensation of
their judges cannot be diminished during their continuance in office.
one example of such courts was the commerce court created by the
mann-elkins act of ,[] which was given exclusive jurisdiction of
all cases to enforce orders of the interstate commerce commission except
those involving money penalties and criminal punishment; of cases
brought to enjoin, annul, or set aside orders of the commission; of
cases brought under the act of  to prevent unjust discriminations;
and of all mandamus proceedings authorized by the act of . this
court actually functioned for less than three years, being abolished in
, as was mentioned above.
the emergency court of appeals of 
another court of specialized jurisdiction but created for a limited time
only was the emergency court of appeals organized by the emergency price
control act of january , .[] by the terms of the statute this
court consisted of three or more judges designated by the chief justice
from the judges of the united states district courts and circuit courts
of appeal. the chief justice was authorized to designate one of the
judges as chief judge, to designate additional judges from time to time,
and to revoke designations. the chief judge in turn was authorized to
divide the court into divisions of three or more members each, with any
such division empowered to [pg ]render judgment as the judgment of the
court. the court was vested with jurisdiction and powers of a district
court to hear appeals filed within thirty days against denials of
protests by the price administrator and with exclusive jurisdiction to
set aside regulations, orders, or price schedules, in whole or in part,
or to remand the proceeding. but no regulation or price schedule could
be set aside or enjoined unless the court was satisfied that it was
contrary to law or was arbitrary or capricious. even then the
effectiveness of a restraining order was to be suspended for thirty days
and, if appealed to the supreme court within thirty days, until its
final disposition. although the act deprived the district courts of the
power to enjoin the enforcement of orders and price schedules, it vested
them with jurisdiction to enforce the act and orders issued thereunder
in actions brought by the administrator to enjoin violations and to try
criminal prosecutions brought by the attorney general. since the
emergency court of appeals, subject to review by the supreme court, was
given exclusive jurisdiction to determine the validity of any order
issued under the act, it resulted that the district courts were deprived
of the power to inquire into the validity of orders involved in civil or
criminal proceedings in which they had jurisdiction.[]
judicial review restrained
in yakus v. united states[] the court held in an opinion by chief
justice stone that there is "no principle of law or provision of the
constitution which precludes congress from making criminal the violation
of an administrative regulation, by one who has failed to avail himself
of an adequate separate procedure for the adjudication of its validity,
or which precludes the practice, in many ways desirable, of splitting
the trial for violations of an administrative regulation by committing
the determination of the issue of its validity to the agency which
created it, and the issue of violation to a court which is given
jurisdiction to punish violations. such a requirement presents no novel
constitutional issue."[] in a dissent justice rutledge took issue
with this holding, saying: "it is one thing for congress to withhold
jurisdiction. it is entirely another to confer it and direct that it be
exercised in a manner inconsistent with constitutional requirements or,
what in some instances may be the same thing, without regard to them.
once it is held that congress can require the courts criminally to
enforce unconstitutional laws or statutes, including regulations, or to
do so without regard for their validity, the way will have been found to
circumvent the supreme law and, what is more, to make the courts parties
to doing so. this congress cannot [pg ]do. there are limits to the judicial
power. congress may impose others. and in some matters congress or the
president has final say under the constitution. but whenever the
judicial power is called into play, it is responsible directly to the
fundamental law and no other authority can intervene to force or
authorize the judicial body to disregard it. the problem therefore is
not solely one of individual right or due process of law. it is equally
one of the separation and independence of the powers of government and
of the constitutional integrity of the judicial process, more especially
in criminal trials."[]
quite distinct from special courts exercising the judicial power of the
united states, but at the same time a significant part of the federal
judiciary, are the legislative courts, so called because they are
created by congress in pursuance of its general legislative powers. the
distinction between constitutional courts and legislative courts was
first made in american insurance company v. canter,[] which
involved the question of the admiralty jurisdiction of the territorial
court of florida, the judges of which were limited to a four-year term
in office. said chief justice marshall for the court: "these courts,
then, are not constitutional courts, in which the judicial power
conferred by the constitution on the general government, can be
deposited. they are incapable of receiving it. they are legislative
courts, created in virtue of the general right of sovereignty which
exists in the government, or in virtue of that clause which enables
congress to make all needful rules and regulations, respecting the
territory belonging to the united states. the jurisdiction with which
they are invested, is not a part of that judicial power which is defined
in the rd article of the constitution, but is conferred by congress, in
the execution of those general powers which that body possesses over the
territories of the united states."[] the court went on to hold that
admiralty jurisdiction can be exercised in the states in those courts
only which are established in pursuance of article iii, but that the
same limitation does not apply to the territorial courts; for, in
legislating for them, "congress exercises the combined powers of the
general, and of a state government."[]
[pg ]
other legislative courts
the distinction made in the canter case has been repeated with
elaborations since , receiving its fullest exposition in ex parte
bakelite corporation,[] which contains a review of the history of
legislative courts and the cases supporting the power of congress to
create them. in addition to discussing the derivation of power to
establish legislative courts, the bakelite case ruled that such courts
"also may be created as special tribunals to examine and determine
various matters, arising between the government and others, which from
their nature do not require judicial determination and yet are
susceptible of it. the mode of determining matters of this class is
completely within congressional control. congress may reserve to itself
the power to decide, may delegate that power to executive officers, or
may commit it to judicial tribunals."[] among the matters susceptible
of judicial determination but not requiring it are claims against the
states,[] the disposal of the public lands and claims arising
therefrom,[] questions concerning membership in the indian
tribes,[] and questions arising out of the administration of the
customs and internal revenue laws.[] for the determination of these
matters congress has created the court of claims, the court of private
land claims, the choctaw and chickasaw citizenship court, the court of
customs, the court of customs and patent appeals, and the tax court of
the united states (formerly the board of tax appeals).
power of congress over legislative courts
in creating legislative courts congress is not limited by the
restrictions imposed in article iii concerning tenure during good
behavior and the prohibition against limitation of salaries. congress
may limit tenure to a term of years, as it has done in acts creating
territorial courts and the tax court of the united states, and it may
subject the judges of legislative courts to removal by the
president.[] in mcallister v. united states,[] the removal of a
territorial judge was sustained on the basis of the principle that: "the
whole subject of the organization of territorial courts, the tenure by
which the judges of such courts shall hold their offices, the salary
they receive and the manner in which they may be removed or suspended
from office, was left, by the constitution, with congress under its
plenary power over the territories of the united states."[] long
afterwards the court held [pg ]in williams v. united states[] that the
reduction of the salaries of the judges of the court of claims, and
inferentially of judges of other legislative courts, to $, per year
by the appropriation act of june , , was constitutional. in so
doing the court rejected dicta in earlier cases which classified the
court of claims as a constitutional court and silently reversed miles
v. graham,[] which had held that congress could not include the
salary of a judge of the court of claims in his taxable income.
status of the court of claims
it follows, too, that in creating legislative courts, congress can vest
in them nonjudicial functions of a legislative or advisory nature and
deprive their judgments of finality. thus in gordon v. united
states[] there was no objection to the power of the secretary of the
treasury and congress to revise or suspend the early judgments of the
court of claims. likewise in united states v. ferreira[] the court
sustained the act conferring powers on the florida territorial court to
examine claims arising under the spanish treaty and to report his
decisions and the evidence on which they were based to the secretary of
the treasury for subsequent action. "a power of this description," it
was said, "may constitutionally be conferred on a secretary as well as
on a commissioner. but [it] is not judicial in either case, in the sense
in which judicial power is granted by the constitution to the courts of
the united states."
[pg ]
a judicial paradox
chief justice taney's view in the gordon case that the judgments of
legislative courts could never be reviewed by the supreme court was
tacitly rejected in de groot v. united states,[] when the court
took jurisdiction from a final judgment of the court of claims. since
the decision of this case in  the authority of the supreme court to
exercise appellate jurisdiction over legislative courts has turned not
upon the nature or status of such courts, but rather upon the nature of
the proceeding before the lower court and the finality of its judgment.
consequently in proceedings before a legislative court which are
judicial in nature and admit of a final judgment the supreme court may
be vested with appellate jurisdiction. thus there arises the workable
anomaly that though the legislative courts can exercise no part of the
judicial power of the united states and the supreme court can exercise
only that power, the latter nonetheless can review judgments of the
former. however, it should be emphasized that the supreme court will
neither review the administrative proceedings of legislative courts nor
entertain appeals from the advisory or interlocutory decrees of such
courts.[]
through a long course of decisions the courts of the district of
columbia were regarded as legislative courts upon which congress could
impose nonjudicial functions. in butterworth v. united states ex rel.
hoe,[] the court sustained an act of congress which conferred
revisionary powers upon the supreme court of the district in patent
appeals and made its decisions binding only upon the commissioner of
patents. similarly, the court later sustained the authority of congress
to vest revisionary powers in the same court over rates fixed by a
public utilities commission.[] not long after this the same rule was
applied to the revisionary power of the district supreme court over
orders of the federal radio commission.[] these rulings were based on
the assumption, express or implied, that the courts of the district were
legislative courts, created by congress in pursuance of its plenary
power to govern the district of columbia. in an obiter dictum in ex
parte bakelite corporation,[] while reviewing the history and
analyzing the nature of legislative courts, the court stated that the
courts of the district were legislative courts.
[pg ]in , nevertheless, the court, abandoning all previous dicta on the
subject, found the courts of the district of columbia to be
constitutional courts exercising judicial power of the united
states,[] with the result of shouldering the task of reconciling the
performance of nonjudicial functions by such courts with the rule that
constitutional courts can exercise only the judicial power of the united
states. this task was easily accomplished by the argument that in
establishing courts for the district, congress is performing dual
functions in pursuance of two distinct powers, the power to constitute
tribunals inferior to the supreme court, and its plenary and exclusive
power to legislate for the district of columbia. however, article iii,
§, limits this latter power with respect to tenure and compensation,
but not with regard to vesting legislative and administrative powers in
such courts. subject to the guarantees of personal liberty in the
constitution, "congress has as much power to vest courts of the district
with a variety of jurisdiction and powers as a state legislature has in
conferring jurisdiction on its courts."[] the effect of the
o'donoghue decision is to confer a dual status on the courts of the
district of columbia. as regards their organization, and the tenure and
compensation of their judges they are constitutional courts, as regards
jurisdiction and powers they are simultaneously legislative and
constitutional courts, and as such can be vested with nonjudicial powers
while sharing the judicial power of the united states.[]
[pg ]
jurisdiction: cases and controversies
section . the judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law
and equity, arising under this constitution, the laws of the united
states, and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their
authority;—to all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers
and consuls;—to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction;—to
controversies to which the united states shall be a party;—to
controversies between two or more states;—between a state and citizens
of another state;—between citizens of different states;—between
citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of different
states, and between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign
states, citizens or subjects.
by the terms of the foregoing section the judicial power extends to nine
classes of cases and controversies, which fall into two general groups.
in the words of chief justice marshall in cohens v. virginia:[] "in
the first, their jurisdiction depends on the character of the cause,
whoever may be the parties. this class comprehends 'all cases in law and
equity arising under this constitution, the laws of the united states,
and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority.' this
cause extends the jurisdiction of the court to all the cases described,
without making in its terms any exception whatever, and without any
regard to the condition of the party. if there be any exception, it is
to be implied, against the express words of the article. in the second
class, the jurisdiction depends entirely on the character of the
parties. in this are comprehended 'controversies between two or more
states, between a state and citizens of another state,' and 'between a
state and foreign states, citizens or subjects.' if these be the
parties, it is entirely unimportant, what may be the subject of
controversy. be it what it may, these parties have a constitutional
right to come into the courts of the union."[]
judicial power is "the power of a court to decide and pronounce a
judgment and carry it into effect between persons and parties who bring
a case before it for decision."[] the meaning attached to the terms
"cases" and "controversies" determines therefore the extent of the
judicial power, as well as the capacity of the federal courts to receive
jurisdiction. as chief justice marshall declared in osborn v. bank of
the united states, judicial power is capable of acting only [pg ]when the
subject is submitted in a case, and a case arises only when a party
asserts his rights "in a form prescribed by law."[] many years later
justice field, relying upon chisholm v. georgia,[] and tucker's
edition of blackstone, amended this definition by holding that
"controversies," to the extent that they differ from "cases," include
only suits of a civil nature. he continued: "by cases and controversies
are intended the claims of litigants brought before the courts for
determination by such regular proceedings as are established by law or
custom for the protection or enforcement of rights, or the prevention,
redress, or punishment of wrongs. whenever the claim of a party under
the constitution, laws, or treaties of the united states takes such a
form that the judicial power is capable of acting upon it, then it has
become a case. the term implies the existence of present or possible
adverse parties whose contentions are submitted to the court for
adjudication."[] the definitions propounded by chief justice marshall
and justice field were quoted with approval in muskrat v. united
states,[] where the court held that the exercise of judicial power is
limited to cases and controversies and emphasized "adverse litigants,"
"adverse interests," an "actual controversy," and conclusiveness or
finality of judgment as essential elements of a case.[]
the necessity of adverse litigants with real interests has been stressed
in numerous cases,[] and has been particularly emphasized in suits to
contest the validity of a federal or state statute. a few illustrations
will suffice to describe the practical operation of these limitations.
in chicago and grand trunk railroad co. v. wellman,[] which
originated in the courts of michigan on an agreed statement of facts
between friendly parties desiring to contest a rate-making statute, the
supreme court ruled there was no case or controversy. in the course of
its opinion, which held that the courts have no "immediate and general
supervision" of the constitutionality of legislative enactments, the
court said: "whenever, in pursuance of an honest and actual antagonistic
assertion of rights by one individual against another, there is
presented a question involving the validity of any act of any
legislature, state or federal, and the decision necessarily rests on the
competency of the legislature to so enact, the court [pg ]must, in the
exercise of its solemn duties, determine whether the act be
constitutional or not; but such an exercise of power is the ultimate and
supreme function of courts. it is legitimate only in the last resort,
and as a necessity in the determination of real, earnest and vital
controversy between individuals. it never was the thought that, by means
of a friendly suit, a party beaten in the legislature could transfer to
the courts an inquiry as to the constitutionality of the legislative
act."[]
in applying the rule requiring adverse litigants to present an honest
and actual antagonistic assertion of rights, the court invalidated an
act of congress which authorized certain indians to bring suits against
the united states to test the constitutionality of the indian allotment
acts, on the ground that such a proceeding was not a case or controversy
in that the united states had no interest adverse to the claimants.[]
the court has also held that in contesting the validity of a statute,
the issue must be raised by one adversely affected and not a stranger to
the operation of the statute,[] and that the interest must be of a
personal as contrasted with an official interest.[] hence a county
court cannot contest the validity of a statute in the interest of third
parties,[] nor can a county auditor contest the validity of a statute
even though he is charged with its enforcement,[] nor can directors
of an irrigation district occupy a position antagonistic to it.[] it
is a well settled rule that: "the court will not pass upon the
constitutionality of legislation ***, or upon the complaint of one who
fails to show that he is injured by its operation, ***"[] it is
equally well established as a corollary that, "litigants may challenge
the constitutionality of a statute only insofar as it affects
them."[]
[pg ]
it must be noted, however, that adversity is a relative element which
the courts may or may not discover. thus in pollock v. farmers' loan
and trust co.,[] the supreme court sustained the jurisdiction of a
district court which had enjoined the company from paying an income tax
even though the suit was brought by a stockholder against the company,
thereby circumventing section  of the revised statutes, which
forbids the maintenance in any court of a suit "for the purpose of
restraining the collection of any tax."[] subsequently the court has
found adversity of parties in a suit brought by a stockholder to
restrain a title company from investing its funds in farm loan bonds
issued by the federal land banks,[] and in a suit brought by certain
preferred stockholders against the alabama power company and the tva to
enjoin the performance of contracts between the company and the
authority and a subsidiary, the electric home and farm authority, on the
ground that the act creating these agencies was unconstitutional.[]
the ability to find adversity in narrow crevices of casual disagreement
is well illustrated by carter v. carter coal co.,[] where the
president of the company brought suit against the company and its
officials, among whom was carter's father who was vice president of the
company.[] the court entertained the suit and decided the case on its
merits.
[pg ]
equally important as an essential element of a case is the concept of
real or substantial interests. as a general rule the interest of
taxpayers in the general funds of the federal treasury is insufficient
to give them a standing in court to contest the expenditure of public
funds on the ground that this interest "is shared with millions of
others; is comparatively minute and indeterminable; and the effect upon
future taxation, of any payment out of the funds, so remote, fluctuating
and uncertain, that no basis is afforded for an appeal to the preventive
powers of a court of equity."[] likewise, the court has held that the
general interest of a citizen in having the government administered by
law does not give him a standing to contest the validity of governmental
action.[] nor can a member of the bar of the supreme court challenge
the validity of an appointment to the court since his "is merely a
general interest common to all members of the public."[] similarly an
electric power company has been held not to have a sufficient interest
to maintain an injunction suit to restrain the making of federal loans
and grants to municipalities for the construction or purchase of
electric power distribution plants on the ground that the "lender owes
the sufferer no enforcible duty to refrain from making the unauthorized
loan; and the borrower owes him no obligation to refrain from using the
proceeds in any lawful way the borrower may choose."[] recent cases,
involving the issue of religion in the schools, reach somewhat divergent
results. in illinois ex rel. mccollum v. board of education,[] the
court held that a litigant had the requisite standing to bring a
mandamus suit challenging, on the basis of her interests as a resident
and taxpayer of the school district and the parent of a child required
by law to attend the school or one meeting the state's educational
requirements, the validity of a religious education program involving
the use of public school rooms one half hour each week. but in doremus
v. board of education,[] decided early in , the court declined
jurisdiction in a case challenging the validity of a new jersey statute
which requires the reading at the opening of each public school day of
five verses of the old testament. appellants' interest as taxpayers was
found to be insufficient to sustain the proceeding.
[pg ]
substantial interest in suits by states
these principles have been applied in a number of cases to which a state
was one of the parties and in suits between states. one of the most
important of these is state of georgia v. stanton,[] which was an
original suit in equity brought by the state of georgia against the
secretary of war and others to enjoin the enforcement of the
reconstruction acts. the state's counsel contended that enforcement of
the acts brought about "an immediate paralysis of all the authority and
power of the state government by military force; *** [which was
divesting the state] of her legally and constitutionally established and
guaranteed existence as a body politic and a member of the union." the
supreme court dismissed the suit for want of jurisdiction, holding that
for a case to be presented for the exercise of the judicial power, the
rights threatened "must be rights of persons or property, not merely
political rights, which do not belong to the jurisdiction of a court,
either in law or equity."[] the rule of the stanton case was applied
and elaborated in massachusetts v. mellon,[] where the state in its
own behalf and as parens patriae sought to enjoin the administration
of the maternity act[] which, it was alleged, was an unconstitutional
invasion of the reserved rights of the state and an impairment of its
sovereignty. the suit was held not justiciable on the ground that a
state cannot maintain a suit either to protect its political rights or
as parens patriae to protect citizens of the united states against the
operation of a federal law. concerning the right of a state to sue in
its own behalf to protect its political rights, the court said: "in that
aspect of the case we are called upon to adjudicate, not rights of
person or property, not rights of dominion over physical domain, not
quasi sovereign rights actually invaded or threatened, but abstract
questions of political power, of sovereignty, of government."[]
however, these holdings do not affect the right of a state as parens
patriae to intervene in behalf of the economic welfare of its citizens
against discriminatory rates set by an alleged illegal combination of
carriers,[] or the right of a state to assert its quasi sovereign
rights over wild life within its domain,[] or to protect its citizens
against the discharge of noxious gases by an industrial plant in an
adjacent state.[]
[pg ]
closely related to the requirements of adverse parties and substantial
interests is that of a real issue as contrasted with speculative,
abstract, hypothetical, or moot cases. as put by chief justice stone in
alabama state federation of labor v. mcadory,[] it has long been
the court's "considered practice not to decide abstract, hypothetical or
contingent questions," or as justice holmes said years earlier by way of
dictum, a party cannot maintain a suit "for a mere declaration in the
air."[] texas v. interstate commerce commission,[] presents a
good illustration of an abstract question. here, texas attempted to
enjoin the enforcement of the transportation act of  on the ground
that it invaded the reserved rights of the state. the court dismissed
the complaint as presenting no case or controversy, declaring: "it is
only where rights, in themselves appropriate subjects of judicial
cognizance, are being, or about to be, affected prejudicially by the
application or enforcement of a statute that its validity may be called
in question by a suitor and determined by an exertion of the judicial
power."[] again in ashwander v. tennessee valley authority,[]
the court refused to decide any issue save that of the validity of the
contracts between the authority and the company because, "the
pronouncements, policies and program of the tennessee valley authority
and its directors, their motives and desires, did not give rise to a
justiciable controversy save as they had fruition in action of a
definite and concrete character constituting an actual or threatened
interference with the rights of the persons complaining." chief justice
hughes cited new york v. illinois,[] where the court dismissed a
suit as presenting abstract questions "as to the possible effect of the
diversion of water from lake michigan upon hypothetical water power
developments in the indefinite future."[] he also cited among other
cases arizona v. california,[] where it was held that claims based
merely upon assumed potential invasions of rights were not enough to
warrant judicial intervention.
[pg ]the concepts of real interests and abstract questions again appear
prominently in united public workers of america v. mitchell.[] here
a number of government employees sued to enjoin the civil service
commission from enforcing the prohibitions of the hatch act against
activity in political management or campaigns, and to obtain a
declaratory judgment that the act was invalid. except for one of the
employees none had violated the act, but they did state that they
desired to engage in the forbidden political activities. the court held
that as to all the parties save the one who had violated the act there
was no justiciable controversy. "concrete legal issues, presented in
actual cases, not abstractions" were declared to be requisite. the
generality of their objection was regarded as really an attack on the
political expediency of the hatch act.[]
from the rule that courts will not render advisory opinions or write
essays in political theory on speculative issues, it follows logically
that they will not determine moot cases or suits arranged by collusion
between parties who have no opposing interests. a moot case has been
defined as "one which seeks to get a judgment on a pretended
controversy, when in reality there is none, or a decision in advance
about a right before it has been actually asserted and contested, or a
judgment upon some matter which, when rendered, for any reason, cannot
have any practical legal effect upon a then existing controversy."[]
cases may become moot because of a change in the law, or the status of
the litigants, or because of some act of the parties which dissolves the
controversy.[] just as courts will not speculate an hypothetical
question, so they will not analyze dead issues.[] the duty of every
federal court, said justice gray, "is to decide actual controversies by
a judgment which can be carried into effect, and not give opinions upon
moot questions or abstract propositions, or to declare principles or
rules of law which cannot affect the matter at issue in the case before
it."[]
[pg ]
the rule has been long established that the courts have no general
supervisory power over the executive or administrative branches of
government.[] in decatur v. paulding,[] which involved an
attempt by mandamus to compel the secretary of the navy to pay a
pension, the supreme court in sustaining denial of relief stated: "the
interference of the courts with the performance of the ordinary duties
of the executive departments of the government, would be productive of
nothing but mischief; and we are quite satisfied, that such a power was
never intended to be given to them."[] it follows, therefore, that
mandamus will lie against an executive official only to compel the
performance of a ministerial duty which admits of no discretion as
contrasted with executive or political duties which admit of
discretion.[] it follows, too, that an injunction will not lie
against the president,[] or against the head of an executive
department to control the exercise of executive discretion.[] these
principles are well illustrated by georgia v. stanton,[]
mississippi v. johnson,[] and kendall v. united states ex rel.
stokes.[]
origin of the concept
the concept of "political question" is an old one. as early as marbury
v. madison,[] chief justice marshall stated: "the province of the
court is, solely, to decide on the rights of individuals, not to inquire
how the executive, or executive officers, perform duties in which they
have a discretion. questions in their nature political, or which are, by
the constitution and laws, submitted to the executive, can never be made
in this court." the concept, as distinguished from that of interference
with executive functions, was first elaborated in luther v.
borden,[] which involved the meaning of "a republican form" of
government and the question of the lawful government of rhode island
among two competing groups purporting to act as the lawful authority.
"it is the province of a court to expound the law, not to make it,"
declared chief justice taney. "and certainly it is no part of the
judicial functions of any court of the united states to prescribe the
qualification of voters in a state, ***; nor has it the right to
determine what political privileges the citizens of a state are entitled
to, unless there is an established constitution or law to [pg ]govern its
decision."[] the court went on to hold that such matters as the
guaranty to a state of a republican form of government and of protection
against invasion and domestic violence are political questions committed
to congress and the president whose decisions are binding upon the
courts.[]
exemplifications of the doctrine
from this case and later applications of it, a political question may be
defined as a question relating to the possession of political power, of
sovereignty, of government, the determination of which is vested in
congress and the president whose decisions are conclusive upon the
courts. the more common classifications[] of cases involving
political questions are: () those which raise the issue of what proof
is required that a statute has been enacted,[] or a constitutional
amendment ratified;[] () questions arising out of the conduct of
foreign relations;[] () the termination of wars,[] or
rebellions;[] the questions of what constitutes a republican form of
government,[] and the right of a state to protection against invasion
or domestic violence;[] questions arising out of political actions of
states in determining the mode of choosing presidential electors,[]
state officials,[] and reapportionment of districts for congressional
representation;[] and suits brought by states to test their political
and so-called sovereign rights.[] the leading case on the evidence
required to prove the enactment of a statute is field v. clark,[]
where it was held that the enactment of a statute is conclusively proved
by the enrolled act signed by the speaker of the house of
representatives and the president of the senate, and the court will not
look beyond these formalities of record by examining the journals of the
two houses of congress or other records. similarly, the court has held
that the efficacy of the ratification of a proposed constitutional
amendment in the light of previous rejection or subsequent attempted
withdrawal is political in nature, pertaining to the political
departments, with the ultimate authority in congress by virtue of its
control over the promulgation of the adoption of amendments.[]
simultaneously, the court ruled that the question of the lapse of a
reasonable length of time between proposal and ratification is for
congress to determine and not the court.[]
[pg ]
recent cases
a few cases will suffice to illustrate the application of the concept of
political questions since . in colegrove v. green,[] a
declaratory judgment was sought to have the division of illinois into
congressional districts declared invalid as a violation of the equal
protection of the laws. justice frankfurter in announcing the judgment
of the court, in an opinion in which justices reed and burton joined,
was of the opinion that dismissal of the suit was required both by the
decision in wood v. broom,[] that there is no federal requirement
that congressional districts shall contain as nearly as practicable an
equal number of inhabitants, and because the question was not
justiciable. justice rutledge thought that smiley v. holm[]
indicated that the question was justiciable but concurred in the result
on the ground that the case was one in which the courts should decline
to exercise jurisdiction.[] justice black in a dissent supported by
justices douglas and murphy thought that the case was justiciable and
would have invalidated the reapportionment, leaving the state free to
elect all of its representatives from the state at large.[] in
macdougall v. green,[] however, the court seemed to regard as
justiciable the question of the validity of the provision of the
illinois election code requiring that a petition for the nomination of
candidates of a new political party be signed by , voters including
at least  from each of at least  of the states'  counties, for
it went on to sustain the provision in a brief per curiam opinion. in
ludecke v. watkins,[] the court held, as it had earlier, that the
determination of the cessation of a state of war is a question for the
political branch of the government and not for the courts. nevertheless,
the court actually found a state of war to exist between the united
states and germany after the end of hostilities, and ruled that an enemy
alien is not entitled to judicial review in a deportation proceeding.
very recently in south v. peters,[] the court refused to pass upon
the validity of the county unit scheme used in georgia for the
nomination of candidates in primary elections.
[pg ]
perhaps no portion of constitutional law pertaining to the judiciary has
evoked such unanimity as the rule that the federal courts will not
render advisory opinions. in  the supreme court refused to grant the
request of president washington and secretary of state jefferson to
construe the treaties and laws of the united states pertaining to
questions of international law arising out of the wars of the french
revolution. after convening the court which considered the request,
chief justice jay replied to president washington concerning the
functions of the three departments of government: "these being in
certain respects checks upon each other, and our being judges of a court
in the last resort, are considerations which afford strong arguments
against the propriety of our extra-judicially deciding the questions
alluded to, especially as the power given by the constitution to the
president, of calling on the heads of departments for opinions, seems to
have been purposely as well as expressly united to the executive
departments."[] since  the court has frequently reiterated the
early view that the federal courts organized under article iii cannot
render advisory opinions or that the rendition of advisory opinions is
not a part of the judicial power of the united states.[]
[pg ]even in the absence of this early precedent, the rule that
constitutional courts will render no advisory opinions would have
logically emerged from the rule subsequently developed, that
constitutional courts can only decide cases and controversies in which
an essential element is a final and binding judgment on the parties. as
stated by justice jackson, when the court refused to review an order of
the civil aeronautics board, which in effect was a mere recommendation
to the president for his final action, "to revise or review an
administrative decision which has only the force of a recommendation to
the president would be to render an advisory opinion in its most
obnoxious form—advice that the president has not asked, tendered at the
demand of a private litigant, on a subject concededly within the
president's exclusive, ultimate control. this court early and wisely
determined that it would not give advisory opinions even when asked by
the chief executive. it has also been the firm and unvarying practice of
constitutional courts to render no judgments not binding and conclusive
on the parties and none that are subject to later review or alteration
by administrative action."[] the early refusal of the court to render
advisory opinions has discouraged direct requests for advice so that the
advisory opinion has appeared only collaterally in cases where there was
a lack of adverse parties,[] or where the judgment of the court was
subject to later review or action by the executive or legislative
branches of government,[] or where the issues involved were abstract
or contingent.[]
[pg ]
the rigid emphasis placed upon such elements of the judicial power as
finality of judgment and an award of execution in united states v.
ferreira,[] gordon v. united states[], and liberty warehouse
v. grannis,[] coupled with the equally rigid emphasis upon adverse
parties and real interests as essential elements of a case or
controversy in muskrat v. united states,[] created serious doubts
concerning the validity of a proposed federal declaratory judgment act.
these were dispelled to some extent by fidelity national bank v.
swope,[] which held that an award of execution is not an essential
part of every judgment and contained general statements in opposition to
the principles of the grannis and willing cases. then in  the
supreme court entertained an appeal from a declaratory judgment rendered
by the tennessee courts in nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v.
wallace,[] and in doing so declared that the constitution does not
require that a case or controversy be presented by traditional forms of
procedure, involving only traditional remedies, and that article iii
defined and limited judicial power not the particular method by which
that power may be invoked or exercised. the federal declaratory
judgments act of  was in due course upheld in aetna life insurance
co. v. haworth,[] as a valid exercise of congressional power over
the practice and procedure of federal courts which includes the power to
create and improve as well as to abolish or restrict.
the declaratory judgment act of 
the act of  was carefully drawn, and provided that: "in cases of
actual controversy the courts of the united states shall have power
*** to declare rights and other legal relations of any interested
party petitioning for such declaration, whether or not further relief is
or could be prayed, and such declaration shall have the [pg ]force and
effect of a final judgment or decree and be reviewable as such." the
other two sections provided for further relief whenever necessary and
proper and for jury trials of matters of fact.[] in the first case
involving private parties exclusively to arise under the act, aetna life
insurance co. v. haworth,[] the court held that a declaration
should have been issued by the district court, although it reiterated
with the usual emphasis the necessity of adverse parties, a justiciable
controversy and specific relief. in the ashwander case it approved the
refusal of the lower court to issue a declaration generally on the
constitutionality of the tennessee valley authority, because the act of
 applied only to "cases of actual controversy." in the same case the
court itself refused to pass upon the navigability of the new and
kanawha rivers and the authority of the federal power commission even at
the request of the united states, on the ground that the bill did no
more than state a difference of opinion between the united states and
west virginia to which the judicial power did not extend.[]
similarly, in electric bond & share co. v. securities and exchange
commission,[] the court refused to decide any constitutional issues
arising out of the public utility holding company act of  except the
registration provisions because the cross bill in which the company had
asked for a declaration that the whole act was unconstitutional was
regarded as presenting a variety of hypothetical questions that might
never become real.
the "case" or "controversy" test in declaratory judgment proceedings
the insistence of the court upon the rule that "the requirements for a
justiciable case or controversy are no less strict in a declaratory
judgment proceeding than in any other type of suit,"[] and the fact
that many actions for a declaration of rights have involved the validity
of legislation, where the court is even more insistent upon the
essentials of a case, have done much to limit the use of the declaratory
judgment. there are, nevertheless, a number of cases, some of which
involved constitutional issues, in which a declaratory judgment has been
rendered. among these are currin v. wallace,[] where tobacco
warehousemen and auctioneers contested the validity of the tobacco
inspection act under which the secretary of agriculture had already
designated a tobacco market for inspection and grading; perkins v.
elg,[] where a natural-born citizen of naturalized parents who left
the [pg ]country during her minority sought to establish her status as a
citizen; maryland casualty co. v. pacific coal and oil co.,[] where
a liability insurer sought to establish his lack of liability in an
automobile collision case; and aetna life insurance co. v.
haworth,[] where a declaration was sought under the disability
benefit clauses of an insurance policy. as stated by justice douglas for
the court in the maryland casualty case: "the difference between an
abstract question and a 'controversy' contemplated by the declaratory
judgment act is necessarily one of degree, and it would be difficult, if
it would be possible, to fashion a precise test for determining in every
case whether there is such a controversy. basically, the question in
each case is whether the facts alleged, under all the circumstances,
show that there is a substantial controversy, between parties having
adverse legal interests, of sufficient immediacy and reality to warrant
the issuance of a declaratory judgment."[] it remains, therefore, for
the courts to determine in each case the degree of controversy necessary
to establish a case for purposes of jurisdiction. even, then, however,
the court is under no compulsion to exercise its jurisdiction.[]
cases arising under the constitution, laws and treaties of the united
states
cases arising under the constitution are cases which require an
interpretation of the constitution for their correct decision.[] they
arise when a litigant claims an actual or threatened invasion of his
constitutional rights by the enforcement of some act of public
authority, usually an act of congress or of a state legislature, and
asks for judicial relief. the clause furnishes the textual basis for the
fountain-head of american constitutional law, in the strict sense of the
term, which fountain-head is judicial review, or the power and duty of
the courts to pass upon the constitutional validity of legislative acts
which they are called upon to recognize and enforce in cases [pg ]coming
before them, and to declare void and refuse enforcement to such as do
not accord with their own interpretation of the constitution.
the supremacy clause clearly recognizes judicial review of state
legislative acts in relation not only to the constitution, but also in
relation to acts of congress which are "in pursuance of the
constitution," and in relation to "treaties made or which shall be made
under the authority of the united states." these constitute "the supreme
law of the land," and "the judges in every state shall be bound thereby,
anything in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary
notwithstanding." this provision was originally implemented by the
famous twenty-fifth section of the judiciary act of  which provided
that final judgments or decrees of the highest courts of law or equity
in the states in which a decision could be had, "where is drawn in
question the validity of a treaty or statute of, or an authority
exercised under the united states, and the decision is against their
validity; or where is drawn in question the validity of a statute of, or
an authority exercised under any state, on the ground of their being
repugnant to the constitution, treaties or laws of the united states,
and the decision is in favour of such their validity, or where is drawn
in question the construction of any clause of the constitution, or of a
treaty, or statute of, or commission held under the united states, and
the decision is against the title, right, privilege or exemption
specially set up or claimed by either party, under such clause of the
said constitution, treaty, statute or commission, may be re-examined and
reversed or affirmed in the supreme court of the united states upon a
writ of error, ***"[]
a quarter of a century after its enactment the validity of this section
was challenged on states' rights premises in martin v. hunter's
lessee,[] and seven years after that in cohens v. virginia.[]
the states' rights argument was substantially the same in both cases. it
amounted to the contention that while the courts of virginia were
constitutionally obliged to prefer "the supreme law of the land" as
defined in the supremacy clause over conflicting state laws it was only
by their own interpretation of the said supreme law that they, as the
courts of a sovereign state, were bound. furthermore, it was contended
that cases did not "arise" under the constitution unless they were
brought in the first instance by some one claiming such a right, from
which it followed that "the judicial power of the united states" did not
"extend" to such cases unless they were brought in the first instance in
the courts of the united states. in answer to these arguments chief
justice marshall declared that: "a case in [pg ]law or equity consists of
the right of the one party, as well as of the other, and may truly be
said to arise under the constitution or a law of the united states,
whenever its correct decision depends upon the construction of
either."[] passing then to broader considerations, he continued: "let
the nature and objects of our union be considered; let the great
fundamental principles, on which the fabric stands, be examined; and we
think, the result must be, that there is nothing so extravagantly
absurd, in giving to the court of the nation the power of revising the
decisions of local tribunals, on questions which affect the nation, as
to require that words which import this power should be restricted by a
forced construction."[]
[pg ]
judicial review of acts of congress is not provided for in the
constitution in such explicit terms as is judicial review of state
legislation, but it is nevertheless fairly evident that its existence is
assumed. in the first place, the term "cases arising under the
constitution" is just as valid a textual basis for the one type of
constitutional case as for the other; and, in the second place, it is
clearly indicated that acts of congress are not "supreme law of the
land" unless they are "in pursuance of the constitution," thus evoking a
question which must be resolved in the first instance by state judges,
when state legislation coming before them for enforcement is challenged
in relation to "the supreme law of the land." furthermore, most of the
leading members of the federal convention are on record
contemporaneously, though not always in the convention itself, as
accepting the idea.[]
[pg ]
the argument for judicial review of acts of congress was first
elaborated in full by alexander hamilton in the seventy-eighth number of
the federalist while the adoption of the constitution was pending.
said hamilton: "the interpretation of the laws is the proper and
peculiar province of the courts. a constitution is, in fact, and must be
regarded by the judges as a fundamental law. it must therefore belong to
them to ascertain its meaning, as well as the meaning of any particular
act proceeding from the legislative body. if there should happen to be
an irreconcilable variance between the two, that which has the superior
obligation and validity ought, of course, to be preferred; or in other
words, the constitution ought to be preferred to the statute, the
intention of the people to the intention of their [legislative]
agents."[] it was also set forth as something commonly accepted by
justice iredell in  in calder v. bull[] in the following words:
"if any act of congress, or of the legislature of a state, violates
those constitutional provisions, it is unquestionably void; though, i
admit, that as the authority to declare it void is of a delicate and
awful nature, the court will never resort to that authority, but in a
clear and urgent case." and between these two formulations of the
doctrine, the membership of the supreme court had given it their
sanction first individually, then as a body. in hayburn's case,[] the
justices while on circuit court duty refused to administer the invalid
pensions act,[] which authorized the circuit courts to dispose of
pension applications subject to review by the secretary of war and
congress on the ground that the federal courts could be assigned only
those functions such as are properly judicial and to be performed in a
judicial manner. in hylton v. united states,[] a made case in which
congress appropriated money to pay counsel on both sides of the
argument, the court passed on the constitutionality of the carriage tax
and sustained it as valid, and in so doing tacitly assumed that it had
the power to review congressional acts.
[pg ]
marbury v. madison
all the above developments were, however, only preparatory. judicial
review of acts of congress was made constitutional law, and thereby the
cornerstone of american constitutionalism, by the decision of the
supreme court, speaking through chief justice marshall in the famous
case of marbury v. madison[] decided in february, . the facts
of the case briefly stated are that marbury had been appointed a justice
of the peace in the district of columbia by john adams almost at the
close of his administration, and john marshall who was serving
simultaneously as secretary of state failed to deliver to marbury his
commission which had been signed before the new administration had
begun. one of the first acts of jefferson was his instruction to
secretary of state madison to withhold commissions to office which
remained undelivered. thereupon marbury sought to compel madison to
deliver the commission by seeking a writ of mandamus in the supreme
court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction and in pursuance of
section  of the judiciary act of [] which prescribed the
original jurisdiction of the court and authorized it to issue writs of
mandamus "in cases warranted by the principles and usages of law, to any
courts appointed, or persons holding office, under the authority of the
united states."
marshall's argument
in the portion of his opinion dealing with judicial review marshall
began his argument with the assumption that "the people have an original
right to establish, for their future government, such principles as, in
their opinion, shall most conduce to their own happiness ***" and,
once established, these principles are fundamental. second, the
government of the united states is limited in its powers by a written
constitution. the constitution either "controls any legislative act
repugnant to it; or, *** the legislature may alter the constitution by
an ordinary act." but the constitution is paramount law and written as
such. "it is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial
department to say what the law is. *** if two laws conflict with each
other, the courts must decide on the operation of each. *** if, then,
the courts are to regard the constitution, and the constitution is
superior to any ordinary act of the legislature, the constitution, and
not such ordinary act, must govern the case to which they both apply."
to declare otherwise, the chief justice concluded, would be subversive
of the very foundation of all written constitutions, would force the
judges to close their eyes to the constitution, and would make the
judicial oath "a solemn mockery."[] the court must therefore look
into some portions of the constitution, and if they can open it at all,
what part of it are they forbidden to read or obey? in conclusion the
chief justice declared that the constitution is mentioned [pg ]first in the
supremacy clause and that "the particular phraseology of the
constitution *** confirms and strengthens the principle, supposed to
be essential to all written constitutions, that a law repugnant to the
constitution is void; and that courts, as well as other departments, [of
government] are bound by that instrument."[]
importance of marbury v. madison
the decision in marbury v. madison has never been disturbed, although
it has often been criticized. nor was its contemporary effect confined
to the national field. from that time on judicial review by state courts
of local legislation in relation to the local constitutions made rapid
progress and was securely established in all states by  under the
influence not only of marbury v. madison, but also of early principles
of judicial review established in the circuit courts of the united
states.[]
[pg ]
because judicial review is an outgrowth of the fiction that courts only
declare what the law is in specific cases,[] and are without will or
discretion,[] its exercise is surrounded by the inherent limitations
of the judicial process and notably the necessity of a case or
controversy between adverse litigants with a standing in court to
present the issue of unconstitutionality in which they are directly
interested. the requisites to a case or controversy have been treated
more extensively above, but it may be noted that the supreme court has
repeatedly emphasized the necessity of "an honest and actual
antagonistic assertion of rights by one individual against
another,"[] and its lack of power to supervise legislative functions
in friendly proceedings, moot cases, or cases which present abstract
issues.[]
[pg ]
the doctrine of "strict necessity"
but even when a case involving a constitutional issue is presented, the
court has repeatedly stated that it will decide constitutional questions
only if strict necessity requires it to do so. hence constitutional
issues will not be decided in broader terms than are required by the
precise state of facts to which the ruling is to be applied; nor if the
record presents some other ground upon which to decide the case; nor at
the instance of one who has availed himself of the benefit of a statute
or who fails to show he is injured by its operation; nor if a
construction of the statute is fairly possible by which the question may
be fairly avoided.[] speaking of the policy of avoiding the decision
of constitutional issues except when necessary justice rutledge,
speaking for the court, declared in : "the policy's ultimate
foundations, some if not all of which also sustain the jurisdictional
limitation, lie in all that goes to make up the unique place and
character, in our scheme, of judicial review of governmental action for
constitutionality. they are found in the delicacy of that function,
particularly in view of possible consequences for others stemming also
from constitutional roots; the comparative finality of those
consequences; the consideration due to the judgment of other
repositories of constitutional power concerning the scope of their
authority; the necessity, if government is to function constitutionally,
for each to keep within its power, including the courts; the inherent
limitations of the judicial process, arising especially from its largely
negative character and limited resources of enforcement; withal in the
paramount importance of constitutional adjudication in our system."[]
the doctrine of political questions
a third limitation to the exercise of judicial review is the rule,
partly inherent in the judicial process, but also partly a precautionary
rule adopted by the court in order to avoid clashes with the "political
branches," is that the federal courts will not decide "political
questions."[]
[pg ]
the "reasonable doubt" doctrine
a fourth rule, of a precautionary nature, is that no act of legislation
will be declared void except in a very clear case, or unless the act is
unconstitutional beyond all reasonable doubt.[] sometimes this rule
is expressed in another way, in the formula that an act of congress or a
state legislature is presumed to be constitutional until proved
otherwise "beyond all reasonable doubt."[] in operation this rule is
subject to two limitations which seriously impair its efficacy. the
first is that the doubts which are effective are the doubts of the
majority only. if five justices of learning and attachment to the
constitution are convinced that the statute is invalid and four others
of equal learning and attachment to the constitution are convinced that
it is valid or are uncertain that it is invalid, the convictions of the
five prevail over the convictions or doubts of the four, and vice versa.
second, the court has made exceptions to this rule in certain categories
of cases. at one time statutes interfering with freedom of contract were
presumed to be unconstitutional until proved valid,[] and more
recently presumptions of invalidity have appeared to prevail against
statutes alleged to interfere with freedom of expression and of
religious worship, which have been said to occupy a preferred position
in the constitution.[]
[pg ]
exclusion of extra-constitutional tests
a fifth maxim of constitutional interpretation runs to the effect that
the courts are concerned only with the constitutionality of legislation
and not with its motives, policy or wisdom, or with its concurrence with
natural justice, fundamental principles of government, or spirit of the
constitution.[] in various forms this maxim has been repeated to such
an extent that it has become trite and has increasingly come to be
incorporated in constitutional cases as a reason for fortifying a
finding of unconstitutionality. through absorption of natural rights
doctrines into the text of the constitution, the court was enabled to
reject natural law and still to partake of its fruits, and the same is
true of the laissez faire principles incorporated in judicial
decisions from about  to . such protective coloration is
transparent in such cases as lochner v. new york[] and united
states v. butler.[]
[pg ]
disallowance by statutory interpretation
a sixth principle of constitutional interpretation designed by the
courts to discourage invalidation of statutes is that if at all possible
the courts will construe the statute so as to bring it within the law of
the constitution.[] at times this has meant that a statute was
construed so strictly in order to avoid constitutional difficulties that
its efficacy was impaired if not lost.[] a seventh principle closely
related to the preceding one is that in cases involving statutes,
portions of which are valid and other portions invalid, the courts will
separate the valid from the invalid and throw out only the latter unless
such portions are inextricably connected.[] sometimes statutes
expressly provide for the separability of provisions, but it remains for
the courts in the last resort to determine whether the provisions are
separable.[]
stare decisis in constitutional law
an eighth limitation on the power of the federal courts to invalidate
legislation springs from the principle of stare decisis, a limitation
which has been progressively weakened since the court proceeded to
correct "a century of error" in pollock v. farmers' loan & trust
co.[] because of the difficulty of amending the constitution the
court has long taken the position that it will reverse its previous
decisions on constitutional issues when convinced they are grounded on
error more quickly than in other types of cases in which earlier
precedents are not absolutely binding.[] the "constitutional
revolution" of  produced numerous reversals of earlier precedents as
other sections of this study disclose, and the process continues. in
smith v. allwright,[] which reversed grovey v. townsend,[]
justice reed cited fourteen cases decided between march , , and
june , , in which one or more earlier decisions of constitutional
questions were overturned. although the general effect of the numerous
reversals of precedent between  and  was to bring judicial
interpretation more generally into accord with the formal text of the
constitution, and to dispose of a considerable amount of constitutional
chaff, justice [pg ]roberts was moved to say in the allwright case that
frequent reversals of earlier decisions tended to bring adjudications of
the supreme court "into the same class as a restricted railroad ticket,
good for this day and train only."[] a ninth limitation which has
nothing to do with statutory or constitutional construction as such and
which is altogether precautionary is that the court will declare no
legislative act void unless a majority of its full membership so
concurs.[]
the cumulative effect of these limitations is difficult to measure. the
limitation imposed by the case concept definitely has the effect of
postponing judicial nullification, but beyond this the most that can be
said is that constitutional issues affecting important issues can
ordinarily be presented in a case and so will sooner or later reach the
court. the limitations of the presumptions of statutory validity, lack
of concern with the wisdom of the legislation, alternative construction,
separability of provisions and the like depend for their effectiveness
upon the consciousness of the individual judge of the judicial
proprieties and have been equally endorsed by those judges most
frequently addressing themselves to the task of finding legislation
invalid. the limitation imposed by the concept of political questions
does not limit in any significant way the power of the federal courts to
review legislation, but does remove from judicial scrutiny vast areas of
executive action. in general, therefore, the extent to and manner in
which the courts will exercise their power to review legislation is a
matter of judicial discretion.
the question of jurisdiction of cases involving federal questions is
determined by the allegations made by the plaintiff and not upon the
[pg ]facts as they may emerge or by a decision of the merits.[]
plaintiffs seeking to docket such cases in the federal courts must set
forth a substantial claim under the constitution, laws or treaties of
the united states.[] nor does jurisdiction arise simply because an
averment of a federal right is made, "if it plainly appears that such
averment is not real and substantial, but is without color of
merit."[] the federal question averred may be insubstantial because
obviously without merit, or because its unsoundness so clearly results
from previous decisions of the supreme court as to foreclose the issue
and leaves no room for the inference that the questions sought to be
raised can be subjects of controversy.[] in gully v. first national
bank[] the court reviewed earlier precedents and endeavored to
restate the rules for determining when a case arises. first there must
be a right or immunity created by the constitution, laws, or treaties of
the united states which must be such that it will be supported if the
constitution, laws, or treaties are given one construction, or defeated
if given another. second, a genuine and present controversy as
distinguished from a possible or conjectural one must exist with
reference to the federal right. third, the controversy must be disclosed
upon the face of the complaint unaided by the answer.[]
[pg ]
the earlier hospitality of the federal courts to cases involving federal
questions is also manifested in suits by corporations chartered by
congress. although in bank of united states v. deveaux[] the court
held that the first bank of the united states could not sue in the
federal courts merely because it was incorporated by an act of congress,
the act incorporating the second bank authorized such suits and this
authorization was not only sustained in osborn v. bank of united
states,[] but an act of incorporation was declared to be a law of the
united states for purposes of jurisdiction in cases involving federal
questions. consequently, the door was opened to other federally
chartered corporations to go into the federal courts after the act of
 vested original jurisdiction generally in the lower courts of such
questions. corporations, chartered by congress, particularly railroads,
quickly availed themselves of this opportunity, and succeeded in the
pacific railroad removal cases[] in removing suits from the state to
the federal courts in cases involving no federal question solely on the
basis of federal incorporation. the result of this and similar cases was
congressional legislation depriving national banks of the right to sue
in the federal courts solely on the basis of federal incorporation in
,[] depriving railroads holding federal charters of this right in
,[] and finally in  removing from federal jurisdiction
involving federal questions all suits brought by federally chartered
corporations, solely on the basis of federal incorporation, except where
the united states holds half of the stock.[]
of greater significance and of immediate importance to the maintenance
of national supremacy are those cases involving state prosecution of
federal officials for acts committed under the color of federal
authority. as early as  congress provided temporarily for the
removal of prosecutions against customs officials for acts done or
omitted as an officer or under color of an act of congress, except for
offenses involving corporal punishment.[] in , in partial answer
to south carolina's nullification proclamation, congress enacted the
so-called force act providing for removal from state courts of all
[pg ]prosecutions against any officer of the united states or under color
thereof.[] as a part of the civil war legislation and limited to the
war period, an act in  provided for removal from state courts of
cases brought against federal officials for acts committed during the
war and justified under the authority of congress and the
president.[] the act of , with amendments, has been kept in
force. since  the united states code has provided for the removal to
a federal district court of civil actions or criminal prosecutions in
state courts against "any officer of the united states or any agency
thereof, or person acting under him, for any act under color of such
office or on account of any right, title or authority claimed under any
act of congress for the apprehension or punishment of criminals or the
collection of the revenue."[]
tennessee v. davis
the validity of the act of  as it was carried over into the revised
statutes, §, was contested in tennessee v. davis,[] which
involved the attempt of a state to prosecute a deputy collector of
internal revenue who had killed a man while seeking to seize an illicit
distilling apparatus. in an opinion in the tradition of martin v.
hunter's lessee[] and cohens v. virginia,[] justice strong
emphasized the power of the national government to protect itself in the
exercise of its constitutional powers, the inability of a state to
exclude it from the exercise of any authority conferred by the
constitution, and the comprehensive nature of the term "cases in law and
equity arising under the constitution, the laws of the united states,
and treaties ***" which was held to embrace criminal prosecutions as
well as civil actions. then speaking of a case involving federal
questions he said: "it is not merely one where a party comes into court
to demand something conferred upon him by the constitution or by a law
or treaty. a case consists of the right of one party as well as the
other, and may truly be said to arise under the constitution or a law or
a treaty of the united states whenever its correct decision depends upon
the construction of either. cases arising under the laws of the united
states are such as grow out of the legislation of congress, whether they
constitute the right or privilege, or claim or protection, or defense of
the party, in whole or in part, by whom they are asserted."[]
[pg ]
in addition to the constitutional issues presented earlier by § of
the act of , which was superseded in  when the "writ of error"
was replaced by "appeal," issues have continued to arise concerning its
application which go directly to the nature and extent of the supreme
court's appellate jurisdiction. these have to do with such matters as
the existence of a federal question, exhaustion of remedies in state
courts, and review of findings of fact by state courts. whether a
federal question has been adequately presented to and decided by a state
court has been held to be in itself a federal question, to be decided by
the supreme court on appeal.[] likewise a contention that a decision
of a state court disregarded decrees of a united states court has been
held to bring a case within the court's jurisdiction;[] also a
decision by a state court which was adverse to an asserted federal right
although, as the record of the case showed, it might have been based
upon an independent and adequate nonfederal ground.[] this latter
ruling, however, was qualified during the same term of court in a case
which held that it is essential to the jurisdiction of the supreme
court, in reviewing a decision of a state court that it must appear
affirmatively from the record, not only that a federal question was
presented for determination, but that its decision was necessary to the
determination of the cause; that the federal question was actually
decided, or that the judgment could not have been given without deciding
it.[]
these rules all flow from the broader principle that if the laws and
constitution of the united states are to be observed, the supreme court
cannot accept as final the decision of a state court on matters alleged
to give rise to an asserted federal right.[] consequently, the
supreme court will review the findings of fact by a state court where a
federal right has been denied by a finding shown by the record to be
without evidence to support it, and where a conclusion of law as to a
federal right and findings of facts are so intermingled as to make it
necessary to analyze the facts in order to pass upon the federal
question.[] it should be noted, too, that barring exceptional
circumstances such as those in gilchrist v. interborough rapid transit
co.,[] which involved intricate contracts between the city of new
york and the company, the meaning of which had not been determined by
the state courts, or explicit statutory provisions as in  u.s.c.a.
§§-, , , resort to a federal court may precede the
exhaustion of remedies of state courts.[]
[pg ]
suits affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls
the earliest interpretation of the grant of original jurisdiction to the
supreme court came in the judiciary act of , which conferred on the
federal district courts jurisdiction of suits to which a consul might be
a party. this legislative interpretation was sustained in  in a
circuit court case in which the judges held that congress might vest
concurrent jurisdiction involving consuls in the inferior courts and
sustained an indictment against a consul.[] many years later, in
, the supreme court held that consuls could be sued in the federal
courts,[] and in another case in the same year declared sweepingly
that congress could grant concurrent jurisdiction to the inferior courts
in cases where the supreme court has been invested with original
jurisdiction.[] nor does the grant of original jurisdiction to the
supreme court in cases affecting ambassadors and consuls of itself
preclude suits in state courts against consular officials. the leading
case is ohio ex rel. popovici v. agler[] in which a rumanian
vice-consul contested an ohio judgment against him for divorce and
alimony. justice holmes, speaking for the court, said: "the words quoted
from the constitution do not of themselves and without more exclude the
jurisdiction of the state. *** it has been understood that, 'the whole
subject of the domestic relations of husband and wife, parent and child,
belongs to the laws of the states and not to the laws of the united
states.' *** in the absence of any prohibition in the constitution or
laws of the united states it is for the state to decide how far it will
go."
a number of incidental questions arise in connection with the phrase
"affecting ambassadors and consuls." does the ambassador or consul to be
affected have to be a party in interest, or is a mere indirect interest
in the outcome of the proceeding sufficient? in united states v.
ortega,[] the court ruled that a prosecution of a person for
violating international law and the laws of the united states by
offering violence to the person of a foreign minister was not a suit
"affecting" the minister, but a public prosecution for vindication of
the laws of nations [pg ]and the united states. another question concerns
the official status of a person claiming to be an ambassador, etc. in ex
parte baiz,[] the court refused to review the decision of the
executive with respect to the public character of a person claiming to
be a public minister and laid down the rule that it has the right to
accept a certificate from the department of state on such a question. a
third question was whether the clause included ambassadors and consuls
accredited by the united states to foreign governments. the court held
that it includes only persons accredited to the united states by foreign
governments.[] however, matters of especial delicacy such as suits
against ambassadors and public ministers or their servants, where the
law of nations permits such suits, and in all controversies of a civil
nature to which a state is a party,[] congress has made the original
jurisdiction of the supreme court exclusive of that of other courts. by
its compliance with the congressional distribution of exclusive and
concurrent original jurisdiction, the court has tacitly sanctioned the
power of congress to make such jurisdiction exclusive or concurrent as
it may choose. likewise, as in the popovici case, it has implied that
congress, if it chose, could make the court's jurisdiction of consular
officials exclusive of state courts.
cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction
the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction of the federal courts had its
origin in the jurisdiction vested in the courts of the admiral of the
english navy. prior to independence, vice-admiralty courts were created
in the colonies by commissions from the english high court of admiralty.
after independence, the states established admiralty courts, from which
at a later date appeals could be taken to a court of appeals set up by
congress under the articles of confederation.[] since one of the
objectives of the philadelphia convention was the promotion of commerce
and the removal of obstacles to it, it was only logical that the
constitution should deprive the states of all admiralty jurisdiction and
vest it exclusively in the federal courts.
the constitution uses the terms "admiralty and maritime jurisdiction"
without defining them. though closely related the words are not
synonyms. in england the word "maritime" referred to the [pg ]cases arising
upon the high seas, whereas "admiralty" meant primarily cases of a
local nature involving police regulations of shipping, harbors, fishing,
and the like. a long struggle between the admiralty and common law
courts had, however, in the course of time resulted in a considerable
curtailment of english admiralty jurisdiction. for this and other
reasons, a much broader conception of admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction existed in the united states at the time of the framing of
the constitution than in the mother country.[] at the very beginning
of government under the constitution, congress conferred on the federal
district courts exclusive original cognizance "of all civil causes of
admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, including all seizures under laws
of impost, navigation or trade of the united states, where the seizures
are made, on waters which are navigable from the sea by vessels of ten
or more tons burthen, within their respective districts, as well as upon
the high seas; saving to suitors, in all cases, the right of a common
law remedy, where the common law is competent to give it; ***"[]
this broad legislative interpretation of admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction soon won the approval of the federal circuit courts, which
ruled that the extent of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction was not to
be determined by english law but by the principles of maritime law "as
respected by maritime courts of all nations and adopted by most, if not
by all, of them on the continent of europe."[]
although a number of supreme court decisions had earlier sustained the
broader admiralty jurisdiction on specific issues,[] it was not until
 that the court ruled squarely in its favor, which it did by
declaring that, "whatever may have been the doubt, originally, as to the
true construction of the grant, whether it had reference to the
jurisdiction in england, or to the more enlarged one that existed in
other maritime countries, the question has become settled by legislative
and judicial interpretation, which ought not now to be disturbed."[]
the court thereupon proceeded to hold that admiralty had jurisdiction
in personam as well as in rem, over controversies arising out of
contracts of affreightment between new york and providence.
admiralty and maritime jurisdiction comprises two types of cases: ()
those involving acts committed on the high seas or other navigable
waters; and () those involving contracts and transactions [pg ]connected
with shipping employed on the seas or navigable waters. in the first
category, which includes prize cases, and torts, injuries, and crimes
committed on the high seas, jurisdiction is determined by the locality
of the act; while in the second category subject matter is the primary
determinative factor.[] specifically, contract cases include suits by
seamen for wages,[] cases arising out of marine insurance
policies,[] actions for towage[] or pilotage[] charges, actions
on bottomry or respondentia bonds,[] actions for repairs on a vessel
already used in navigation,[] contracts of affreightment,[]
compensation for temporary wharfage,[] agreements of consortship
between the masters of two vessels engaged in wrecking,[] and surveys
of damaged vessels.[] in the words of the court in ex parte
easton,[] admiralty jurisdiction "extends to all contracts, claims
and services essentially maritime."
jurisdiction of maritime torts depends exclusively upon the commission
of the wrongful act upon navigable waters[] regardless of the voyage
and the destination of the vessel.[] by statutory elaboration, as
well as judicial decision, maritime torts include injuries to
persons,[] damages to property arising out of collisions or other
negligent acts,[] and violent dispossession of property.[] but
until congress makes some regulation touching the liability of parties
for marine torts resulting in the death of the persons injured, a state
statute providing "that when the death of one is caused by the wrongful
act or omission of another, the personal representatives of the former
may maintain an action therefor against the latter, if the former might
have maintained an action, had he lived, against the latter for an
injury for the same act or omission," applies, and, as thus applied, it
constitutes no encroachment upon the commerce power of congress.[]
[pg ]
from the earliest days of the republic, the federal courts sitting in
admiralty have been held to have exclusive jurisdiction of prize
cases.[] also, in contrast to other phases of admiralty jurisdiction
prize law as applied by the british courts continued to provide the
basis of american law so far as practicable,[] and so far as it was
not modified by subsequent legislation, treaties, or executive
proclamations. finally, admiralty and maritime jurisdiction comprises
the seizure and forfeiture of vessels engaged in activities in violation
of the laws of nations or municipal law, such as illicit trade,[]
infraction of revenue laws,[] and the like.[]
procedure in admiralty jurisdiction differs in few respects from
procedure in actions at law, but the differences that do exist are
significant. suits in admiralty take the form of a proceeding in rem
against the vessel and, with exceptions to be noted, proceedings in
rem concerning navigable waters are confined exclusively to federal
admiralty courts. however, if a common law remedy exists, a plaintiff
may bring an action at law in either a state or federal court of
competent jurisdiction,[] but in this event the action is a
proceeding in personam against the owner of the vessel. on the other
hand, although the court has sometimes used language which would confine
proceedings in rem to admiralty courts,[] yet it has sustained
proceedings [pg ]in rem in the state courts in actions of forfeiture. thus
in the case of c.j. hendry co. v. moore,[] the court held that a
proceeding in rem in a state court against fishing nets in the
navigable waters of california was a common law proceeding within the
meaning of § of the judiciary act of , and therefore within the
exception to the grant of admiralty jurisdiction to the federal courts.
at the same time, however, the court was careful to confine such
proceedings to forfeitures arising out of violations of state law.
another procedural difference between actions at law and in admiralty is
the absence of jury trial in civil proceedings in admiralty courts
unless congress specifically provides for it. otherwise the judge of an
admiralty court tries issues of fact as well as of law.[] indeed, the
absence of a jury in admiralty proceedings appears to have been one of
the reasons why the english government vested a broad admiralty
jurisdiction in the colonial vice-admiralty courts of america, since
they provided a forum where the english authorities could enforce the
navigation laws without what chief justice stone called "the obstinate
resistance of american juries."[]
as early as  a federal district court in kentucky asserted admiralty
jurisdiction over inland waterways to the consternation of certain
interests in kentucky which succeeded in inducing the senate to pass a
bill confining admiralty jurisdiction to the ebb and flow of the tide,
only to see it defeated in the house.[] however, in , in the
thomas jefferson[] the court relieved these tensions by confining
admiralty jurisdiction to the high seas and upon rivers as far as the
ebb and flow of the tide extended in accordance with the english rule.
twenty-two years later this rule was qualified in waring v.
clarke,[] when the court ruled that the admiralty jurisdiction under
the constitution was not to be limited or interpreted by english rules
of admiralty and extended the jurisdiction of the federal courts [pg ]to a
collision on the mississippi river ninety-five miles above new orleans.
in this ruling the court moved in the direction of accommodating the
rising commerce on the inland waterways and prepared the way for the
genesee chief,[] which reversed the thomas jefferson and sustained
the constitutionality of an act of congress passed in  giving the
district courts jurisdiction over the great lakes and connecting waters,
and so in effect extended the admiralty jurisdiction to all the
navigable waters of the united states.[] the genesee chief therefore
vastly expanded federal power,[] and marked a trend which was
continued in ex parte boyer,[] where admiralty jurisdiction was
extended to canals, and in the daniel ball,[] where it was extended
to waters wholly within a given state provided they form a connecting
link in interstate commerce. this latter case is also significant for
its definition of navigable waters of the united states as those that
are navigable in fact, and as navigable in fact when so "used, or ***
susceptible of being used, in their ordinary condition, as highways for
commerce, over which trade and travel are or may be conducted in the
customary modes of trade and travel on water."[] the doubts left by
the ball case in its distinction between navigable waters of the united
states and navigable waters of the states were clarified by in re
garnett,[] where it was held that the power of congress to amend the
maritime law was coextensive with that law and not confined "to the
boundaries or class of subjects which limit and characterize the power
to regulate commerce," and that the admiralty jurisdiction extends "to
all public navigable lakes and rivers." in united states v.
appalachian electric power co.,[] the concept of "navigable waters of
the united states" was further expanded to include waterways which by
reasonable improvement can be made navigable for use in interstate
commerce provided there is a balance between cost and need at a time
when the improvement would be useful. nor is it necessary that the
improvement shall have been undertaken or authorized. conversely, a
navigable waterway of the united states does not cease to be so because
navigation has ceased, and it may be a navigable waterway for only part
of its course. although this doctrine was announced as an interpretation
of the commerce clause, the garnett case and the decision rendered in
southern s.s. co. v. national labor relations board,[] to the
effect that admiralty jurisdiction includes all navigable waters within
the country, makes it applicable also to the admiralty and maritime
clause.
[pg ]
the extension of the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction to navigable
waters within a state does not, however, of its own force include
general or political powers of government. thus in the absence of
legislation by congress, the states through their courts may punish
offenses upon their navigable waters and upon the sea within one marine
league of the shore. in united states v. bevans[] the court denied
the jurisdiction of a federal circuit court to try defendant for a
murder committed in boston harbor in the absence of statutory
authorization of trials in federal courts for offenses committed within
the jurisdiction of a state. while admitting that congress may pass all
laws which are necessary and proper for giving complete effect to
admiralty jurisdiction, chief justice marshall at the same time declared
that "the general jurisdiction over the place, subject to this grant of
power, adheres to the territory, as a portion of sovereignty not yet
given away. the residuary powers of legislation are still in
massachusetts."[]
exclusiveness of the jurisdiction
determination of the bounds of admiralty jurisdiction is a judicial
function, and "no state law can enlarge it, nor can an act of congress
or a rule of court make it broader than the judicial power [pg ]may
determine to be its true limits."[] nor is the jurisdiction
self-executing. it can only be exercised under acts of congress vesting
it in the federal courts.[] the admiralty jurisdiction of the federal
courts was made exclusive of state court jurisdiction by the judiciary
act of  according to the "moses taylor,"[] which also held that
state laws conferring remedies in rem could only be enforced in the
federal courts. consequently, the state courts were deprived of
jurisdiction of a great number of cases arising out of maritime
contracts and torts over which they had exercised jurisdiction prior to
. however, as before noted, the ninth section of the act of 
contained a provision, still in effect, which enables parties to avail
themselves in state courts of such remedies as the common law is
competent to give,[] but in such cases the rights and obligations
involved are still determined by the maritime law.[]
concessions to state power
nor does the exclusiveness of federal admiralty jurisdiction preclude
the states from creating rights enforceable in admiralty courts. in the
"lottawanna,"[] it was held that federal district courts sitting in
admiralty could enforce liens given for security of a contract even when
created by state laws. likewise liabilities created by state statutes
for injuries resulting in death have been enforced by proceedings in
rem in federal admiralty courts,[] and, in the absence of
congressional legislation, a state may enact laws governing the rights
and obligations of its citizens on the high seas. under this general
rule a law of delaware providing for damages for wrongful death was
enforced in an admiralty proceeding against a vessel arising out of a
collision at sea of two vessels owned by delaware corporations.[] and
in , in just v. chambers,[] the supreme court held specifically
applicable in admiralty proceedings the law of florida whereby a cause
of action for personal injury due to another's negligence survives the
death of the tort-feasor against his estate and against the vessel.
[pg ]
the jensen case and its sequelae
in the face of these decisions, except the last, the court,
nevertheless, held in  in southern pacific co. v. jensen[] that
a new york workman's compensation statute was unconstitutional as
applied to employees engaged in maritime work. proceeding on the
assumption that "congress has paramount power to fix and determine the
maritime law which shall prevail through the country," and that in the
absence of a controlling statute the general maritime law as accepted by
the federal courts is a part of american national law, justice
mcreynolds proceeded to draw an analogy between the power of the states
to legislate on admiralty and maritime matters and their power to
legislate on matters affecting interstate commerce. just as the states
may not regulate interstate commerce where the subject is national in
character and requires uniform regulation, so, he argued, they may not
legislate on maritime matters in such fashion as to destroy "the very
uniformity in respect to maritime matters which the constitution was
designed to establish" or to hamper and impede freedom of navigation
between the states and with foreign countries. nor could the act be
covered by the saving clause of the act of  governing common law
remedies, since the remedy provided by the compensation statute was
unknown to the common law.[]
following the jensen decision congress enacted a statute saving to
claimants their rights and remedies under state workmen's compensation
laws.[] in knickerbocker ice co. v. stewart[] the same majority
of judges, with justice mcreynolds again their spokesman, invalidated
this statute as an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power to
the states. the holding was based on the premise, stated as follows:
"the constitution itself adopted and established, as part of the laws of
the united states, approved rules of the general maritime law and
empowered congress to legislate in respect of them and other matters
within the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction. moreover, it took from
the states all power, by legislation or judicial decision, to contravene
the essential purposes of, or to work material injury to, characteristic
features of such law or to interfere with its proper harmony and
uniformity in its international and interstate [pg ]relations."[] and a
like fate overtook the attempt of congress in  to protect
longshoremen and other workers under state compensation laws by
excluding masters and crew members of vessels from those who might claim
compensation for maritime injuries.[] finally, in  congress
passed the longshoremen's and harbor workers' act,[] which provided
accident compensation for those workers who could not validly be
compensated under state statutes. this time it seems to have succeeded,
the constitutionality of the  statute being apparently taken for
granted.[]
the net result of the jensen case and its progeny has been a series of
cases which hold that in some circumstances the states can apply their
compensation laws to maritime employees and in other circumstances
cannot, if to do so "works material prejudice to the characteristic
features of the general maritime law or interferes with the proper
harmony and uniformity of that law in its international and interstate
relations."[] but, as justice black pointed out in  in davis v.
department of labor,[] "when a state could, and when it could not,
grant protection under a compensation act was left as a perplexing
problem, for it was held 'difficult, if not impossible,' to define this
boundary with exactness."[] nor, he continued, has the court been
able "to give any guiding, definite rule to determine the extent of
state power in advance of litigation, and has held that the margins of
state authority must 'be determined in view of surrounding circumstances
as cases arise.'"[] as to the specific claim involved in the davis
case, justice black stated further that it was "fair to say that a
number of cases can be cited both in behalf of and in opposition to
recovery here."[] concurring in the davis case, justice frankfurter
referred to the jensen case as "that ill-starred decision," but agreed
that reversal would not eliminate its resultant complexities and
confusions until congress attempted another comprehensive solution of
the problem. until then all the court could do was "to bring order out
of the remaining judicial chaos as marginal situations" were
presented.[]
[pg ]
in view of the chaos created by the jensen case and its apparent
disharmony with earlier as well as some later decisions the question
arises as to the scope of congress's power to revise and codify the
maritime law. in the "lottawanna"[] justice bradley as spokesman of
the court, while admitting the existence of a general body of maritime
law, asserted that it is operative as law only insofar "as it is adopted
by the laws and usages of that country,"[] subject to such
modifications and qualifications as may be made. so adopted and
qualified it becomes the law of a particular nation, but not until then.
"that we have a maritime law of our own, operative throughout the united
states, cannot be doubted. the general system of maritime law which was
familiar to the lawyers and statesmen of the country when the
constitution was adopted, was most certainly intended and referred to
when it was declared in that instrument that the judicial power of the
united states shall extend 'to all cases of admiralty and maritime
[pg ]jurisdiction.'" continuing, justice bradley stated that "the
constitution must have referred to a system of law coextensive with and
operating uniformly in, the whole country. it certainly could not have
been the intention to place the rules and limits of maritime law under
the disposal and regulation of the several states, as that would have
defeated the uniformity and consistency at which the constitution aimed
on all subjects of a commercial character affecting the intercourse of
the states with each other or with foreign states."[] however, the
framers of the constitution could not have contemplated that the law
should remain ever the same, especially as congress "has authority under
the commercial power, if no other, to introduce such changes as are
likely to be needed."[] sixteen years later in the garnett case[]
justice bradley, speaking for a unanimous court, asserted that the power
of congress to amend the maritime law is coextensive with that law and
not limited by the boundaries of the commerce clause, and that the
maritime law is "subject to such amendments as congress may see fit to
adopt."[] likewise, justice mcreynolds in southern pacific co. v.
jensen[] emphasizes congress' "paramount power to fix and determine
the maritime law which shall prevail throughout the country," albeit in
the absence of a controlling statute the general maritime law prevails;
and the language of knickerbocker ice co. v. stewart[] is to like
effect, as is also that of swanson v. marra bros.,[] decided in
the law administered by the federal courts sitting in admiralty is
therefore an amalgam of the general maritime law insofar as it is
acceptable to the courts, modifications of that law by congressional
enactments, the common law of torts and contracts as modified by state
or national legislation, and international prize law. this body of law,
however, is subject at all times to the paramount authority of congress
to change it in pursuance of its powers under the commerce clause, the
admiralty and maritime clause, and the necessary and proper clause. that
portion of the jensen opinion emphasizing congressional power in this
respect has never been in issue in either the opinions of the dissenters
in that case or in subsequent opinions critical of it, which in effect
invite congress to exercise its power to modify the maritime law.[]
[pg ]
cases to which the united states is a party: right of the united states
to sue
as justice story pointed out in his commentaries, "it would be a perfect
novelty in the history of national jurisprudence, as well as of public
law, that a sovereign had no authority to sue in his own courts."[]
as early as  the supreme court ruled that the united states could
sue in its own name in all cases of contract without congressional
authorization of such suits.[] later this rule was extended to other
types of actions. in the absence of statutory provisions to the contrary
such suits are initiated by the attorney general in the name of the
united states.[] as in other judicial proceedings, the united states,
like any other party plaintiff, must have an interest in the subject
matter and a legal right to the remedy sought.[] by the judiciary act
of  and subsequent amendments congress has vested jurisdiction in
the federal district courts to hear all suits of a civil nature at law
or in equity, brought by the united states as a party plaintiff.[]
controversies to which the united states is a party include suits
brought against states as party defendants. the first such suit occurred
in united states v. north carolina[] which was an action by the
united states to recover upon bonds issued by north carolina. although
no question of jurisdiction was raised, in deciding the case on its
merits in favor of the state, the court tacitly assumed that it had
jurisdiction of such cases. the issue of jurisdiction was directly
raised by texas a few years later in a bill in equity brought by the
united states to determine the boundary between texas and the territory
of oklahoma, and the court sustained its jurisdiction over strong
arguments by texas to the effect that it could not be sued by the united
states without its consent and that the supreme court's original
jurisdiction did not extend to cases to which the united states is a
party.[] stressing the inclusion within the judicial power of cases
to which the united states and a state are parties, justice harlan
pointed out that the constitution made no exception of suits brought by
the united states. in effect, therefore, consent to be sued by the
united states "was given by texas when admitted to the union upon an
equal footing in all respects with the other states."[]
[pg ]suits brought by the united states against states have, however, been
infrequent. all of them have arisen since , and they have become
somewhat more common since . that year the supreme court decided a
dispute between the united states and minnesota over land patents issued
to the state by the united states in breach of its trust obligations to
the indians.[] in united states v. west virginia,[] the court
refused to take jurisdiction of a suit in equity brought by the united
states to determine the navigability of the new and kanawha rivers on
the ground that the jurisdiction in such suits is limited to cases and
controversies and does not extend to the adjudication of mere
differences of opinion between the officials of the two governments. a
few years earlier, however, it had taken jurisdiction of a suit by the
united states against utah to quiet title to land forming the beds of
certain sections of the colorado river and its tributaries within the
states.[] similarly, it took jurisdiction of a suit brought by the
united states against california to determine the ownership of and
paramount rights over the submerged land and the oil and gas thereunder
off the coast of california between the low-water mark and the
three-mile limit.[] like suits were decided against louisiana and
texas in .[]
in pursuance of the general rule that a sovereign cannot be sued in his
own courts, it follows that the judicial power does not extend to suits
against the united states unless congress by general or special
enactment consents to suits against the government. this rule first
emanated in embryo form in an obiter dictum by chief justice jay in
chisholm v. georgia, where he indicated that a suit would not lie
against the united states because "there is no power which the courts
can call to their aid."[] in cohens v. virginia,[] also by way
of dictum, chief justice marshall asserted, "the universally received
opinion is, that no suit can be commenced or prosecuted against the
united states." the issue was more directly in question in united states
v. clarke[] where chief justice marshall stated that as the [pg ]united
states is "not suable of common right, the party who institutes such
suit must bring his case within the authority of some act of congress,
or the court cannot exercise jurisdiction over it." he thereupon ruled
that the act of may , , for the final settlement of land claims in
florida condoned the suit. the doctrine of the exemption of the united
states from suit was repeated in various subsequent cases, without
discussion or examination.[] indeed, it was not until united states
v. lee[] that the court examined the rule and the reasons for it,
and limited its application accordingly.
waiver of immunity by congress
since suits against the united states can be maintained only by
permission, it follows that they can be brought only in the manner
prescribed by congress and subject to the restrictions imposed.[]
only congress can take the necessary steps to waive the immunity of the
united states from liability for claims, and hence officers of the
united states are powerless by their actions either to waive such
immunity or to confer jurisdiction on a federal court.[] even when
authorized, suits can be brought only in designated courts.[] these
rules apply equally to suits by states against the united states.[]
although an officer acting as a public instrumentality is liable for his
own torts, congress may grant or withhold immunity from suit on behalf
of government corporations.[]
[pg ]
united states v. lee
united states v. lee, a five-to-four decision, qualified earlier
holdings to the effect that where a judgment affected the property of
the united states the suit was in effect against the united states, by
ruling that title to the arlington estate of the lee family, then being
used as a national cemetery, was not legally vested in the united states
but was being held illegally by army officers under an unlawful order of
the president. in its examination of the sources and application of the
rule of sovereign immunity, the court concluded that the rule "if not
absolutely limited to cases in which the united states are made
defendants by name, is not permitted to interfere with the judicial
enforcement of the rights of plaintiffs when the united states is not a
defendant or a necessary party to the suit."[] except, nevertheless,
for an occasional case like kansas v. united states,[] which held
that a state cannot sue the united states, most of the cases involving
sovereign immunity from suit since  have been cases against
officers, agencies, or corporations of the united states where the
united states has not been named as a party defendant. thus, it has been
held that a suit against the secretary of the treasury to review his
decision on the rate of duty to be exacted on imported sugar would
disturb the whole revenue system of the government and would in effect
be a suit against the united states.[] even more significant is
stanley v. schwalby,[] which resembles without paralleling united
states v. lee, where it was held that an action of trespass against an
army officer to try title in a parcel of land occupied by the united
states as a military reservation was a suit against the united states
because a judgment in favor of the plaintiffs would have been a judgment
against the united states.
[pg ]
difficulties created by the lee case
subsequent cases repeat and reaffirm the rule of united states v. lee
that where the right to possession or enjoyment of property under
general law is in issue, the fact that defendants claim the property as
officers or agents of the united states, does not make the action one
against the united states until it is determined that they were acting
within the scope of their lawful authority.[] contrariwise, the rule
that a suit in which the judgment would affect the united states or its
property is a suit against the united states has also been repeatedly
approved and reaffirmed.[] but, as the court has pointed out, it is
not "an easy matter to reconcile all of the decisions of the court in
this class of cases,"[] and, as justice frankfurter quite justifiably
stated in a dissent, "the subject is not free from casuistry."[]
justice douglas' characterization of land v. dollar, "this is the type
of case where the question of jurisdiction is dependent on decision of
the merits,"[] is frequently applicable.
[pg ]
official immunity today
the recent case of larson v. domestic and foreign corp.,[]
illuminates these obscurities somewhat. here a private company sought to
enjoin the administrator of the war assets in his official capacity from
selling surplus coal to others than the plaintiff who had originally
bought the coal, only to have the sale cancelled by the administrator
because of the company's failure to make an advance payment. chief
justice vinson and a majority of the court looked upon the suit as one
brought against the administrator in his official capacity, acting under
a valid statute, and therefore a suit against the united states. it held
that although an officer in such a situation is not immune from suits
for his own torts, yet his official action, though tortious cannot be
enjoined or diverted, since it is also the action of the sovereign.[]
the court then proceeded to repeat the rule that "the action of an
officer of the sovereign (be it holding, taking, or otherwise legally
affecting the plaintiff's property) can be regarded as so individual
only if it is not within the officer's statutory powers, or, if within
those powers, only if the powers or their exercise in the particular
case, are constitutionally void."[] the court rejected the contention
that the doctrine of sovereign immunity should be relaxed as
inapplicable to suits for specific relief as distinguished from damage
suits, saying: "the government, as representative of the community as a
whole, cannot be stopped in its tracks by any plaintiff who presents a
disputed question of property or contract right."[]
[pg ]
suits against officers involving the doctrine of sovereign immunity have
been classified by justice frankfurter in a dissenting opinion into four
general groups. first, there are those cases in which the plaintiff
seeks an interest in property which belongs to the government, or calls
"for an assertion of what is unquestionably official authority."[]
such suits, of course, cannot be maintained.[] second, cases in which
action adverse to the interests of a plaintiff is taken under an
unconstitutional statute or one alleged to be so. in general these suits
are maintainable.[] third, cases involving injury to a plaintiff
because the official has exceeded his statutory authority. in general
these suits are also maintainable.[] fourth, cases in which an
officer seeks immunity behind statutory authority or some other
sovereign command for the commission of a common law tort.[] this
category of cases presents the greatest difficulties since these suits
can as readily be classified as falling into the first group if the
action directly or indirectly is one for specific performance or if the
judgment would affect the united states.
the multiplication of government corporations during periods of war and
depression has provided one motivation for limiting the doctrine of
sovereign immunity. in keifer & keifer v. reconstruction finance corp.
and regional agricultural credit corp.,[] the court held that the
government does not become a conduit of its immunity in suits against
its agents or instrumentalities merely because they do its work. nor
does the creation of a government corporation confer upon it legal
immunity. whether congress endows a public corporation with governmental
immunity in a specific instance, is a matter of [pg ]ascertaining the
congressional will. moreover, it has been held that waivers of
governmental immunity in the case of federal instrumentalities and
corporations should be construed liberally.[] on the other hand,
indian nations are exempt from suit without further congressional
authorization; it is as though their former immunity as sovereigns
passed to the united states for their benefit, as did their tribal
properties.[]
suits between two or more states
the extension of the federal judicial power to controversies between
states and the vesting of original jurisdiction in the supreme court of
suits to which a state is a party had its origin in experience. prior to
independence disputes between colonies claiming charter rights to
territory were settled by the privy council. under the articles of
confederation congress was made "the last resort on appeal" to resolve
"all disputes and differences *** between two or more states
concerning boundary, jurisdiction, or any other cause whatever," and to
constitute what in effect were ad hoc arbitral courts for determining
such disputes and rendering a final judgment therein. when the
philadelphia convention met in , serious disputes over boundaries,
lands, and river rights involved ten states.[] it is hardly
surprising, therefore, that during its first sixty years the only state
disputes coming to the supreme court were boundary disputes[] or that
such disputes constitute the largest single number of suits between
states. since , however, as the result of the increasing mobility of
population and wealth and the effects of technology and
industrialization other types of cases have occurred with increasing
frequency.
of the earlier examples of suits between states, that between new jersey
and new york is significant for the application of the rule laid down
earlier in chisholm v. georgia,[] that the supreme court [pg ]may
proceed ex parte if a state refuses to appear when duly summoned. the
long drawn out litigation between rhode island and massachusetts is of
even greater significance for its rulings, after the case had been
pending for seven years, that though the constitution does not extend
the judicial power to all controversies between states, yet it does not
exclude any;[] that a boundary dispute is a justiciable and not a
political question;[] and that a prescribed rule of decision is
unnecessary in such cases. on the last point justice baldwin stated:
"the submission by the sovereigns, or states, to a court of law or
equity, of a controversy between them, without prescribing any rule of
decision, gives power to decide according to the appropriate law of the
case ( ves. ); which depends on the subject-matter, the source and
nature of the claims of the parties, and the law which governs them.
from the time of such submission, the question ceases to be a political
one, to be decided by the sic volo, sic jubeo, of political power;
it comes to the court, to be decided by its judgment, legal discretion
and solemn consideration of the rules of law appropriate to its nature
as a judicial question, depending on the exercise of judicial power; as
it is bound to act by known and settled principles of national or
municipal jurisprudence, as the case requires."[]
beginning with missouri v. illinois and the sanitary district of
chicago,[] which sustained jurisdiction to entertain an injunction
suit to restrain the discharge of sewage into the mississippi river,
water rights, the use of water resources, and the like have become an
increasing source of suits between states. such suits have been
especially frequent in the western states, where water is even more of a
treasure than elsewhere, but they have not been confined to any one
region. in kansas v. colorado,[] the court established the
principle of the equitable division of river or water resources between
conflicting state interests. in new jersey v. new york[] where new
jersey sought to enjoin the diversion of waters into the hudson river
watershed for new york in such a way as to diminish the flow of the
delaware river in new jersey, injure its shad fisheries, and increase
harmfully the saline contents of the delaware, justice holmes stated for
the court: "a river is more than an amenity, it is a treasure. it offers
a necessity [pg ]of life that must be rationed among those who have power
over it. new york has the physical power to cut off all the water within
its jurisdiction. but clearly the exercise of such a power to the
destruction of the interest of lower states could not be tolerated. and,
on the other hand, equally little could new jersey be permitted to
require new york to give up its power altogether in order that the river
might come down to it undiminished. both states have real and
substantial interests in the river that must be reconciled as best they
may be."[]
other types of interstate disputes of which the court has taken
jurisdiction include suits by a state as the donee of the bonds of
another to collect thereon,[] by virginia against west virginia to
determine the proportion of the public debt of the original state of
virginia which the latter owed the former,[] of one state against
another to enforce a contract between the two,[] of a suit in equity
between states for the determination of a decedent's domicile for
inheritance tax purposes,[] and of a suit by two states to restrain a
third from enforcing a natural gas measure which purported to restrict
the interstate flow of natural gas from the state in the event of a
shortage.[] in general in taking jurisdiction of these suits, along
with those involving boundaries and the diversion or pollution of water
resources, the supreme court proceeded upon the liberal construction of
the term "controversies between two or more states" enunciated in rhode
island v. massachusetts,[] and fortified by chief justice
marshall's dictum in cohens v. virginia[] concerning jurisdiction
because of the parties to a case, that "it is entirely unimportant, what
may be the subject of controversy. be it what it may, these parties have
a constitutional right to come into the courts of the union."
[pg ]
in other cases, however, the court, centering its attention upon the
elements of a case or controversy, has declined jurisdiction. thus in
alabama v. arizona[] where alabama sought to enjoin  states from
regulating or prohibiting the sale of convict-made goods, the court went
far beyond holding that it had no jurisdiction, and indicated that
jurisdiction of suits between states will be exercised only when
absolutely necessary, that the equity requirements in a suit between
states are more exacting than in a suit between private persons, that
the threatened injury to a plaintiff state must be of great magnitude
and imminent, and that the burden on the plaintiff state to establish
all the elements of a case is greater than that generally required by a
petitioner seeking an injunction suit in cases between private parties.
pursuing a similar line of reasoning, the court declined to take
jurisdiction of a suit brought by massachusetts against missouri and
certain of its citizens to prevent missouri from levying inheritance
taxes upon intangibles held in trust in missouri by resident trustees.
in holding that the complaint presented no justiciable controversy, the
court declared that to constitute such a controversy, the complainant
state must show that it "has suffered a wrong through the action of the
other state, furnishing ground for judicial redress, or is asserting a
right against the other state which is susceptible of judicial
enforcement according to *** the common law or equity systems of
jurisprudence."[] the fact that the trust property was sufficient to
satisfy the claims of both states and that recovery by either would not
impair any rights of the other distinguished the case from texas v.
florida,[] where the contrary situation obtained. furthermore, the
missouri statute providing for reciprocal privileges in levying
inheritance taxes did not confer upon massachusetts any contractual
right. the court then proceeded to reiterate its earlier rule that a
state may not invoke the original jurisdiction of the supreme court for
the benefit of its residents or to enforce the individual rights of its
citizens.[] moreover, massachusetts could not invoke the original
jurisdiction of the court by the expedient of making citizens of
missouri parties to a suit not otherwise maintainable.[] accordingly,
massachusetts was held not to be without an adequate remedy in
missouri's courts or in a federal district court in missouri.[]
[pg ]
the problem of enforcement; virginia v. west virginia
a very important issue that presents itself in interstate litigation is
the enforcement of the court's decree, once it has been entered. in some
types of suits, as charles warren has indicated, this issue may not
arise; and if it does, it may be easily met. thus a judgment putting a
state in possession of disputed territory is ordinarily self-executing.
but if the losing state should oppose execution, refractory state
officials, as individuals, would be liable to civil suits or criminal
prosecutions in the federal courts. likewise an injunction decree may be
enforced against state officials as individuals by civil or criminal
proceedings. those judgments, on the other hand, which require a state
in its governmental capacity to perform some positive act present the
issue of enforcement in more serious form. the issue arose directly in
the long and much litigated case between virginia and west virginia over
the proportion of the state debt of original virginia owed by west
virginia after its separate admission to the union under a compact which
provided that west virginia assume a share of the debt. the suit was
begun in , and a judgment was rendered against west virginia in
. finally in  virginia filed a suit against west virginia to
show cause why, in default of payment of the judgment, an order should
not be entered directing the west virginia legislature to levy a tax for
payment of the judgment.[] starting with the rule that the judicial
power essentially involves the right to enforce the results of its
exertion,[] the court proceeded to hold that it applied with the same
force to states as to other litigants,[] and to consider appropriate
remedies for the enforcement of its authority. in this connection, chief
justice white declared: "as the powers to render the judgment and to
enforce it arise from the grant in the constitution on that subject,
looked at from a generic point of view, both are federal powers and,
comprehensively considered, are sustained by every authority of the
federal government, judicial, legislative, or executive, which may be
appropriately exercised."[] the court, however, left open the
question of its power to enforce the judgment under existing legislation
and scheduled the case for reargument at the next term, but in the
meantime west virginia accepted the court's judgment and entered into an
agreement with virginia to pay it.[]
[pg ]
controversies between a state and citizens of another state
the decision in chisholm v. georgia[] that this category of cases
included equally those where a state was a party defendant provoked the
proposal and ratification of the eleventh amendment, and since then
controversies between a state and citizens of another state have
included only those cases where the state has been a party plaintiff or
has consented to be sued. as a party plaintiff, a state may bring
actions against citizens of other states to protect its legal rights or
as parens patriae to protect the health and welfare of its citizens.
in general, the court has tended to construe strictly this grant of
judicial power which simultaneously comes within its original
jurisdiction by perhaps an even more rigorous application of the
concepts of cases and controversies than that in cases between private
parties.[] this it does by holding rigorously to the rule that all
the party defendants be citizens of other states,[] and by adhering
to congressional distribution of its original jurisdiction concurrently
with that of other federal courts.[]
the supreme court has refused to take jurisdiction of a number of suits
brought by states because of the lack of a justiciable controversy. in
cases like mississippi v. johnson[] and georgia v. stanton,[]
the political nature of the controversy constituted the dominant reason.
in others, like massachusetts v. mellon[] and florida v.
mellon,[] the political issue, though present, was accompanied by the
inability of a state to sue in behalf of its citizens as parens
patriae to contest the validity of an act of congress when in national
matters the national government bore the relation of parens patriae to
the same persons as citizens of the united states. moreover, a state may
not bring a suit in its own name for the benefit of particular
persons.[]
[pg ]
in cohens v. virginia[] there is a dictum to the effect that the
original jurisdiction of the supreme court does not include suits
between a state and its own citizens. long afterwards, the supreme court
dismissed an action for want of jurisdiction because the record did not
show the corporation against which the suit was brought was chartered in
another state.[] subsequently the court has ruled that it will not
entertain an action by a state to which its citizens are either parties
of record, or would have to be joined because of the effect of a
judgment upon them.[] in his dictum in cohens v. virginia, chief
justice marshall also indicated that perhaps no jurisdiction existed
over suits by states to enforce their penal laws.[] sixty-seven years
later the court wrote this dictum into law in wisconsin v. pelican
insurance co.[] here wisconsin sued a louisiana corporation to
recover a judgment rendered in its favor by one of its own courts.
relying partly on the rule of international law that the courts of no
country execute the penal laws of another, partly upon the th section
of the judiciary act of  which vested the supreme court with
exclusive jurisdiction of controversies of a civil nature where a state
is a party, and partly on justice iredell's dissent in chisholm v.
georgia,[] where he confined the term "controversies" to civil suits,
justice gray ruled for the court that for purposes of original
jurisdiction, "controversies between a state and citizens of another
state" are confined to civil suits.[]
the distinction between suits brought by states to protect the welfare
of the people as a whole and suits to protect the private interests of
individual citizens is not easily drawn. in oklahoma ex rel. johnson
v. cook,[] the court dismissed a suit brought by oklahoma to
enforce the statutory liability of a stockholder of a state bank then in
the process of liquidation through a state officer. although the state
was vested with legal title to the assets under the liquidation
procedure, the state's action was independent of that and it was acting
merely for the benefit of the bank's creditors and depositors. a
generation earlier the court refused jurisdiction of oklahoma v.
atchison, topeka & santa fe r. co.[] in which oklahoma sought to
[pg ]enjoin unreasonable rate charges by a railroad on the shipment of
specified commodities, inasmuch as the state was not engaged in shipping
these commodities and had no proprietary interest in them.
georgia v. evans,[] on the other hand, presents the case of a clear
state interest as a purchaser of materials. here, georgia sued certain
asphalt companies for treble damages under the sherman act arising
allegedly out of a conspiracy to control the prices of asphalt of which
georgia was a large purchaser. the matter of georgia's interest was not
contested and did not arise. the case is primarily significant for the
ruling that a state is a person under section  of the sherman act
authorizing suits by "any person" for treble damages arising out of
violations of the sherman act. a less clear-cut case, and one not
altogether in accord with oklahoma v. atchison, topeka & santa fe r.
co.,[] is georgia v. pennsylvania r. co.[] in which the state,
suing as parens patriae and in its proprietary capacity, was permitted
to file a bill of complaint against twenty railroads for injunctive
relief from freight rates, allegedly discriminatory against the state
and asserted to have been fixed through coercive action by the northern
roads against the southern roads in violation of the th section of the
clayton act. although the rights of georgia were admittedly based on
federal laws, the court indicated that the enforcement of the sherman
and clayton acts depends upon civil as well as criminal sanctions.
moreover, the interests of a state for purposes of invoking the original
jurisdiction of the supreme court were held, as in georgia v.
tennessee copper co.,[] not to be confined to those which are
proprietary but to "embrace the so-called 'quasi-sovereign' interests
which *** are 'independent of and behind the titles of its citizens,
in all the earth and air within its domain.'"[]
georgia v. pennsylvania railroad
in the course of his opinion justice douglas, speaking for a narrowly
divided court, treated the alleged injury to georgia as a proprietor as
a "makeweight," and remarked that the "original jurisdiction of this
court is one of the mighty instruments which the framers of the
constitution provided so that adequate machinery might be [pg ]available for
the peaceful settlement of disputes between states and between a state
and citizens of another state *** trade barriers, recriminations,
intense commercial rivalries had plagued the colonies. the traditional
methods available to a sovereign for the settlement of such disputes
were diplomacy and war. suit in this court was provided as an
alternative."[] discriminatory freight rates, said he, may cause a
blight no less serious than noxious gases in that they may arrest the
development of a state and put it at a competitive disadvantage.
"georgia as a representative of the public is complaining of a wrong
which, if proven, limits the opportunities of her people, shackles her
industries, retards her development, and relegates her to an inferior
economic position among her sister states. these are matters of grave
public concern in which georgia has an interest apart from that of
particular individuals who may be affected. georgia's interest is not
remote; it is immediate. if we denied georgia as parens patriae the
right to invoke the original jurisdiction of the court in a matter of
that gravity, we would whittle the concept of justiciability down to the
stature of minor or conventional controversies. there is no warrant for
such a restriction."[]
controversies between citizens of different states
the meaning of "state"; hepburn v. ellzey
despite stringent definitions of the words "citizen" and "state" and
strict statutory safeguards against abuse of the jurisdiction arising
out of it, the diversity of citizenship clause is one of the more
prolific sources of federal jurisdiction. in hepburn v. ellzey,[]
chief justice marshall, speaking for the court, confined the meaning of
the word "state," as used in the constitution, to "the members of the
american confederacy" and ruled that a citizen of the district of
columbia could not sue a citizen of virginia on the basis of diversity
of citizenship. in the course of his brief opinion marshall owned that
it was "extraordinary that the courts of the united states, which are
open to aliens, and to the citizens of every state in the union should
be closed" to the residents of the district, but the situation, he
indicated, was "a subject for legislative, not for judicial
consideration."[] the same restrictive rule was later extended to
citizens of territories of the united states.[]
[pg ]
extension of jurisdiction by the act of 
whether chief justice marshall had in mind a constitutional amendment or
an act of congress when he spoke of legislative consideration is not
clear. at any rate, not until  did congress enact a statute to
confer on federal district courts jurisdiction of civil actions
(involving no federal question) "between citizens of different states,
or citizens of the district of columbia, the territory of hawaii, or
alaska and any state or territory."[] in national mutual insurance
co. v. tidewater transfer co.,[] this act was sustained by five
judges, but for widely different reasons. justice jackson, in an opinion
in which justices black and burton joined, was for adhering to the rule
that the district of columbia is not a state, but held the act to be
valid nevertheless because of the exclusive and plenary power of
congress to legislate for the district and its broad powers under the
necessary and proper clause.[] justice rutledge, in a concurring
opinion, in which justice murphy joined, agreed that the act was valid
and asserted that the ellzey case should be overruled.[] chief
justice vinson in a dissent in which justice douglas concurred[] and
justice frankfurter in a dissent in which justice reed joined[]
thought the act invalid and would have adhered to the rule in the ellzey
case. the net result is that the ellzey case still stands insofar as it
holds that the district of columbia is not a state, but that under
congressional enactment citizens of the district may now sue citizens of
states in the absence of a federal question, on the basis of no statable
constitutional principle, but through the grace of what justice
frankfurter called "conflicting minorities in combination."[]
for purposes of diversity jurisdiction state citizenship is determined
by domicile or residence, for the determination of which various tests
have been stated: removal to a state, acquiring real estate there, and
paying taxes;[] residence in a state for a considerable time;[]
and removal to a state with the intent of making it one's home for an
indefinite period of time.[] where citizenship is dependent on
intention, acts may disclose it more satisfactorily than
declarations.[] the fact that removal to another state is motivated
solely by a desire to acquire citizenship for diversity purposes does
not oust the federal courts of [pg ]jurisdiction so long as the new
residence is indefinite or the intention to reside there indefinitely is
shown.[] but a mere temporary change of domicile for the purpose of
suing in a federal court is not sufficient to effectuate a change in
citizenship.[] exercise of the right of suffrage is a conclusive test
of citizenship in a state, and the acquisition of the right to vote
without exercising it is sufficient to establish citizenship.[]
in bank of united states v. deveaux,[] chief justice marshall
declared: "that invisible, intangible, and artificial being, that mere
legal entity, a corporation aggregate, is certainly not a citizen; and
consequently cannot sue or be sued in the courts of the united states,
unless the rights of the members, in this respect, can be exercised in
their corporate name." he proceeded then to look beyond the corporate
entity and hold that the bank could sue under the diversity provisions
of the constitution and the judiciary act of  because the members of
the bank as a corporation were citizens of one state and deveaux was a
citizen of another. this holding was reaffirmed a generation later, in
commercial and railroad bank of vicksburg v. slocomb,[] at a time
when corporations were coming to play a more important role in the
national economy. the same rule, combined with the rule that in a
diversity proceeding all the persons on one side of a suit must be
citizens of different states from all persons on the other side,[]
could in the course of time have closed the federal courts in diversity
cases to the larger corporations having stockholders in all or most of
the states.
if such corporations were to have the benefits of diversity
jurisdiction, either the deveaux or the strawbridge rule would have to
yield. by , only four years after the slocomb case, the interests of
corporations in docketing cases in the federal courts as citizens of
different states appeared more important to the supreme court than the
weight to be attached to precedents, even those set by john marshall,
and in louisville, cincinnati, and charleston r. co. v. letson,[]
both the deveaux and slocomb cases were overruled. after elaborate
arguments by counsel, the court, speaking through justice wayne, [pg ]held
that "a corporation created by and doing business in a particular state,
is to be deemed to all intents and purposes as a person, although an
artificial person, an inhabitant of the same state, for the purposes of
its incorporation, capable of being treated as a citizen of that state,
as much as a natural person."[]
in the letson case the emphasis is upon the place of incorporation of a
joint stock company as something completely separate from the
citizenship of its members. in succeeding cases, however, this fiction
of corporate personality has undergone modifications so that a
corporation, though still a citizen of the state where it is chartered,
is such by virtue of the jurisdictional fiction that all the
stockholders are citizens of the state which by its laws created the
corporation.[] this presumption is conclusive and irrebuttable and
resembles in many ways the english jurisdictional fiction that for
providing remedies for wrongs done in the mediterranean "the island of
minorca was at london, in the parish of st. mary le bow in the ward of
cheap."[] this fiction creates a logical anomaly, which the letson
rule had avoided, in those cases in which a stockholder of one state
sues a corporation chartered in another state. although all stockholders
are conclusively presumed to be citizens of the state where the
corporation is chartered, an individual stockholder from a different
state may nevertheless aver his actual citizenship so as to maintain a
diversity suit against the corporation.[] these rulings lead to some
extraordinary results, as john chipman gray has indicated: "the federal
courts take cognizance of a suit by a stockholder who is a citizen, say,
of kentucky, against the corporation in which he owns stock, which has
been incorporated, say, by ohio. since he is a stockholder of an ohio
corporation, the court conclusively presumes that he is a citizen of
ohio, but if he were a citizen of ohio, he could not sue an ohio
corporation in the federal courts. therefore the court considers that he
is and he is not at the same time a citizen of ohio, and it would have
no jurisdiction unless it considered that he both was and was not at the
same time a citizen both of ohio and kentucky."[]
[pg ]
the black and white taxicab case
these fictions of corporate citizenship make it easy for corporations to
go into the federal courts on matters of law that are purely local in
nature, and they have availed themselves of the opportunity to the full.
for a time the supreme court tended to look askance at collusory
incorporations and the creation of dummy corporations for purposes of
getting cases into the federal courts,[] but as a result of the
kentucky taxicab case,[] decided in , the limitation of collusion
lost much of its force. here the black and white company, a kentucky
corporation, dissolved itself and obtained a charter as a tennessee
corporation in order to get the benefit of a federal rule which would
condone an exclusive contract with a railroad to park its cabs in and
around a station whereas the state rule forbade such contracts. the only
change made was of the state of incorporation. the name of the company,
its officers, and shareholders, and the location of its business all
remained the same. yet no collusion was found, and the company received
the benefit of the federal rule—a measure of salvation by being born
again in tennessee. the odd result in the taxicab case, whereby citizens
of kentucky could conduct business there contrary to state law with the
sanction of the supreme court of the united states, did not stem solely
from the rule that the citizenship of a corporation is determined by the
state of its incorporation, but also from this rule combined with the
rule of swift v. tyson,[] another by-product of diversity
jurisdiction.
the law applied in diversity cases: swift v. tyson
section  of the judiciary act of  provided that in diversity cases
at common law the laws of the several states should be the rules of
decision in the united states courts. however, in swift v. tyson[]
the supreme court refused to apply this section on the ground that it
did not extend to contracts or instruments of a commercial nature, the
interpretation of which therefore ought to be according to "the general
principles and doctrines of jurisprudence"; and while the decisions of
[pg ]state courts on such subjects were entitled to and would receive
attention and respect, they could not be conclusive or binding upon the
federal courts.[]
extension of the tyson case
for ninety-six years the court followed this opinion, which the other
justices saw only the evening before it was delivered, and which invoked
a precedent of lord mansfield on the law of the sea and an epigram of
cicero on the law of nature.[] later decisions expanded the concept
of matters of a commercial nature so that the scope of the tyson rule
was greatly extended.[] in many instances the state courts followed
their own rules of decision even when contrary to the federal rules, so
that justice story's attempt at uniformity in matters of a commercial
nature paradoxically led to a greater diversity and to the mischief in
many instances of two conflicting rules of law in the same state, with
the outcome of suits dependent upon whether the case was docketed in a
state or a federal court. simultaneously, the supreme court was holding
under the tyson rule that the federal courts were not bound by decisions
of state courts interpreting state constitutions[] or state
statutes.[]
the tyson rule protested
moreover, decisions extending the scope of the tyson rule were
frequently rendered by a divided court over the strong protests of
dissenters.[] in baltimore and ohio r. co. v. baugh,[] which
[pg ]further projected the tyson rule into the law of torts in disregard of
state law, justice field wrote a sharp dissent in which he indicated an
opinion that the supreme court's disregard of state court decisions was
unconstitutional. such disregard, nevertheless, was further aggravated
in kuhn v. fairmont coal co.,[] where the court held that in
construing a contract in a case involving real estate and mining law a
federal court was not bound by a west virginia decision touching the
same subject. this evoked a provocative dissent from justice holmes, who
later wrote one of his more famous dissents in the black and white
taxicab company case,[] in which he asserted emphatically that the
court's extensions of the tyson rule were unconstitutional.[]
erie railroad co. v. tompkins; tyson overruled
increasing criticism of the tyson rule led to a restriction of it in
mutual life ins. co. v. johnson,[] where the court chose to apply
virginia decisions rather than exercise its independent judgment on the
ground that the case was "balanced with doubt."[] the federal
judicial power was subordinated to what justice cardozo called "a benign
and prudent comity."[] four years later, and without further
preparation other than a change in two of the justices, the court
overturned swift v. tyson and its judicial progeny in erie railroad
co. v. tompkins,[] in an opinion by justice brandeis which is
remarkable in a number of ways. in the first place, it reversed a
ninety-six year old precedent which counsel had not questioned;
secondly, for the first and only time in american constitutional
history, it held action of the supreme court itself to have been
unconstitutional, to wit, action taken by it in reliance on its
interpretation of the th section of the judiciary act of , a
question which also was not before the court; and thirdly, it completely
ignored the power of congress under the commerce clause, as well as its
power to prescribe [pg ]rules of decision for the federal courts in the
cases enumerated in article iii.
like the fairmont coal and taxicab cases, the tompkins case presented
the possibility of a head-on conflict between state and federal rules of
decision. tompkins was seriously injured by a passing freight train
while he was walking along the railroad's right of way in pennsylvania.
as a citizen of pennsylvania, tompkins could have sued in that state,
but he could also have sued in the federal district court in
pennsylvania, or in new york because the railroad was incorporated in
the latter state. he elected to sue in the federal court for the
southern district of new york, where he obtained a verdict for $,
after the trial judge had ruled that the applicable law did not preclude
recovery. the circuit court of appeals affirmed the judgment because it
thought it unnecessary to consider whether the law of pennsylvania
precluded recovery, inasmuch as the question was one of general law to
be decided by the federal courts in the exercise of their independent
judgment. citing warren's discovery that swift v. tyson was an
erroneous interpretation of the judiciary act of , criticism of the
tyson doctrine both on and off the bench, and the political and social
defects of the rule in working discriminations against citizens of a
state in favor of noncitizens and in producing injustice and confusion,
justice brandeis declared: "if only a question of statutory construction
were involved, we should not be prepared to abandon a doctrine so widely
*** [followed for] nearly a century. but the unconstitutionality of
the course pursued has now been made clear and compels us to do so.
*** there is, [he continued], no federal general common law. congress
has no power to declare substantive rules of common law applicable in a
state whether they be local in their nature or 'general,' be they
commercial law or a part of the law of torts. and no clause in the
constitution purports to confer such a power upon the federal
courts."[] after quoting justice field and justice holmes on the
unconstitutionality of the tyson rule, justice brandeis made it clear
that the court was not invalidating § of the federal judiciary act of
, but was merely declaring that the supreme court and the lower
federal courts had, in their application of it, "invaded rights which
*** are reserved by the constitution to the several states."[]
justice butler, joined by justice mcreynolds, concurred in the result,
because in his view tompkins was not entitled to damages under [pg ]general
law, but he deprecated the reversal of swift v. tyson. he also
objected to the decision of the constitutional issue as
unnecessary.[] justice reed likewise concurred, but thought it
questionable to raise the constitutional issue. "if the opinion, [said
he], commits this court to the position that the congress is without
power to declare what rules of substantive law shall govern the federal
courts, that conclusion also seems questionable."[]
extension of the tompkins rule
since  the federal courts have been most assiduous in following the
decisions of the state courts in diversity cases. the decisions
followed, moreover, include not only those of the highest state courts,
but those also of intermediate courts. in west v. american telephone
and telegraph co.[] the supreme court held that a decision of an ohio
county court of appeals which the supreme court of the state had
declined to review was binding on the lower federal courts regardless of
the desirability of the rule of the decision or of the belief that the
highest court of the state might establish a different rule in future
litigation. in fidelity union trust co. v. field[] the court went
even farther and ruled that the lower courts were bound to follow the
decisions of two chancery courts in new jersey although there had been
no appeal to the highest state court, and obviously other new jersey
courts were not bound by the decisions of two vice-chancellors. the
anomaly of this decision was partially removed in king v. order of
united commercial travelers,[] where the court held that the federal
courts were not bound by the decision of a court of first instance of
south carolina, which was the only decision applicable to the
interpretation of the insurance policy in dispute. nor is this the whole
story. in the event of a state supreme court's reversal of its earlier
decisions the federal courts are bound by the latest decision. hence a
judgment of a federal district court, correctly applying state law as
interpreted by the state's highest court, must be reversed on appeal if
the state court in the meantime has reversed its earlier rulings and
adopted a contrary interpretation. though aware of possible
complications from this rule, the court insisted that "until such time
as a case is no longer sub judice, the duty rests upon the federal
courts to apply the rules of decision statute in accordance with the
then controlling decision of the highest state court."[]
[pg ]although the rules of decision act[] requires the federal courts to
follow state decisions only in civil cases, the application of the
tompkins rule has been extended to suits in equity.[] in guaranty
trust co. v. york,[] the court held that when a statute of
limitations barred recovery in a state court, a federal court sitting in
equity could not entertain the suit because of diversity of citizenship.
this ruling was based on the express premise that "a federal court
adjudicating a state-created right solely because of the diversity of
citizenship of the parties is for that purpose, in effect, only another
court of the state, *** "[] it was held to be immaterial,
therefore, whether statutes of limitations were designated as
substantive or procedural. the tompkins case, it was said, was not an
endeavor to formulate scientific legal terminology. "in essence, the
intent of that decision was to insure that, in all cases where a federal
court is exercising jurisdiction solely because of the diversity of
citizenship of the parties, the outcome of the litigation in the federal
court should be substantially the same, so far as legal rules determine
the outcome of a litigation, as it would be if tried in a state
court."[]
controversies between citizens of the same state claiming lands under
grants of different states
this clause was not in the first draft of the constitution, but was
added without objection.[] undoubtedly the motivation for this
extension of the judicial power was the existence of boundary disputes
affecting ten states at the time the philadelphia convention met. [pg ]with
the northwest ordinance of , the ultimate settlement of boundary
disputes between states, and the passing of land grants by states, this
clause, never productive of many cases, has become obsolete.[]
controversies between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign
states, citizens or subjects
the scope of this jurisdiction has been limited both by judicial
decisions and the eleventh amendment. by judicial application of the law
of nations a foreign state is immune from suit in the federal courts
without its consent,[] an immunity which extends to suits brought by
states of the american union.[] conversely, the eleventh amendment
has been construed to bar suits by foreign states against a state of the
american union.[] consequently, the jurisdiction conferred by this
clause comprehends only suits brought by a state against citizens or
subjects of foreign states, by foreign states against american citizens,
citizens of a state against the citizens or subjects of a foreign state,
and by aliens against citizens of a state.
the privilege of a recognized foreign state to sue in the courts of a
foreign state upon the principle of comity is recognized by both
international law and american constitutional law.[] to deny a
sovereign this privilege "would manifest a want of comity and friendly
feeling."[] although national sovereignty is continuous, a suit in
behalf of a national sovereign can be maintained in the courts of the
united states only by a government which has been recognized by the
political branches of our own government as the authorized government of
the foreign state.[] once a foreign government avails itself of the
privilege of suing in the courts of the united states, it subjects
itself to the procedure and rules of decision governing those courts and
accepts whatever liabilities the court may decide to be a reasonable
incident of bringing the suit.[] also, certain of the benefits
extending to the domestic sovereign do not extend to a foreign sovereign
suing in the courts of the united states. thus a foreign sovereign does
not receive the benefit of the rule which exempts the united states [pg ]and
its member states from the operation of the statute of limitations,
because considerations of public policy back of the rule are regarded as
absent.[]
indian tribes
within the terms of article iii, an indian tribe is not a foreign state
and hence cannot sue in the courts of the united states. this rule was
applied in the case of cherokee nation v. georgia,[] where chief
justice marshall conceded that the cherokee nation was a state, but not
a foreign state, being a part of the united states and dependent upon
it. other passages of the opinion specify the elements essential to a
foreign state for purposes of jurisdiction, such as sovereignty and
independence.
as in cases of diversity jurisdiction, suits brought to the federal
courts under this category must clearly state in the record the nature
of the parties. as early as  the supreme court ruled that a federal
court could not take jurisdiction of a cause where the defendants were
described in the record as "late of the district of maryland," but were
not designated as citizens of maryland, and plaintiffs were described as
aliens and subjects of the united kingdom.[] the meticulous care
manifested in this case appeared twenty years later when the court
narrowly construed section  of the judiciary act of , vesting the
federal courts with jurisdiction where an alien was a party, in order to
keep it within the limits of this clause. the judicial power was further
held not to extend to private suits in which an alien is a party, unless
a citizen is the adverse party.[] this [pg ]interpretation was extended
in  by a holding that if there is more than one plaintiff or
defendant, each plaintiff or defendant must be competent to sue or
liable to suit.[] these rules, however, do not preclude a suit
between citizens of the same state if the plaintiffs are merely nominal
parties and are suing on behalf of an alien.[]
clause . in all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and
consuls, and those in which a state shall be party, the supreme court
shall have original jurisdiction. in all the other cases before
mentioned, the supreme court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as
to law and fact, with such exceptions, and under such regulations as the
congress shall make.
the original jurisdiction of the supreme court
acting on the assumption that its existence is derived directly from the
constitution, the supreme court has held since  that its original
jurisdiction flows directly from the constitution and is therefore
self-executing without further action by the congress. in the famous
case of chisholm v. georgia[] the supreme court entertained an
action of assumpsit against georgia by a citizen of another state.
although the th section of the judiciary act of  invested the
supreme court with original jurisdiction in suits between a state and
citizens of another state, it did not authorize actions of assumpsit in
such cases, nor did it prescribe forms of process for the court in the
exercise of original jurisdiction. over the dissent of justice iredell,
the court in opinions by chief justice jay and justices blair, wilson,
and cushing, sustained its jurisdiction and its power, in the absence of
congressional enactments, to provide forms of process and rules of
procedure. so strong were the states' rights sentiments of the times
that georgia refused to appear as a party litigant, and other states
were so disturbed that the eleventh amendment was proposed forthwith and
ratified. this amendment, however, did not affect the direct flow of
original jurisdiction to the court, which continued to take jurisdiction
of cases to which a state was party plaintiff and of suits between
states without specific provision by congress for forms of [pg ]process. by
 chief justice taney could enunciate with confidence, after a review
of the precedents, that in all cases where original jurisdiction is
given by the constitution, the supreme court has authority "to exercise
it without further act of congress to regulate its powers or confer
jurisdiction, and that the court may regulate and mould the process it
uses in such manner as in its judgment will best promote the purposes of
justice."[]
cannot be enlarged; marbury v. madison
since the original jurisdiction is derived directly from the
constitution, it follows logically that congress can neither restrict it
nor, as was held in the great case of marbury v. madison,[] enlarge
it. in holding void the th section of the judiciary act of , which
was interpreted as giving the court power to issue a writ of mandamus in
an original proceeding, chief justice marshall declared that "a negative
or exclusive sense" had to be given to the affirmative enunciation of
the cases to which original jurisdiction extends.[] while the rule
that the supreme court is vested with original jurisdiction by the
constitution and that this jurisdiction cannot be extended or restricted
deprives congress of any power to define it, it allows a considerable
latitude of interpretation to the court itself. in some cases, as in
missouri v. holland,[] the court has manifested a tendency toward a
liberal construction of original jurisdiction; in others, as in
massachusetts v. mellon,[] it has placed a narrow construction upon
the grant through the device of a restrictive interpretation of cases
and controversies; and in still other cases, as in california v.
southern pacific co.,[] it has stated that its original jurisdiction
"is limited and manifestly to be sparingly exercised, and should not be
expanded by construction."
[pg ]
although congress can neither enlarge nor restrict the original
jurisdiction of the supreme court, it may vest concurrent jurisdiction
in the lower federal courts in cases over which the supreme court has
original jurisdiction.[] thus among the grounds given for the
decision in wisconsin v. pelican insurance co.,[] that the court
had no original jurisdiction of an action by a state to enforce a
judgment for a pecuniary penalty awarded by one of its own courts, was
the provision of the th section of the judiciary act of [] that
"the supreme court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of controversies of
a civil nature, where a state is a party, except between a state and its
citizens; and except also between a state and citizens of other states,
or aliens, in which latter case it shall have original but not exclusive
jurisdiction." speaking of that act with particular reference to this
section, justice gray declared that it "was passed by the first congress
assembled under the constitution, many of whose members had taken part
in framing that instrument, and is contemporaneous and weighty evidence
of its true meaning."[] in cases affecting consuls, moreover, the
original jurisdiction of the supreme court is shared concurrently with
state courts unless congress by positive action makes such jurisdiction
exclusive.[]
[pg ]
the appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court
unlike its original jurisdiction, the appellate jurisdiction of the
supreme court is subject to control by congress in the exercise of the
broadest discretion. although the provisions of article iii seem,
superficially at least, to imply that its appellate jurisdiction would
flow directly from the constitution until congress should by positive
enactment make exceptions to it, rulings of the court since 
establish the contrary rule. consequently, before the supreme court can
exercise appellate jurisdiction, an act of congress must have bestowed
it, and affirmative bestowals of jurisdiction are interpreted as
exclusive in nature so as to constitute an exception to all other cases.
this rule was first applied in wiscart v. dauchy[] where the court
held that in the absence of a statute prescribing a rule for appellate
proceedings, the court lacked jurisdiction. it was further stated that
if a rule were prescribed, the court could not depart from it. fourteen
years later chief justice marshall observed for the court that its
appellate jurisdiction is derived from the constitution, but proceeded
nevertheless to hold that an affirmative bestowal of appellate
jurisdiction by congress, which made no express exceptions to it,
implied a denial of all others.[]
the mccardle case
the power of congress to make exceptions to the court's appellate
jurisdiction has thus become, in effect, a plenary power to bestow,
withhold, and withdraw appellate jurisdiction, even to the point of its
abolition. and this power extends to the withdrawal of appellate
jurisdiction even in pending cases. in the notable case of ex parte
mccardle,[] a mississippi newspaper editor who was being held in
custody by the military authorities acting under the authority of the
reconstruction acts filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in
the circuit court for southern mississippi. he alleged unlawful
restraint and challenged the validity to the reconstruction statutes.
the writ was issued, but after a hearing the prisoner was remanded to
the custody of the military authorities. mccardle then appealed to the
supreme court which denied a motion to dismiss the appeal, heard
arguments on the merits of the case, and took it under advisement.
before a conference could be held, congress, fearful of a test of the
reconstruction acts, enacted a statute withdrawing appellate
jurisdiction from the court in certain habeas corpus proceedings.[]
the court then proceeded to dismiss the appeal for want of
jurisdiction. [pg ]chief justice chase, speaking for the court said:
"without jurisdiction the court cannot proceed at all in any cause.
jurisdiction is the power to declare the law and when it ceases to
exist, the only function remaining to the court is that of announcing
the fact and dismissing the cause."[]
although the mccardle case goes to the ultimate in sustaining
congressional power over the court's appellate jurisdiction and although
it was born of the stresses and tensions of the reconstruction period,
it has been frequently reaffirmed and approved.[] the result is to
vest an unrestrained discretion in congress to curtail and even abolish
the appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court, and to prescribe the
manner and forms in which it may be exercised. this principle is well
expressed in the "francis wright"[] where the court sustained the
validity of an act of congress which limited the court's review in
admiralty cases to questions of law appearing on the record. a portion
of the opinion is worthy of quotation: "authority to limit the
jurisdiction necessarily carries with it authority to limit the use of
the jurisdiction. not only may whole classes of cases be kept out of the
jurisdiction altogether, but particular classes of questions may be
subjected to reexamination and review, while others are not. to our
minds it is no more unconstitutional to provide that issues of fact
shall not be retried in any case, than that neither issues of law nor
fact shall be retried in cases where the value of the matter in dispute
is less than $,. the general power to regulate implies the power to
regulate in all things. the whole of a civil appeal may be given, or a
part. the constitutional requirements are all satisfied if one
opportunity is had for the trial of all parts of a case. everything
beyond that is a matter of legislative discretion."[]
[pg ]
the power of congress to regulate the jurisdiction of the lower federal
courts
martin v. hunter's lessee
the power of congress to vest, withdraw, and regulate the jurisdiction
of the lower federal courts is derived from the power to create
tribunals under article i, the necessary and proper clause, and the
clause in article iii, vesting the judicial power in the supreme court
and such inferior courts as "the congress may from time to time ordain
and establish." balancing these provisions, however, are the phrases in
article iii to the effect that the judicial power "shall be vested" in
courts and "shall extend" to nine classes of cases and controversies and
the question of what is the force of the word "shall." in martin v.
hunter's lessee,[] justice story declared obiter that it was
imperative upon congress to create inferior federal courts and vest in
them all the jurisdiction they were capable of receiving. this dictum
was criticized by justice johnson in his dissent, in which he contended
that the word "shall" was used "in the future sense," and had "nothing
imperative in it."[] and for that matter in another portion of his
opinion justice story expressly recognized that congress may create
inferior courts and "parcel out such jurisdiction among such courts,
from time to time at their own pleasure";[] and in his commentaries
he took a broad view of the power of congress to regulate
jurisdiction.[]
neither legislative construction nor judicial interpretation has
sustained justice story's position in martin v. hunter's lessee. the
judiciary act of , which was a contemporaneous interpretation of the
constitution by the congress, rests on the assumption of a broad
discretion on the part of congress to create courts and to grant
jurisdiction to and withhold it from them. this act conferred original
jurisdiction upon the district and circuit courts in certain cases, but
by no means all they were capable of receiving. thus suits at the common
law to which the united states was a party were limited [pg ]by the amount
in controversy. except for offenses against the united states, seizures
and forfeitures made under the impost, navigation, or trade laws of the
united states, and suits by aliens under international law or treaties,
that whole group of cases involving the constitution, laws, and treaties
of the united states was withheld from the jurisdiction of the district
and circuit courts,[] with the result that original jurisdiction in
these cases was exercised by the state courts subject to appeal to the
supreme court under section . jurisdiction was vested in the district
courts over admiralty and maritime matters and in the circuit courts
over suits between citizens of different states where the amount
exceeded $, or suits to which an alien was a party.[] the act of
 empowered the courts to issue writs, to require parties to produce
testimony, to punish contempts, to make rules, and to grant stays of
execution.[] finally, equity jurisdiction was limited to those cases
where a "plain, adequate, and complete remedy" could not be had at
law.[]
this care for detail in conferring jurisdiction upon the inferior courts
and vesting them with ancillary powers in order to render such
jurisdiction effective is of the utmost significance in the later
development of the law pertaining to congressional regulation of
jurisdiction, inasmuch as it demonstrates conclusively that a majority
of the members of the first congress regarded positive action on the
part of congress to be necessary before jurisdiction and judicial powers
could be exercised by courts of its own creation. ten years later this
practical construction of article iii was accepted by the supreme court
in turner v. bank of north america.[] the case involved an attempt
to recover on a promissory note in a diversity case contrary to § of
the act of  which forbade diversity suits involving assignments
unless the suit was brought before the assignment was made. counsel for
the bank argued that the circuit courts were not inferior courts and
that the grant of judicial power by the constitution was a direct grant
of jurisdiction. this argument evoked questions from chief justice
ellsworth and the following statement from justice chase: "the notion
has been frequently entertained, that the federal courts derive their
power immediately from the constitution; but the political truth is,
that the judicial power (except in a few specified instances) belongs to
congress. if congress has given the power to this court, we possess it,
not otherwise; and if congress has not given the power to us, or to any
other court, it still remains at the legislative disposal. besides,
congress is not bound, and it would, perhaps, be inexpedient, to enlarge
the jurisdiction of the federal courts, to every [pg ]subject, in every
form, which the constitution might warrant."[] the court applied §
of the judiciary act and ruled that the circuit court lacked
jurisdiction.
eight years later chief justice marshall in distinguishing between
common law and statutory courts declared that "courts which are created
by written law, and whose jurisdiction is defined by written law, cannot
transcend that jurisdiction."[] this rule was reaffirmed in the
famous case of united states v. hudson and goodwin[] on the
assumption that the power of congress to create inferior courts
necessarily implies "the power to limit the jurisdiction of those courts
to particular objects."[] after pointing to the original jurisdiction
which flows immediately from the constitution, justice johnson asserted:
"all other courts created by the general government possess no
jurisdiction but what is given them by the power that creates them, and
can be vested with none but what the power ceded to the general
government will authorize them to confer."[] to the same affect is
rhode island v. massachusetts[] where justice baldwin declared that
"the distribution and appropriate exercise of the judicial power must
therefore be made by laws passed by congress and cannot be assumed by
any other department ***"
a more sweeping assertion of congressional power over jurisdiction was
made by the supreme court in cary v. curtis,[] which bears more
directly upon the issue than some of the earlier cases. here counsel had
argued that a statute which made final the decisions of the secretary of
the treasury in tax disputes was unconstitutional in that it deprived
the federal courts of the judicial power vested in them by the
constitution. in reply to this argument the court speaking through
justice daniel declared: "the judicial power of the united states ***
is (except in enumerated instances, applicable exclusively to this
court) dependent for its distribution and organization, and for the
modes of its exercise, entirely upon the action of congress, who possess
the sole power of creating the tribunals (inferior to the supreme court)
*** and of investing them with jurisdiction, either limited,
concurrent, or exclusive, and of withholding jurisdiction from them in
the exact degrees and character which to congress may seem proper for
the public good." continuing, [pg ]justice daniel said: "it follows then
that courts created by statute, must look to the statute as the warrant
for their authority; certainly they cannot go beyond the statute, and
assert an authority with which they may not be invested by it, or which
may clearly be denied to them."[]
the principles of cary v. curtis were reiterated five years later in
sheldon v. sill[] where the validity of § of the judiciary act
of  was directly questioned. the assignee of a negotiable instrument
filed a suit in a circuit court even though no diversity of citizenship
existed as between the original parties to the mortgage. the circuit
court entertained jurisdiction in spite of the prohibition against such
suits in § and ordered a sale of the property in question. on appeal
to the supreme court, counsel for the assignee contended that § was
void because the right of a citizen of any state to sue citizens of
another in the federal courts flowed directly from article iii and
congress could not restrict that right. the supreme court unanimously
rejected these contentions and held that since the constitution had not
established the inferior courts or distributed to them their respective
powers, and since congress had the authority to establish such courts,
it could define their jurisdiction and withhold from any court of its
own creation jurisdiction of any of the enumerated cases and
controversies in article iii.[] sheldon v. sill has been cited,
quoted, and reaffirmed many times.[] its effect and that of the cases
following it is that as regards the jurisdiction of the lower federal
courts two elements are necessary to confer jurisdiction: first, the
constitution must have given the courts the capacity to receive it, and
second, an act of congress must have conferred it. the manner in which
the inferior federal courts acquire jurisdiction, its character, the
mode of its exercise, and the objects of its operation are remitted
without check or limitation to the wisdom of the legislature.[]
[pg ]
the plenary power of congress to withhold and restrict jurisdiction was
given renewed vitality by the emergency price control act of []
and the cases arising therefrom. fearful that the price control program
might be effectively nullified by injunctions, congress provided for a
special court and special procedures for contesting the validity of
price regulations. in lockerty v. phillips[] the supreme court
sustained the power of congress to confine equity jurisdiction, to
restrain enforcement of the act to the specially created emergency court
of appeals, with appeal to the supreme court. the court went much
farther than this in yakus v. united states,[] and held that the
provision of the act conferring on the emergency court of appeals and
the supreme court exclusive jurisdiction to determine the validity of
any regulation or order, and providing that no court should have
jurisdiction or power to consider the validity of any regulation,
precluded the plea of invalidity of such a regulation as a defense to
its violation in a criminal proceeding in a district court. although
justice rutledge protested in his dissent that this provision of the act
conferred jurisdiction on the district courts from which essential
elements of the judicial power had been abstracted,[] chief justice
stone declared for the majority that the provision presented no novel
constitutional issue.
[pg ]
the authority of congress to regulate the jurisdiction of the lower
federal courts includes that of controlling the power of the courts to
issue writs in cases where they have jurisdiction and to regulate other
ancillary powers generally.[] among some of the more notable
restrictions in this regard are the limitations on the power of courts
to issue injunctions, particularly in the field of taxation and labor
disputes. by the act of march , ,[] congress provided that "no
suit for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any
tax shall be maintained in any court." there have never been any
constitutional doubts concerning this provision, which was strictly
applied for many years[] until  when the supreme court began to
make exceptions[] which in the later cases[] made the provision so
inefficacious that by october, , more than  suits had been filed
to restrain the collection of processing taxes under the agricultural
adjustment act.[] none of these cases, however, raises any issue
other than that of statutory interpretation, and since  the court
has interpreted the exceptions to the statute somewhat more
strictly.[]
injunctions in labor disputes; the norris-laguardia act
the norris-laguardia act of [] is significant for its
restrictions on the powers of the federal courts to issue injunctions in
labor disputes in the form of requirements for hearings followed by
findings that unlawful acts are threatened and will be committed unless
restrained, or if already committed will be continued; that substantial
injury to the property of complainants will ensue; that as to the relief
granted greater injury will be inflicted upon complainants by denying
relief than will be inflicted on defendants by granting it; that the
complainants have no adequate remedy at law; and, finally, that the
public officials charged with the protection of complainants' property
are either unable or unwilling to do so. this act has been [pg ]scrupulously
applied by the supreme court, which has implicitly sustained its
constitutionality by construing its restrictions liberally[] in every
case except united states v. united mine workers,[] where it was
held that the statute did not apply to suits brought by the united
states to enjoin a strike in the coal industry while the government
technically was operating the mines.
although the cases point to a plenary power in congress to withhold
jurisdiction from the inferior courts and to withdraw it at any time
after it has been conferred, even as applied to pending cases, there are
a few cases in addition to martin v. hunter's lessee[] which
slightly qualify the cumulative effect of this impressive array of
precedents. as early as , the supreme court in murray v. hoboken
land and improvement co.[] distinguished between matters of private
right which from their nature were the subject of a suit at the common
law, equity, or admiralty and cannot be withdrawn from judicial
cognizance and those matters of public right which, though susceptible
of judicial determination, did not require it and which might or might
not be brought within judicial cognizance. seventy-seven years later the
court elaborated this distinction in crowell v. benson,[] which
involved the finality to be accorded administrative findings of
jurisdictional facts in compensation cases. in holding that an employer
was entitled to a trial de novo of the constitutional jurisdictional
facts of the matter of the employer-employee relationship and of the
occurrence of the injury in interstate commerce, chief justice hughes,
speaking for the majority fused the due process clause of amendment v
and article iii, but emphasized that the issue ultimately was "rather a
question of the appropriate maintenance of the federal judicial power,"
and "whether the congress may substitute for constitutional courts, in
which the judicial power of the united states is vested, an
administrative agency *** for the final determination of the existence
of the facts upon which the enforcement of the constitutional rights of
the citizen depend." to do so, contended the chief justice, [pg ]"would be
to sap the judicial power as it exists under the federal constitution
and to establish a government of a bureaucratic character alien to our
system, wherever constitutional rights depend, as not infrequently they
do depend, upon the facts, and finality as to facts becomes in effect
finality in law."[]
the power of congress to confer jurisdiction on the lower federal courts
is qualified by the rule that before congress can vest jurisdiction in
the inferior courts, they must have the capacity to receive it. the
capacity of the lower judiciary to receive jurisdiction is defined in
the enumeration of cases and controversies in article iii. consequently
in vesting courts with jurisdiction, congress cannot go beyond this
enumeration.[] it follows from the rule that constitutional courts
can perform only judicial functions that congress, in vesting courts
with jurisdiction, cannot impose upon them nonjudicial duties such as
administering pensions,[] deciding issues subject to later executive
or legislative action,[] rendering advisory opinions, or opinions
which are not final and conclusive upon the parties,[] or taking
jurisdiction of matters from which any essential element of the judicial
power has been abstracted.[] to be sure, congress may clothe some
matters of an administrative nature with the mantle of a case or
controversy and thereby make it a matter of judicial cognizance, as it
has done with naturalization proceedings,[] the administration of
certain laws relating to the expulsion of aliens,[] the limited
administration of funds received from the government of mexico to
compensate american citizens for claims against that government,[]
and, of course, the traditional administration of bankrupt enterprises
through the medium of a receiver.
[pg ]
federal-state court relations
the american federal system with its dual system of courts, exercising
concurrent jurisdiction in a number of classes of cases, presents
numerous possibilities of inter-court conflicts and interference.
subject to congressional enactments to the contrary, the state courts
have concurrent jurisdiction over all the classes of cases and
controversies enumerated in article iii except suits between states,
those to which the united states is a party, those to which a foreign
state is a party, and cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction. even
in admiralty cases the state courts, though unable to exercise any
portion of admiralty or maritime jurisdiction by delegation or
otherwise,[] may have a concurrent jurisdiction when the same issues
assume the form of a case at common law.[] in addition to conflicts
arising out of concurrent jurisdiction, relations between federal and
state courts are exposed to other frictions, such as injunctions in one
jurisdiction restraining judicial processes in another, the use of the
writ of habeas corpus by a court of concurrent jurisdiction to release
persons in custody of another, and the refusal by state courts to comply
with orders of the supreme court. the relations between federal and
state courts are governed in part by constitutional law with respect to
state court interference with the federal courts and state court refusal
to comply with the judgments of federal tribunals, by statutes as
regards interference by federal courts with those of the [pg ]states, and by
self-imposed rules of comity applied for the avoidance of unseemly
conflicts.
the refusal of state courts to make returns on writs of errors issued by
the supreme court has already been noted in connection with the
disobedience of the virginia courts in martin v. hunter's lessee[]
and cohens v. virginia[] and in that of the wisconsin court in
ableman v. booth.[] more spectacular disobedience to federal
authority arose out of the cherokee indian case involving actions of
georgia and its courts. in the first of these the supreme court had
issued a writ of error to the georgia supreme court to review the
conviction of corn tassel for the murder of another cherokee indian. the
writ was served, but before a hearing could be held corn tassel was
executed on the day originally set for punishment contrary to the
federal law that a writ of error superseded sentence until the appeal
was decided. this action ensued as a result of the legislature's
approval of the governor's policy that he would permit no interference
with georgia's courts by orders of the supreme court and would resist by
force any attempt to enforce them with all the forces at his
command.[]
worcester v. georgia
two years later georgia renewed its defiance of the supreme court in
worcester v. georgia[] which involved the conviction of two
missionaries for residing among the indians without a license. the
supreme court reversed the conviction on the ground that the state had
no jurisdiction over the cherokee reservations and ordered worcester's
discharge in a special mandate to the superior court of gwinnett county.
the state court ignored the mandate and once again the governor of the
state announced that he would meet such usurpation by the supreme court
with determined resistance. consequently, worcester and butler remained
in jail until they agreed to abandon further efforts for their discharge
by federal authority in the form of a writ of error, whereupon the
governor pardoned them on the condition that they leave the state.
[pg ]
aside from these more dramatic assertions of independence of federal
courts, state court interference with the federal judiciary has occurred
for the most part in conflicts of jurisdiction which affect only the
lower federal courts as courts of concurrent jurisdiction and in
attempts to release persons in federal custody. to the extent that this
phase of federal-state relations is not governed by statute or the
supremacy clause of article vi, it is governed by comity, a self-imposed
rule of judicial morality whereby independent tribunals of concurrent or
coordinate jurisdiction exercise a mutual restraint in order to prevent
interference with each other and to avoid collisions of authority.
although the court on one occasion has stated that the principle of
comity is not a rule of law but "one of practice, convenience, and
expediency"[] which persuades, but does not command, it has also
declared that in the american federal system it has come to have "a
higher sanction than the utility which comes from concord" and has been
converted into a principle "of right and of law, and therefore of
necessity."[] as developed and applied by the supreme court the rule
of comity is exemplified in three classes of cases: first, those in
which a court has acquired jurisdiction of the res or the possession
of property and another court interferes with that jurisdiction or
possession; second, those in which a court has acquired jurisdiction or
custody of the person and another interferes with such jurisdiction or
custody, most frequently by discharges from custody in habeas corpus
proceedings; and, third, those in which injunctions are used to stay
proceedings in another court or to enjoin official action before the
courts of proper jurisdiction have had an opportunity to adjudicate the
issue.
as applied by the supreme court in cases involving concurrent
jurisdiction the principle of comity means that when the jurisdiction of
a court and the right of a plaintiff to prosecute a suit therein have
attached and when a court has acquired constructive possession of
property, such jurisdiction cannot be taken away or obstructed by
proceedings in another court, nor can the possession of the property be
disturbed by proceedings in another court; and the court which has first
acquired jurisdiction of the cause or the possession of the res has
exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine the case and all
controversies relating thereto, provided that the subject matter of the
suit, the remedies sought, and the parties to it are the same, and
provided further that it is not necessary for the federal courts to
exercise [pg ]jurisdiction in order to enforce the supremacy of the
constitution and laws of the united states.[]
it has long been settled as a general rule that state courts have no
power to enjoin proceedings or judgments of the federal courts.[] in
united states ex rel. riggs v. johnson county[] this rule was
attributed to no paramount jurisdiction of the federal courts, but
rather to the complete independence of the state and federal courts in
their spheres of action. like many of the rules governing federal-state
court relations, this rule is not absolute, as shown by a case arising
in pennsylvania. two surviving trustees had filed an account for
themselves and a deceased trustee in a court of common pleas.
thereafter, two of the five beneficiaries sued the two trustees and the
deceased trustee in a federal district court, charging mismanagement and
praying for an accounting and restitution and removal of the trustees.
the supreme court held that the state court upon the filing of the
account acquired jurisdiction over the trust quasi in rem exclusively
and therefore sustained the state court's injunction restraining the
parties from further proceeding in the federal court while
simultaneously holding that the district court could not enjoin the
parties from proceeding in the state court.[] the power of a state
court to enjoin parties from proceeding in a federal court obviously
does not include that of enjoining a federal court.
[pg ]
the discretion of the federal courts to enjoin proceedings in state
courts has not been left exclusively to doctrines of comity, for since
 the federal courts have been prohibited by statute from restraining
proceedings in state courts.[] initially this statute was applied
with strict literalness in condemning attempts by the lower federal
courts to enter exceptions to it,[] but gradually the supreme court
began to interpret the provision as not prohibitive of all injunctions.
first, it has been held that an injunction will lie against proceedings
in a state court to protect the lawfully acquired jurisdiction of a
federal court against impairment or defeat.[] this exception is
notably applicable to cases where the federal court has taken possession
of property which it may protect by injunction from interference by
state courts.[] second, in order to prevent irreparable damages to
persons and property the federal courts may restrain the legal officers
of a state from taking proceedings in state courts to enforce state
legislation alleged to be unconstitutional.[] nor does the
prohibition of § of the judicial code [ u.s.c.a. §] prevent
injunctions restraining the execution of judgments in state courts
obtained by fraud,[] the restraint of proceedings in state courts in
cases which have been removed to the federal courts,[] nor, until
lately, to proceedings in state courts to relitigate issues previously
adjudicated and finally settled by decrees of a federal court.[]
[pg ]in toucey v. new york life insurance co.,[] justice frankfurter,
as spokesman for the court, reviewed earlier cases and in effect
overruled the exception of suits designed to relitigate issues
previously adjudicated by a federal court, and held that a suit for
injunction would not lie to restrain a proceeding in a state court on
the ground that the claim had been previously adjudicated. in so doing
he placed this issue in its proper context of res judicata. in
addition he went beyond the requirements of the case at bar to cast
doubts upon the exception of suits brought to enjoin the execution of
judgments of state courts obtained by fraud. furthermore, by regarding
the exception of suits restraining proceedings in state courts in cases
which had been removed to the federal courts as emanating from the
removal acts, justice frankfurter concluded that only one exception had
been made by judicial construction to §, [ u.s.c.a. §]
namely, that permitting injunction of proceedings in state courts to
protect the possession of property previously acquired.[] the rule of
this case was extended on the same day to forbid an injunction to
restrain proceedings in a state court in support of jurisdiction
previously begun earlier and still pending in the federal court.[]
federal injunctions of state official action
injunctions by federal courts restraining state officials from enforcing
unconstitutional state statutes constitute an indirect interference with
state courts and a serious obstruction to the administration of public
policy. from osborn v. bank of the united states,[] which was the
first case in which an injunction was used to restrain state action
under an unconstitutional statute, to ex parte young[] the supreme
court established firmly the rule that jurisdiction exists in the
federal courts to restrain the enforcement of unconstitutional state
statutes and to enjoin state officials charged with the duty of
enforcing state laws from bringing criminal or civil proceedings to
enforce an invalid statute. until ex parte young, the court had been
careful to sustain the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts to
enjoin the enforcement of unconstitutional state legislation only after
a finding of unconstitutionality,[] but ex [pg ]parte young abandoned
this rule by holding that the enforcement of a state statute by the
attorney general of the state through proceedings in state courts could
be enjoined pending the determination of its constitutionality.
ex parte young
although a suit to restrain the attorney general of a state from
proceeding in the courts of the state to enforce a state law not
declared unconstitutional would seem effectively to stay proceedings in
a state court, justice peckham drew a distinction between the power to
enjoin the attorney general and other law officers as individuals and a
suit against a state court on the ground that the former does not
include the "power to prevent any investigation or action by a grand
jury. the latter body is part of the machinery of a criminal court, and
an injunction against a state court would be a violation of the whole
scheme of our government."[] justice harlan, not convinced by this
distinction, characterized the suit as an attempt "to tie the hands of
the state so that it could not in any manner or by any mode of
proceeding in its own courts, test the validity of the statutes and
orders in question."[]
although the rigor of the rule of ex parte young has been mitigated by
subsequent decisions[] and the mode of its exercise somewhat narrowed
by statute, it has not been overruled and remains a source of friction
in federal-state relations. simultaneously, however, § (see note 
above) has been construed strictly as designed "to secure the public
interest in 'a limited class of cases of special importance,'"[] and
not "a measure of broad social policy to be construed with great
liberality, but as an enactment technical in the strict sense of the
term and to be applied as such."[]
[pg ]
the most spectacular type of state court interference with federal
courts has been their use of the writ of habeas corpus to release
persons in federal custody. between  and , judges in nine state
courts asserted the right to release persons in federal custody,[]
and the issue was not finally settled until , when ableman v.
booth[] was decided. here a justice of the wisconsin supreme court
first released a prisoner held by a united states commissioner on
charges of violating the fugitive slave law. after the trial,
conviction, and sentence of the defendant, the state supreme court
issued a second writ of habeas corpus and after hearing ordered the
release of the prisoner. the national supreme court then issued a writ
of error to the state court which refused to make a return. in an
opinion based in part on national supremacy and in part on dual
sovereignty, chief justice taney, speaking for the court, laid down the
absolute rule that no state court has the power to release prisoners
held in custody under the authority of the united states.[]
notwithstanding the strong language of the court in ableman v. booth,
the wisconsin courts thirteen years later again asserted the power to
release persons in federal custody by directing the release of an
enlisted soldier in the custody of a recruiting officer of the united
states army. once again the court held that a state court has no
authority to issue a writ of habeas corpus for the release of persons
held under the authority or claim and color of authority of the united
states. justice field for the court went on to lay down the
generalization that neither government "can intrude with its judicial
process into the domain of the other, except so far as such intrusion
may be necessary on the part of the national government to preserve its
rightful supremacy in cases of conflict of authority."[]
[pg ]
another potential source of friction between state and federal courts is
the use of the writ of habeas corpus or of removal proceedings in the
federal courts to release persons from state custody. as has already
been indicated the rule of national supremacy deprives the courts of the
states of any power to release persons held in federal custody. recourse
to habeas corpus or removal proceedings in the federal courts to
release persons in the custody of state courts is governed by statute
and comity. the judiciary act of [] conferred jurisdiction upon
the federal courts to issue writs of habeas corpus to release persons
in state custody only for the purpose of having them appear as witnesses
in federal proceedings. the same act also provided for the removal
before trial into a federal court of civil cases arising under the laws
of the united states. both branches of this jurisdiction were broadened
as a result of the nullification movement in south carolina so as to
make either removal or habeas corpus available to persons held in
state custody for any act done or omitted in pursuance of the laws of
the united states.[] these recourses were in  made available to
aliens restrained by state authority in violation of their international
rights,[] and in  to all persons restrained in violation of the
constitution, laws, or treaties of the united states.[] in substance
all these acts still remain on the statute book.[]
of these provisions the most important are those governing the release
of persons held under state authority for an act done or omitted under
federal authority and persons held in violation of the constitution,
laws, or treaties of the united states. in the leading case of tennessee
v. davis,[] decided in , the question was faced of their
constitutionality. davis was a federal revenue officer who, in the
discharge of his duties, killed a man, and was arraigned by tennessee
for murder. he thereupon applied for removal of his case to a federal
court under the act of . to tennessee's evocation of the doctrine of
state sovereignty, the court rejoined with a ringing assertion of the
principle of national supremacy. subsequently, the same provisions have
been construed to procure the release of a deputy united states marshal
from state custody for killing a man while protecting a justice of the
supreme court under a presidential order which was regarded as a "law"
of the united states;[] the release of an election official held
under state authority for perjury on the ground that jurisdiction to
punish a false witness belonged to the [pg ]federal courts in this
instance;[] and the release of a collector of internal revenue held
in kentucky for his refusal to file copies of his official papers with a
state court.[] similarly, the governor of a national home for
disabled soldiers was released from ohio custody for serving
oleomargarine in the home in violation of an ohio statute.[] a more
extreme exercise of habeas corpus jurisdiction is illustrated by
hunter v. wood[] where a ticket agent of a railroad held in state
custody for an overcharge on a ticket was released because prior to his
trial in the state court, a united states circuit court had enjoined the
enforcement of the statute. the element common to all of these cases is
the supremacy of the national government and the inability of the states
through judicial proceedings or otherwise to obstruct the enforcement of
federal authority. the doctrine of comity is inapplicable in this
category of cases.
on the other hand, in ex parte royall,[] decided in , the court
held that the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts in the above
category of cases involved no duty to release persons from state custody
but only a discretion to do so. such discretion, the court declared,
"should be exercised in the light of the relations existing, under our
system of government, between the judicial tribunals of the union and of
the states, and in recognition of the fact that the public good requires
that those relations be not disturbed by unnecessary conflict between
the courts equally bound to guard and protect rights secured by the
constitution."[] in pursuance of these principles the court has
subsequently formulated rules to the effect that mere error in the
prosecution and trial of a suit cannot confer jurisdiction upon a
federal court to review the proceedings upon a writ of habeas
corpus;[] that the writ of habeas corpus cannot be substituted for
the writ of error, however serious the errors committed by the state
court;[] that except in extreme and urgent cases the federal courts
will not discharge a prisoner in state custody prior to final
disposition of the case in the state courts, where the prisoner must
first exhaust all state remedies; and even after the state courts have
acted, the federal courts will usually leave the prisoner to the usual
and orderly procedure of appeal to the supreme court. furthermore, the
supreme court will, in the exercise of a sound discretion, issue a writ
of mandamus to compel a federal court to remand to a state court a
prosecution of a federal officer removed to it, when it appears that the
officer in question, in seeking removal, failed to make a candid,
specific, and [pg ]positive explanation of his relation to the transaction
giving rise to the crime for which he was indicted.[]
because of the care with which the discretion to issue writs of habeas
corpus and to grant removals has been exercised by the federal courts
to release persons from state custody there has been a minimum of
friction in this area of federal-state relations, in contrast to that
produced by their extensive use of injunctions to restrain the
enforcement of state statutes. in wade v. mayo,[] justice murphy
cited the statistics of the administrative office of the united states
courts which revealed that during the fiscal years of , , and
, there was an average of  habeas corpus petitions filed each
year in federal district courts by persons in state custody, and that of
these petitions, an average of only six per year resulted in a reversal
of the conviction and the release of the prisoner.
moreover, cold comity may become on occasion warm cooperation between
the two systems of courts. in ponzi v. fessenden,[] the matter at
issue was the authority of the attorney general of the united states to
consent to the transfer on a writ of habeas corpus of a federal
prisoner to a state court to be there put on trial upon indictments
there pending against him. the court, speaking by chief justice taft,
while conceding that there was no express statutory authority [pg ]for such
action, sustained it. said the chief justice: "we live in the
jurisdiction of two sovereignties, each having its own system of courts
to declare and enforce its laws in common territory. it would be
impossible for such courts to fulfil their respective functions without
embarrassing conflict unless rules were adopted by them to avoid it. the
people for whose benefit these two systems are maintained are deeply
interested that each system shall be effective and unhindered in its
vindication of its laws. the situation requires, therefore, not only
definite rules fixing the powers of the courts in cases of jurisdiction
over the same persons and things in actual litigation, but also a spirit
of reciprocal comity and mutual assistance to promote due and orderly
procedure."[]
the final phase of the relation of state courts has to do with their
administration of federal law. although it is the general rule that
congress cannot vest the judicial power of the united states in courts
other than those created in pursuance of article iii,[] it has from
the beginning of the national government left to the state courts wide
areas of jurisdiction which it might have vested exclusively in the
federal courts, section  of the judiciary act of  offering the
supreme illustration. but going far beyond that, in the latter years of
the eighteenth century and the early part of the nineteenth, congress
provided that suits by the national government itself for fines,
forfeitures, and penalties imposed by the revenue laws might be brought
in state courts of competent jurisdiction as well as in the federal
courts.[] the fugitive slave act of ,[] the naturalization act
of ,[] and the alien enemies act of ,[] all imposed
positive duties on state courts to enforce federal law. in  the
state courts were vested with jurisdiction to try criminal offenses
against federal laws.[] extensive reliance was placed on state courts
for the enforcement of the embargo acts;[] and the act of march ,
,[] vested in state or county courts within or directly adjoining
a federal tax-collection district cognizant "of all complaints, suits
and prosecutions for taxes, duties, fines, penalties, and forfeitures."
[pg ]
retreat from this practice
the indifference, however, of the state courts in new england to the
embargo acts, the later hostility of courts in the northern states to
the fugitive slave act, and the refusal of courts in other states to
administer federal law on the general principle that the courts of no
nation are bound to enforce the penal laws of another,[] all combined
to produce strong sentiments against the use of state courts to
administer federal law. these sentiments came in time to be incorporated
in dissenting opinions,[] and in  in prigg v. pennsylvania[]
the court definitely ruled that the states could not be compelled to
enforce federal law. however, it was later held that this ruling did not
prevent congress from authorizing state courts to administer federal law
or the action taken by them, if they choose to do so, from being
valid.[]
resumption of the practice
near the end of the nineteenth century and afterwards congress resumed
its earlier practice of vesting concurrently the enforcement of
federally created rights in the state and federal courts. the
administration of indian lands and the determination of rights to
inherit allotted lands[] marked the beginning of the restoration of
the use of state courts to apply federal law, and the federal employers'
liability act of [] carried the practice further, not only by
vesting concurrent jurisdiction in suits arising under the act, in state
courts but also in prohibiting the removal of cases begun in state
courts to the federal courts. soon afterwards the connecticut courts in
a compensation case applied the state's common law rules of liability
contrary to the federal act and held that congress could not require a
state court to grant a remedy which local law did not permit. the
connecticut courts further held that enforcement of the federal act was
contrary to the public policy of the state.[] this decision was
overruled in the second employers' liability cases,[] where it was
held on the basis of national supremacy that rights arising under [pg ]the
act can be enforced "as of right, in the courts of the states when their
jurisdiction, as prescribed by local laws, is adequate to the occasion."
subsequently, the supreme court has held that the rights created under
this statute cannot be defeated by forms of local practice and that it
is the duty of the supreme court to construe allegations in a complaint
asserting a right under the liability act in order to determine whether
a state court has denied a right of trial guaranteed by congress.[]
the issue of state obligation to administer federal law was presented
most recently by testa v. katt.[] this case arose out of the
emergency price control act of ,[] which provided that persons
who had been overcharged in violation of the act or, in the alternative,
the price administrator, could sue for treble damages in any court of
competent jurisdiction. on the ground that one sovereign cannot enforce
the penal laws of another, the rhode island supreme court ruled that the
state courts had no jurisdiction of such suits. assuming for the
purposes of the case that the treble damage provision, was "penal" in
nature, justice black for a unanimous court proceeded to lay to rest the
principle that a state court is not bound to enforce federal criminal
law as an assumption flying "in the face of the fact that the states of
the union constitute a nation" and one which disregarded the supremacy
clause. justice black also pointed to early acts of congress and early
decisions of the supreme court as establishing the rule that "state
courts do not bear the same relation to the united states as they do to
foreign countries."[] the prigg case, though not overruled expressly,
was ignored save for its citation in a footnote.[]
[pg ]
in a series of cases the court has been called upon to adjudicate
between the power of a state to exclude foreign corporations from doing
a purely domestic business within its borders and the right of such
foreign corporations to resort to the federal courts. after deciding
first one way and then the other, on the basis of some highly refined
distinctions,[] it finally, in , came out unqualifiedly for the
latter right. this was in terral v. burke construction co.,[] in
which an arkansas statute requiring the cancellation of the license of a
foreign corporation to do business in the state, upon notice that such
corporation had removed a case to a federal court, was pronounced void.
at the same time all contrary decisions were explicitly overruled.
clause . the trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall
be by jury; and such trial shall be held in the state where the said
crimes shall have been committed; but when not committed within any
state, the trial shall be at such place or places as the congress may by
law have directed. see amendment vi, pp. -.
section . treason against the united states, shall consist
only in levying war against them, or in adhering to their enemies,
giving them aid and comfort. no person shall be convicted of treason
unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or on
confession in open court.
treason
the provisions and phraseology of this section are derived from the
english statute of treasons enacted in , in the reign of edward
iii,[] as an expression of grievance against the application of the
doctrine of constructive treasons by the common law courts. the
constitutional definition is, of course, much more restrictive than [pg ]the
enumeration of treasons in the english statute, but like that statute,
it is emphatically a limitation on the power of government to define
treason and to prove its existence. the rigid and exclusive definition
of treason takes from congress all power to define treason and
prescribes limitations on the power to prescribe punishment thereupon.
early judicial interpretation of the meaning of treason in terms of
levying war was conditioned by the partisan struggles of the early
nineteenth century, in which were involved the treason trials of aaron
burr and his associates. in ex parte bollman,[] which involved two of
burr's confederates, chief justice marshall, speaking for himself and
three other justices, confined the meaning of levying of war to the
actual waging of war. "however flagitious may be the crime of conspiring
to subvert by force the government of our country, such conspiracy is
not treason. to conspire to levy war and actually to levy war, are
distinct offences. the first must be brought into open action, by the
assemblage of men for a purpose treasonable in itself, or the fact of
levying war cannot have been committed. so far has this principle been
carried, that *** it has been determined that the actual enlistment of
men, to serve against the government, does not amount to the levying of
war."[] chief justice marshall was careful, however, to state that
the court did not mean that no person could be guilty of this crime who
had not appeared in arms against the country. "on the contrary, if it be
actually levied, that is, if a body of men be actually assembled, for
the purpose of effecting by force a treasonable purpose, all those who
perform any part, however minute, or however remote from the scene of
action, and who are actually leagued in the general conspiracy, are to
be considered as traitors. but there must be an actual assembling of
men, for the treasonable purpose, to constitute a levying of war."[]
on the basis of these considerations and due to the fact that no part of
the crime charged had been committed in the district of columbia, the
court held that bollman and swartwout could not be tried in the district
and ordered their discharge. he continued by saying that "the crime of
treason should not be extended by construction to doubtful cases" and
concluded that no conspiracy for overturning the government and "no
enlisting of men to effect it, would be an actual levying of war."[]
[pg ]
the burr trial
not long afterward the chief justice went to richmond to preside over
the trial of burr himself. his ruling[] denying a motion to introduce
certain collateral evidence bearing on burr's activities is significant
both for rendering the latter's acquittal inevitable and for the
qualifications and exceptions made to the bollman decision. in brief
this ruling held that burr, who had not been present at the assemblage
on blennerhassett's island, could be convicted of advising or procuring
a levying of war, only upon the testimony of two witnesses to his having
procured the assemblage. this operation having been covert, such
testimony was naturally unobtainable. the net effect of marshall's
pronouncements was to make it extremely difficult to convict one of
levying war against the united states short of the conduct of or
personal participation in actual hostilities.[]
since the bollman case only three treason cases have ever reached the
supreme court, all of them outgrowths of world war ii and all charging
adherence to enemies of the united states and giving them aid and
comfort. in the first of these, cramer v. united states,[] the
issue was whether the "overt act" had to be "openly manifest treason" or
if it was enough if, when supported by other proper evidence, it showed
the required treasonable intention.[] the court in a five-to-four
[pg ]opinion by justice jackson in effect took the former view holding that
"the two-witness principle" interdicted "imputation of incriminating
acts to the accused by circumstantial evidence or by the testimony of a
single witness,"[] even though the single witness in question was the
accused himself. "every act, movement, deed, and word of the defendant
charged to constitute treason must be supported by the testimony of two
witnesses,"[] justice jackson asserted. justice douglas in a dissent,
in which chief justice stone and justices black and reed concurred,
contended that cramer's treasonable intention was sufficiently shown by
overt acts as attested to by two witnesses each, plus statements made by
cramer on the witness stand.
the supreme court sustained a conviction of treason, for the first time
in its history in  in haupt v. united states.[] here it was
held that although the overt acts relied upon to support the charge of
treason—defendant's harboring and sheltering in his home his son who
was an enemy spy and saboteur, assisting him in purchasing an
automobile, and in obtaining employment in a defense plant—were all
acts which a father would naturally perform for a son, this fact did not
necessarily relieve them of the treasonable purpose of giving aid and
comfort to the enemy. speaking for the court, justice jackson said: "no
matter whether young haupt's mission was benign or traitorous, known or
unknown to the defendant, these acts were aid and comfort to him. in the
light of his mission and his instructions, they were more than casually
useful; they were aid in steps essential to his design for treason. if
proof be added that the defendant knew of his son's instructions,
preparation and plans, the purpose to aid and comfort the enemy becomes
clear."[]
the court held that conversations and occurrences long prior to the
indictment were admissible evidence on the question of defendant's
intent. and more important, it held that the constitutional requirement
of two witnesses to the same overt act or confession in open court [pg ]does
not operate to exclude confessions or admissions made out of court,
where a legal basis for the conviction has been laid by the testimony of
two witnesses of which such confessions or admissions are merely
corroborative. this relaxation of restrictions surrounding the
definition of treason evoked obvious satisfaction from justice douglas
who saw in the haupt decision a vindication of his position in the
cramer case. his concurring opinion contains what may be called a
restatement of the law of treason and merits quotation at length;
"as the cramer case makes plain, the overt act and the intent with
which it is done are separate and distinct elements of the crime. intent
need not be proved by two witnesses but may be inferred from all the
circumstances surrounding the overt act. but if two witnesses are not
required to prove treasonable intent, two witnesses need not be required
to show the treasonable character of the overt act. for proof of
treasonable intent in the doing of the overt act necessarily involves
proof that the accused committed the overt act with the knowledge or
understanding of its treasonable character.
"the requirement of an overt act is to make certain a treasonable
project has moved from the realm of thought into the realm of action.
that requirement is undeniably met in the present case, as it was in the
case of cramer.
"the cramer case departed from those rules when it held that 'the
two-witness principle is to interdict imputation of incriminating acts
to the accused by circumstantial evidence or by the testimony of a
single witness.'  u.s. p. . the present decision is truer to the
constitutional definition of treason when it forsakes that test and
holds that an act, quite innocent on its face, does not need two
witnesses to be transformed into an incriminating one."[]
[pg ]
the third case referred to above is kawakita v. united states,[]
which was decided on june , . the facts are sufficiently stated in
the following headnote: "at petitioner's trial for treason, it appeared
that originally he was a native-born citizen of the united [pg ]states and
also a national of japan by reason of japanese parentage and law. while
a minor, he took the oath of allegiance to the united states; went to
japan for a visit on an american passport; and was prevented by the
outbreak of war from returning to this country. during the war, he
reached his majority in japan; changed his registration from american to
japanese; showed sympathy with japan and hostility to the united states;
served as a civilian employee of a private corporation producing war
materials for japan; and brutally abused american prisoners of war who
were forced to work there. after japan's surrender, he registered as an
american citizen; swore that he was an american citizen and had not done
various acts amounting to expatriation; and returned to this country on
an american passport." the question whether, on this record kawakita had
intended to renounce american citizenship, said the court, in sustaining
conviction, was peculiarly one for the jury and their verdict that he
had not so intended was based on sufficient evidence. an american
citizen, it continued, owes allegiance to the united states wherever he
may reside, and dual nationality does not alter the situation.[]
the vacillation of chief justice marshall between the bollman[] and
burr[] cases and the vacillation of the court in the cramer[] and
haupt[] cases leaves the law of treason in a somewhat doubtful
condition. the difficulties created by the burr case have been obviated
to a considerable extent through the punishment of acts ordinarily
treasonable in nature under a different label within a formula provided
by chief justice marshall himself in the bollman case. the passage
reads: "crimes so atrocious as those which have for their object the
subversion by violence of those laws and those institutions which have
been ordained in order to secure the peace and happiness of society, are
not to escape punishment, because they have not ripened into treason.
the wisdom of the legislature is competent to provide for the case; and
the framers of our constitution *** must have conceived it more safe
that punishment in such cases should be ordained by general laws, formed
upon deliberation, under the influence of no resentments, and without
knowing on whom they were to operate, than that it should be inflicted
under the influence of those passions which the occasion seldom fails to
excite, and which a flexible definition of the crime, or a construction
which would render it flexible, might bring into operation."[]
[pg ]
clause . the congress shall have power to declare the punishment of
treason, but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or
forfeiture except during the life of the person attainted.
the confiscation act of [] "to suppress insurrection; to punish
treason and rebellion; to seize and confiscate the property of rebels
raised issues under article iii, section , clause ." because of the
constitutional doubts of the president the act was accompanied by an
explanatory joint resolution which stipulated that only a life estate
terminating with the death of the offender could be sold and that at his
death his children could take the fee simple by descent as his heirs
without deriving any title from the united states. in applying this act,
passed in pursuance of the war power and not the power to punish
treason,[] the court in one case[] quoted with approval the
english distinction between a disability absolute and perpetual and one
personal or temporary. corruption of blood as a result of attainder of
treason was cited as an example of the former and was defined as the
disability of any of the posterity of the attainted person "to claim any
inheritance in fee simple, either as heir to him, or to any ancestor
above him."[]
notes
[] miller, on the constitution,  (new york, ).
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. arredondo,  pet.  ().
[] general investment co. v. new york central r. co., 
[] for distinctions between judicial power and jurisdiction
see williams v. united states,  u.s. ,  (); and the
dissent of justice rutledge in yakus v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] michaelson v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] mcintire v. wood,  cr.  (); ex parte bollman, 
cr.  ().
[] wayman v. southard,  wheat.  ()
[] gumbel v. pitkin,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte peterson,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte garland,  wall. ,  ().
[] chisholm v. georgia,  dall.  (); kentucky v.
dennison,  how. ,  () contains a review of authorities on this
point.
[] mayor of nashville v. cooper,  wall. ,  ();
cary v. curtis,  how.  (); shelden v. sill,  how. 
(); kline v. burke construction co.,  u.s.  (). see
also the cases discussed under the heading of the power of congress to
regulate the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts, infra, p. .
[]  dall.  ().
[] his initial effort was in united states v. ferreira, 
how.  (). this case involved the validity of an act of congress
directing the judge of the territorial court of florida to examine and
adjudge claims of spanish subjects against the united states and to
report his decisions with evidence thereon to the secretary of the
treasury who in turn was to pay the award to the claimant if satisfied
that the decisions were just and within the terms of the treaty of
cession. after florida became a state and the territorial court a
district court of the united states, the supreme court refused to
entertain an appeal under the statute for want of jurisdiction to review
nonjudicial proceedings. the duties required by the act, it was said
"are entirely alien to the legitimate functions of a judge or court of
justice, and have no analogy to the general or special powers ordinarily
and legally conferred on judges or courts to secure the due
administration of the laws." ibid. .
[]  wall.  ().
[]  u.s.  appx. (). see also de groot v. united
states,  wall.  () and united states v. klein,  wall. 
(), which sustained supreme court revision after the jurisdiction of
the court of claims had been made final. the gordon decision had
indicated that the supreme court could not review the decision of any
legislative court.
[]  u.s. , . this last doctrine was repeated to the
extent that for many years an award of execution as distinguished from
finality of judgment came to be regarded as an essential attribute of
judicial power. see in re sanborn,  u.s. ,  ();
interstate commerce commission v. brimson,  u.s. ,  ();
la abra silver mining co. v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
frasch v. moore,  u.s.  (); muskrat v. united states, 
u.s. , , - (), and postum cereal co. v. california fig
nut co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). this case also clarified any doubts
concerning a federal declaratory judgment act which was passed in 
and sustained in aetna life insurance co. v. haworth,  u.s. 
[]  u.s.  (). the decision in the swope and wallace
cases removed all constitutional doubts which had previously shrouded a
proposed federal declaratory judgment act which was enacted in  (
stat. ) and sustained in aetna life ins. co. v. haworth,  u.s.
[] john charles fox, the king v. almon,  law quarterly
review , - ().
[] john charles fox, the summary power to punish contempt, 
law quarterly review, ,  ().
[]  stat. , .
[] act of march , ,  stat. , now  u.s.c.a. .
for a summary of the peck impeachment and the background of the act of
, see felix frankfurter and james landis, power of congress over
procedure in criminal contempts in inferior federal courts—a study in
separation of powers,  harvard law review, , - ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. , -.
[] gompers v. bucks stove & range co.,  u.s. , 
(). see also in re debs,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[]  u.s.  (). in his dissent in this case, justice
holmes stated that unless a judge has power to "lay hold of anyone who
ventures to publish anything that tends to make him unpopular or to
belittle him ***. a man cannot be summarily laid by the heels because
his words may make public feeling more unfavorable in case the judge
should be asked to act at some later date, any more than he can for
exciting feeling against a judge for what he already has done." ibid.
[]  u.s. ,  (). see pp. - (amendment
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] sacher v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] dennis v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. , , -. justice clark did not participate.
justices black, frankfurter, and douglas dissented. justice
frankfurter's opinion is accompanied by an elaborate review of exchanges
between the trial judge and defense counsel, excerpted from the record
of the case. on the constitutional issue he said: "summary punishment of
contempt is concededly an exception to the requirements of due process.
necessity dictates the departure. necessity must bound its limits. in
this case the course of events to the very end of the trial shows that
summary measures were not necessary to enable the trial to go on.
departure from established judicial practice, which makes it unfitting
for a judge who is personally involved to sit in his own case, was
therefore unwarranted. neither self-respect nor the good name of the law
required it. quite otherwise. despite the many incidents of contempt
that were charged, the trial went to completion, nine months after the
first incident, without a single occasion making it necessary to lay any
one of the lawyers by the heel in order to assure that the trial
proceed. the trial judge was able to keep order and to continue the
court's business by occasional brief recesses calculated to cool
passions and restore decorum, by periodic warnings to defense lawyers,
and by shutting off obstructive arguments whenever rulings were
concisely stated and firmly held to." ibid. . justice douglas
summarized the position of all three dissenters, as follows: "i agree
with mr. justice frankfurter that one who reads this record will have
difficulty in determining whether members of the bar conspired to drive
a judge from the bench or whether the judge used the authority of the
bench to whipsaw the lawyers, to taunt and tempt them, and to create for
himself the role of the persecuted. i have reluctantly concluded that
neither is blameless, that there is fault on each side, that we have
here the spectacle of the bench and the bar using the courtroom for an
unseemly demonstration of garrulous discussion and of ill will and hot
tempers. i therefore agree with mr. justice black and mr. justice
frankfurter that this is the classic case where the trial for contempt
should be held before another judge. i also agree with mr. justice black
that petitioners were entitled by the constitution to a trial by jury."
ibid. .
[] gompers v. bucks stove & range co.,  u.s. ,
- (); ex parte grossman,  u.s.  (). see also
bessette v. w.b. conkey co.,  u.s. , - ().
[] michaelson v. united states,  u.s. , - ().
[] penfield co. v. securities and exchange commission, 
u.s.  (). note the dissent of justice frankfurter. for
delegations of the subpoena power to administrative agencies and the use
of judicial process to enforce them see also mccrone v. united
states,  u.s.  (); endicott johnson corp. v. perkins, 
u.s.  (); oklahoma press pub. co. v. walling,  u.s. 
(). in the last mentioned case justice murphy dissented on the
ground that delegation of the subpoena power to nonjudicial officers is
unconstitutional as "a corrosion of liberty." in the endicott johnson
case he expressed dissatisfaction with the exercise of this power by
administrative agencies but confined his dissent to emphasizing greater
judicial scrutiny in enforcing administrative orders to appear and
produce testimony.
[]  stat. , .
[] ibid. -.
[]  cr.  (). cf. wiscart v. dauchy,  dall. 
[] mcintire v. wood,  cr.  (); and mcclung v.
silliman,  wheat.  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] ex parte bollman,  cr. , ,  ().
[] ex parte yerger,  wall.  ().
[] see also ex parte mccardle,  wall.  ().
[] in united states v. detroit timber & lumber co., 
u.s. ,  (), justice brewer, speaking for the court, approached
a theory of inherent equity jurisdiction when he declared: "the
principles of equity exist independently of and anterior to all
congressional legislation, and the statutes are either annunciations of
those principles or limitations upon their application in particular
cases." it should be emphasized, however, that the court made no
suggestion that it could apply pre-existing principles of equity without
jurisdiction over the subject matter. indeed, the inference is to the
contrary. in a dissenting opinion in which justices mckenna and van
devanter joined, in paine lumber co. v. neal,  u.s. , 
(), justice pitney contended that article iii, section , "had the
effect of adopting equitable remedies in all cases arising under the
constitution and laws of the united states where such remedies are
appropriate."
[] boyce's executors v. grundy,  pet.  ().
[]  stat. ;  u.s.c.a. .
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c.a.  (a).
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c.a. .
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c.a. .
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c.a. .
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c.a. .
[]  stat.  () (clayton act);  u.s.c.a. , and 
stat.  () (norris-laguardia act);  u.s.c.a. -.
[]  stat.  (), §;  u.s.c.a.  (app.).
[] freeman v. howe,  how.  (); gaines v.
fuentes,  u.s.  (); ex parte young,  u.s.  ().
[] langnes v. green,  u.s.  (); riehle v.
margolies,  u.s.  (), and essanay film mfg. co. v. kane, 
u.s.  (). see also hill v. martin,  u.s. ,  ();
kohn v. central distributing co.,  u.s. ,  (); and
oklahoma packing co. v. oklahoma gas and electric co.,  u.s. , 
[] lauf v. e.g. shinner & co.,  u.s.  (); new
negro alliance v. sanitary grocery co.,  u.s.  ().
[] in addition to the cases cited in note , see milk wagon
drivers' union v. lake valley farm products co.,  u.s. , -
[] ibid. , quoting cary v. curtis,  how. , 
[] washington-southern navigation co. v. baltimore co., 
[]  wheat.  ().
[] washington-southern navigation co. v. baltimore co., 
[] mcdonald v. pless,  u.s. ,  (); griffin
v. thompson,  how. ,  ().
[] gumbel v. pitkin,  u.s.  (); covell v.
heyman,  u.s.  (), and buck v. colbath,  wall.  ().
[] eberly v. moore,  how.  (); arkadelphia milling
co. v. st. louis s.w.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] gagnon v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wall. , - ().
[] ibid. .
[] ex parte secombe,  how. ,  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. -. for an extensive treatment of disbarment
and american and english precedents thereon, see ex parte wall, 
[] reorganization of the judiciary, hearings on s. ; th
cong., st sess., , pt. , p. . justices van devanter and
brandeis approved the letter. for earlier proposals to have the court
sit in divisions, see felix frankfurter and james m. landis, the
business of the supreme court, pp. -, (new york, ).
[]  stat. -, §-.
[] ibid. , -; §-.
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. . for a general account of the events leading
to the acts of  and , see felix frankfurter and james m.
landis, the business of the supreme court; a study in the federal
judicial system (new york, ), pp. -. this book also contains an
excellent account of the organization and reorganization of the
judiciary by statute from time to time. for another account of the acts
of  and  see charles warren, the supreme court in united
states history (boston, rev. ed., ), -.
[]  cr. ,  ().
[]  stat. , -.
[] prior to the act of  congress had voted to abolish
the commerce court, but president taft vetoed the bill which converted
the commerce court judges into ambulatory circuit judges. for a general
account of the abolition of the commerce court, see felix frankfurter
and james m. landis, the business of the supreme court (new york, ),
pp. -.
[] evans v. gore,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[]  stat.  (). for the legislative history of the
commerce court see felix frankfurter and james m. landis, the business
of the supreme court (new york, ), pp. -.
[]  stat. , -.
[] in lockerty v. phillips,  u.s.  (), the
limitations on the use of injunctions, except the prohibition against
interlocutory decrees, was unanimously sustained.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . closely analogous to the territorial courts
are extraterritorial and consular courts created in the exercise of the
foreign relations power. see in re ross,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] gordon v. united states,  u.s.  (); mcelrath
v. united states,  u.s.  (); williams v. united states,
[] united states v. coe,  u.s.  ().
[] wallace v. adams,  u.s.  ().
[] old colony trust co. v. commissioner of internal
revenue,  u.s.  (); ex parte bakelite corporation,  u.s.
[] the general tendency in the evolution of legislative
courts is to provide for tenure during good behavior. this is true of
the judges of the court of claims, the customs court, the court of
customs and patent appeals. the terms of the judges of the tax court are
limited to twelve years and the judges are subject to removal by the
president after notice and hearing. for the provisions of the statutes
governing these matters see  u.s.c. §§, , -a;  u.s.c.
§§b, d, f. the territorial judges in alaska ( u.s.c. §) have
four-year terms subject to removal by the president; in hawaii six years
unless removed by the president ( u.s.c. §), eight years in puerto
rico ( u.s.c. §); eight years in the canal zone subject to removal
by the president ( u.s.c. §); and four years in the virgin
islands unless sooner removed by the president ( u.s.c. §y).
[] ibid. 
[]  how. ,  (). see also keller v. potomac
electric power co.,  u.s.  (); federal radio commission v.
general electric co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] postum cereal co. v. california fig nut co.,  u.s.
 (); federal radio commission v. general electric co.,  u.s.
 (); pope v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] keller v. potomac electric co.,  u.s.  ().
[] federal radio commission v. general electric co., 
[]  u.s.  (). all of these rulings with respect to
the vesting of revisory powers in the courts of the district carried the
qualification that revisory actions and interlocutory opinions, as
nonjudicial functions, were not reviewable on appeal to the supreme
court of the united states. frasch v. moore,  u.s.  (); e.c.
atkins & co. v. moore,  u.s.  (); keller v. potomac
electric co.,  u.s.  (); federal radio commission v. general
electric co.,  u.s.  ().
[] o'donoghue v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. . chief justice hughes in a dissent joined by
justice van devanter and cardozo took the position that the plenary
power of congress over the district is complete in itself and its power
to create courts in the district is not derived from article iii.
consequently, they argued that the limitations of article iii do not
apply to the organization of such courts. the o'donoghue case is
discussed in the opinions of justices jackson and rutledge and in the
dissent of chief justice vinson in national mutual insurance co. v.
tidewater transfer co.,  u.s. , -, -, - ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] miller, constitution, , quoted in muskrat v. united
states,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[]  dall. , ,  ().
[] in re pacific railway commission,  f. ,  ().
justice field repeated the substance of this definition in smith v.
adams,  u.s. , - ().
[] ibid. -. judicial power is here defined by justice
day as "the right to determine actual controversies arising between
adverse litigants, duly instituted in courts of proper jurisdiction."
ibid. .
[] muskrat v. united states,  u.s.  (); chicago
& grand trunk r. co. v. wellman,  u.s.  (); lampasas v.
bell,  u.s.  (); braxton county court v. west virginia, 
u.s.  (); smith v. indiana,  u.s.  (); tregea v.
modesto irrigation district,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] muskrat v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] lampasas v. bell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] braxton county court v. west virginia,  u.s. 
[] ibid. .
[] smith v. indiana,  u.s. ,  ().
[] tregea v. modesto irrigation district,  u.s. 
[] coffman v. breeze corporations, inc.,  u.s. ,
- (), citing tyler v. the judges,  u.s.  ();
hendrick v. maryland,  u.s.  ().
[] fleming v. rhodes,  u.s. ,  (). see also
blackmer v. united states,  u.s. ,  (); virginian r. co.
v. system federation,  u.s.  (); carmichael v. southern
coal & coke co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s.  (). the first injunction suit by a
stockholder to restrain a corporation from paying the tax appears to be
dodge v. woolsey,  how.  () which involved the validity of an
ohio tax. the suit was entertained on the basis of english precedents. a
case similar to the pollock case is brushaber v. union pacific r. co.,
 u.s.  (). hawes v. oakland,  u.s.  () is cited in
the pollock case, although it in fact threw out a stockholder's suit.
[] cf. cheatham et al. v. united states,  u.s. 
(); and snyder v. marks,  u.s.  ().
[] smith v. kansas city title co.,  u.s. , , 
[] ashwander v. tennessee valley authority,  u.s. 
(). although the holdings of the plaintiffs amounted to only
one-three hundred and fortieth of the preferred stock, the court ruled
that the right to maintain the suit was not affected by the smallness of
the holdings.
[] robert l. stern, in the commerce clause and the national
economy,  harv. l. rev. , - (), gives the following
account of the litigation in the first bituminous coal case: on the same
day that the bituminous coal act became law, the directors of the carter
coal company met in new york. james carter presented a letter saying the
coal act was unconstitutional and that the company should not join the
code. his father agreed that the act was invalid, but thought the
company should not take the risk of paying the tax required of
nonmembers in the event the act should be sustained. the third director
agreed with the elder carter, and the board passed a resolution
rejecting james carter's proposals. this action was subsequently
approved by a majority of the voting stock held by james carter's father
and mother who outvoted him and his wife.
[] massachusetts v. mellon,  u.s. ,  (). see
also williams v. riley,  u.s.  ().
[] fairchild v. hughes,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte levitt,  u.s.  (). see, however,
massachusetts state grange v. benton,  u.s.  (), where the
supreme court, though affirming the dismissal of a suit to enjoin a
day-light-saving statute, nonetheless, sustained the jurisdiction of the
district court to entertain the suit.
[] alabama power co. v. ickes,  u.s. , -
[]  u.s.  (). see p.  (amendment i).
[]  wall. ,  (). see also state of mississippi
v. johnson,  wall.  ().
[]  wall. at .
[]  stat.  ().
[]  u.s. , -. see also new jersey v.
sargent,  u.s. , - (), where the court refused
jurisdiction of a suit to enjoin the federal water power act because of
its effect on the conservation of potable waters in new jersey. a
similar situation arose in arizona v. california,  u.s. , 
(), where the court declined to take jurisdiction of an injunction
suit to restrain the secretary of the interior and the five states of
the colorado river compact from constructing boulder dam.
[] georgia v. pennsylvania r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri v. holland,  u.s.  ().
[] georgia v. tennessee copper co.,  u.s.  ().
[] alabama state federation of labor v. mcadory,  u.s.
[] giles v. harris,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ashwander v. tennessee valley authority,  u.s. ,
[] ibid. -. justices black and douglas wrote separate
dissents, but each contended that the controversy was justiciable.
justice douglas could not agree that the men should violate the act and
lose their jobs in order to test their rights.
[] ex parte steele,  f. ,  ().
[] pennsylvania v. wheeling & belmont bridge co.,  how.
 (); united states v. chambers,  u.s.  (); mills v.
green,  u.s.  (); united states v. evans,  u.s. 
[] mills v. green,  u.s.  (). this case came to
the supreme court on appeal from a decree of the circuit court of
appeals dissolving an injunction restraining certain registration
officials from excluding the appellant from the voting list. however,
the election in which appellant desired to vote was held prior to the
appeal, and the case thereby became moot. see also st. pierre v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] keim v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
georgia v. stanton,  wall. ,  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid., and kendall v. united states ex rel. stokes, 
pet. ,  (); see also marbury v. madison,  cr. 
[] mississippi v. johnson,  wall.  ().
[] georgia v. stanton,  wall.  ().
[] ibid.
[]  wall.  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[]  cr. ,  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] this classification follows in the main that of melville
fuller weston, political questions,  harv. l. rev.  ().
[] field v. clark,  u.s.  ().
[] coleman v. miller,  u.s.  ().
[] foster v. neilson,  pet.  (). see p. ,
supra.
[] commercial trust co. of new jersey v. miller,  u.s.
[] united states v. anderson,  wall.  ().
[] luther v. borden,  how.  (); pacific states
telephone & telegraph co. v. oregon,  u.s.  ().
[] luther v. borden,  how.  ().
[] mcpherson v. blacker,  u.s.  (), where the
court refused to pass upon the act of the michigan legislature in 
providing for the election of presidential electors by congressional
districts.
[] south v. peters,  u.s.  ().
[] colegrove v. green,  u.s.  ().
[] massachusetts v. mellon,  u.s.  (); georgia
v. stanton,  wall. u.s.  (); cherokee nation v. georgia, 
pet.  ().
[] coleman v. miller,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. -.
[]  u.s.  (). this case involved an unsuccessful
attempt to enjoin an election of representatives in congress in
mississippi because the districts formed by the legislature for that
purpose were not a contiguous and compact territory and of equal
population and that the redistricting violated article i, § and the
fourteenth amendment. the court held that the provisions of the
reapportionment act of  did not reenact the requirements of the act
of  and that it was therefore unnecessary to determine whether the
questions raised were justiciable.
[]  u.s.  (). here the court held that the act of
the minnesota legislature redistricting the state required the
governor's signature, and that representatives should be chosen at large
until a redistricting was passed.
[] ibid. ff.
[] charles warren, the supreme court in united states
history, i, (boston, ), -. for the full correspondence see 
correspondence and public papers of john jay (-), (edited by
henry phelps johnston), . according to e.f. albertsworth, advisory
functions in federal supreme court,  georgetown l.j., , -
(may ), the court rendered an advisory opinion to president monroe
in response to a request for legal advice on the power of the government
to appropriate federal funds for public improvements by responding that
congress might do so under the war and postal powers. the inhibitions of
the court against advisory opinions do not prevent the individual
justices from giving advice or aiding the political departments in their
private capacities. ever since chief justice jay went on a mission to
england to negotiate a treaty the members of the court have performed
various nonjudicial functions. john marshall served simultaneously as
secretary of state and chief justice, and later justice robert jackson
served as war crimes prosecutor.
[] for example, muskrat v. united states,  u.s. ,
 (); chicago & southern airlines v. waterman steamship corp.,
 u.s. ,  (); united public workers of america v.
mitchell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] chicago & southern airlines v. waterman steamship
corp.,  u.s. , - (), citing hayburn's case,  dall. 
(); united states v. ferreira,  how.  (); gordon v.
united states,  u.s.  (); in re sanborn,  u.s.  ();
interstate commerce commission v. brimson,  u.s.  (); la
abra silver mining co. v. united states,  u.s.  (); muskrat
v. united states,  u.s.  (); united states v. jefferson
electric co.,  u.s.  ().
[] muskrat v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. ferreira,  how.  ().
[] united public workers of america v. mitchell,  u.s.
,  (). here, justice reed, for the court, after asserting that
constitutional courts do not render advisory opinions, declared that
"'concrete legal issues, presented in actual cases, not abstractions,'
are requisite" for the adjudication of constitutional issues, citing
electric bond and share co. v. securities & exchange commission, 
u.s. ,  (); united states v. appalachian electric power co.,
 u.s. ,  (); alabama state federation of labor v.
mcadory,  u.s. ,  (); and coffman v. breeze corporations,
[]  how.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). in willing v. chicago auditorium
association,  u.s.  () certain lessees desired to ascertain
their rights under a lease to demolish a building after the lessors had
failed to admit such rights on the allegation that claims, fears, and
uncertainties respecting the rights of the parties greatly impaired the
value of the leasehold. because there was no showing that the lessors
had hampered the full use of the premises or had committed or threatened
a hostile act, the supreme court sustained the decree of the lower court
dismissing the bill on the ground that the plaintiff was seeking a mere
declaratory judgment. the court admitted that the proceeding was not
moot, that there were adverse parties with substantial interests, and
that a final judgment could have been rendered, but held, nonetheless,
that the proceeding was not a case or controversy merely because
plaintiffs were thwarted by its own doubts, or by the fears of others.
ibid. -.
[]  u.s.c.a. §§, ;  stat. .
[]  u.s. , - (). the court distinguished
between a justiciable controversy and a dispute of an abstract
character, emphasized that the controversy must be definite and
concrete, touching the legal relations of parties having adverse legal
interests, and reiterated the necessity of "a real and substantial
controversy admitting of specific relief through a decree of a
conclusive character, as distinguished from an opinion advising what the
law would be upon a hypothetical state of facts."
[] ashwander v. tennessee valley authority,  u.s. ,
[] alabama state federation of labor v. mcadory,  u.s.
,  (), citing nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. wallace, 
u.s.  (); aetna life insurance co. v. haworth,  u.s. 
(); maryland casualty co. v. pacific co.,  u.s. , 
(); great lakes co. v. huffman,  u.s. , ,  (); and
coffman v. breeze corporation,  u.s.  (). here, as in other
cases, the court refused to entertain hypothetical, or contingent
questions, and the decision of constitutional issues prematurely. for
this same rule see also, altvater v. freeman,  u.s. , 
[] maryland casualty co. v. pacific coal & oil co., 
[] brillhart v. excess insurance co.,  u.s.  ().
this was a diversity of citizenship case which presented only local
questions.
[] cohens v. virginia,  wheat. ,  ().
[] stat. , -.
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -. in martin v. hunter's lessee,  wheat.
 (), justice story had traversed some of these same grounds. he,
too, began with the general assumptions that the constitution was
established by the people of the united states and not by the states in
their sovereign capacities, that the constitution is to be construed
liberally, and that the national government is supreme in relation to
its objects; and had concluded that the supreme court had authority to
review state court decisions under the express provisions of articles
iii and vi, and also from the necessity that final decision must rest
somewhere and from the importance and necessity of uniformity of
decisions interpreting the constitution. many years later in ableman
v. booth,  how. , - (), where the wisconsin supreme
court, like the virginia courts earlier, had declared an act of congress
invalid and disregarded a writ of error from the supreme court, chief
justice taney on grounds both of dual sovereignty and national supremacy
was even more emphatic in his rebuke of state pretensions. his emphasis
on the indispensability of the federal judicial power to maintain
national supremacy, to protect the states from national encroachments,
and to make the constitution and laws of the united states uniform all
combine to enhance the federal judicial power to a degree beyond that
envisaged even by marshall and story. as late as  the questions
presented in the foregoing cases were before the court in williams v.
bruffy,  u.s.  (), which again involved the refusal of a
virginia court to enforce a mandate of the supreme court. by the act of
december , ,  stat. , the th section of the judiciary act
of  which was carried over with modifications into the revised
statutes, §;  u.s.c. § was amended so as to provide for review
of state court decisions on certiorari whether the federal claim is
sustained or denied. these provisions are now contained in  u.s.c.a.
the first case involving invalid state legislation arose under a treaty
of the united states. ware v. hylton,  dall.  (). in calder
v. bull,  dall.  (), the court sustained a state statute as
not being an ex post facto law. the first case in which a state
statute was held invalid as a violation of the constitution was fletcher
v. peck,  cr.  (), which came to the supreme court by appeal
from a united states circuit court and not by a writ of error under
section . famous cases coming to the court under section  were
sturges v. crowninshield,  wheat. , mcculloch v. maryland, 
wheat. , and dartmouth college v. woodward,  wheat. . all three
were decided in  and the state legislation involved in each was held
void.
[] that the great majority of the most influential members
of the convention of  thought the constitution secured to courts in
the united states the right to pass on the validity of acts of congress
under it cannot be reasonably doubted. confining ourselves simply to the
available evidence that is strictly contemporaneous with the framing and
ratifying of the constitution, we find the following members of the
convention that framed the constitution definitely asserting that this
would be the case: gerry and king of massachusetts, wilson and
gouverneur morris of pennsylvania, martin of maryland, randolph,
madison, and mason of virginia, dickinson of delaware, yates and
hamilton of new york, rutledge and charles pinckney of south carolina,
davie and williamson of north carolina, sherman and ellsworth of
connecticut. see max farrand, records of the federal convention (yale
univ. press, ); i,  (gerry),  (king); ii,  (wilson), 
(martin),  (mason),  (dickinson and morris),  (rutledge), 
(pinckney),  (williamson),  (sherman),  (madison); iii, 
(martin, in "genuine information"). the federalist: nos.  and 
(madison), nos.  and  (hamilton). elliot's debates (ed. of ),
ii, - (ellsworth),  and  (wilson), - (hamilton);
iii, , ,  (randolph),  (mason), - (madison); iv, 
(davie). p.l. ford, pamphlets on the constitution,  (dickinson, in
"letters of fabius"). ford, essays on the constitution,  (robert
yates, writing as "brutus"). true these are only seventeen names out of
a possible fifty-five, but they designate fully three-fourths of the
leaders of the convention, four of the five members of the committee of
detail which drafted the constitution (gorham, rutledge, randolph,
ellsworth, and wilson) and four of the five members of the committee of
style which gave the constitution final form (johnson, hamilton,
gouverneur morris, madison, and king). against them are to be pitted, in
reference to the question under discussion, only mercer of maryland,
bedford of delaware, and spaight of north carolina, the record in each
of whose cases is of doubtful implication.
it should be noted, however, that there was later some backsliding.
madison's record is characteristically erratic. his statement in the
federalist no.  written probably early in , is very positive: the
tribunal which is to ultimately decide, in controversies relating to the
boundary between the two jurisdictions, is to be established under the
general government. yet a few months later (probably october, ) he
seemed to repudiate judicial review altogether, writing: "in the state
constitutions and indeed in the federal one also, no provision is made
for the case of a disagreement in expounding them; and as the courts are
generally the last in making the decision, it results to them by
refusing or not refusing to execute a law, to stamp it with its final
character. this makes the judiciary department paramount in fact to the
legislature, which was never intended and can never be proper." 
writings (hunt ed.), . yet in june, , we find him arguing as
follows in support of the proposals to amend the constitution which led
to the bill of rights: "if they are incorporated into the constitution,
independent tribunals of justice will consider themselves in a peculiar
manner the guardians of those rights; they will be an impenetrable
bulwark against every assumption of power in the legislature or
executive; they will be naturally led to resist every encroachment upon
rights expressly stipulated for in the constitution by the declaration
of rights." ibid. . nine years later as author of the virginia
resolutions of , he committed himself to the proposition that the
final power in construing the constitution rested with the respective
state legislatures, a position from the logical consequences of which he
spent no little effort to disengage himself in the years of his
retirement. another recidivist was charles pinckney, who in 
denounced the idea of judicial review as follows: "on no subject am i
more convinced, than that it is an unsafe and dangerous doctrine in a
republic, ever to suppose that a judge ought to possess the right of
questioning or deciding upon the constitutionality of treaties, laws, or
any act of the legislature. it is placing the opinion of an individual,
or of two or three, above that of both branches of congress, a doctrine
which is not warranted by the constitution, and will not, i hope, long
have many advocates in this country." wharton, state trials, . the
great debate in congress in the first session of the th congress over
the repeal of the judiciary act of  speedily developed into a debate
over whether judicial review of acts of congress was contemplated by the
constitution. in the senate breckenridge of kentucky, author of the
kentucky resolutions of , contended for the equal right of the three
departments to construe the constitution for themselves within their
respective spheres, and from it deduced the exclusive right of the
legislature to interpret the constitution in what regards the lawmaking
power and the obligation of the judges to execute what laws they make.
but the feeble disguise which this doctrine affords legislative
sovereignty made it little attractive even to republicans, who for the
most part either plainly indicated their adherence to the juristic view
of the constitution, or following a hint by giles of virginia, kept
silent on the subject. the federalists on the other hand were unanimous
on the main question, though of divergent opinions as to the grounds on
which judicial review was to be legally based, some grounding it on the
"arising" and "pursuant" clauses, some on the precedents of the pension
and carriage cases, some on the nature of the constitution and of the
judicial office, some on the contemporary use of terms and the
undisputed practice under the constitution of all constitutional
authorities. moreover, said the federalist orators, judicial review was
expedient, since the judiciary had control of neither the purse nor the
sword; it was the substitute offered by political wisdom for the
destructive right of revolution; to have established this principle of
constitutional security, a novelty in the history of nations, was the
peculiar glory of the american people; the contrary doctrine was
monstrous and unheard of. the year following marshall concluded the
debate, and rendered decision, in marbury v. madison. see edward s.
corwin, the doctrine of judicial review (princeton university press.
), -; and court over constitution (), chap. . "the glory
and ornament of our system which distinguishes it from every other
government on the face of the earth is that there is a great and mighty
power hovering over the constitution of the land to which has been
delegated the awful responsibility of restraining all the coordinate
departments of government within the walls of the governmental fabric
which our fathers built for our protection and immunity."—chief justice
edward douglass white when senator from louisiana. cong. record, d
cong., d sess., p.  (). "i do not think the united states would
come to an end if we lost our power to declare an act of congress void.
i do think the union would be imperiled if we could not make that
declaration as to the laws of the several states." oliver wendell
holmes, collected legal papers (new york, ), -.
[] the federalist no. .
[]  dall. ,  ().
[]  dall.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  dall.  ().
[]  cr.  ().
[]  stat. , .
[] cr. , -.
[] ibid. . the opinion in marbury v. madison is subject
to two valid criticisms. in the first place the construction of the th
section of the judiciary act, if not erroneous, was unnecessary since
the section could have been interpreted, as it afterward was, merely to
give the court the power to issue mandamus and other writs when it had
jurisdiction but not for the purpose of acquiring jurisdiction. the
exclusive interpretation of the court's original jurisdiction, sometimes
made a subject of criticism, had been adopted by the court in wiscart
v. dauchy,  dall.  (), and while couched in terms which had
later to be qualified in cohens v. virginia,  wheat. , -
(), by marshall himself, has remained the doctrine of the court.
secondly, there was good ground for jefferson's criticism, which did not
touch the constitutional features of the decision, but did inveigh
against the temerity of the court in passing on the merits of a case of
which, by its own admission, it had no jurisdiction.
[] in this connection justice patterson's jury charge in van
horne's lessee v. dorrance,  dall. ,  (), is of
significance for its discussion of the relation of the constitution, the
legislature and the courts. a constitution, he said, "is the form of
government, delineated by the mighty hand of the people, in which
certain first principles of fundamental laws are established. the
constitution is certain and fixed; it contains the permanent will of the
people, and is the supreme law of the land; it is paramount to the power
of the legislature, and can be revoked or altered only by the authority
that made it." legislatures are the creatures of the constitution to
which they owe their existence and powers, and in case of conflict
between a legislative act and the constitution it is the duty of the
courts to hold it void. in accordance with these doctrines fortified by
natural law concepts, the circuit court invalidated a pennsylvania
statute as being in conflict with the federal and state constitutions as
a violation of the inalienable rights of property. in  the federal
circuit court in north carolina, over which chief justice marshall
presided, invalidated an act of north carolina as a violation of the
contract clause and the separation of powers in ogden v. witherspoon,
 fed. cas. no. , (). the reliance on general principles and
natural rights continued in fletcher v. peck,  cr. ,  ()
where the supreme court invalidated an act of the georgia legislature
revoking an earlier land grant as a violation either of the "general
principles which are common to our free institutions," or of the
contract clause.
[] this phase of judicial review is described by justice
sutherland as follows: "from the authority to ascertain and determine
the law in a given case, there necessarily results, in case of conflict,
the duty to declare and enforce the rule of the supreme law and reject
that of an inferior act of legislation which, transcending the
constitution, is of no effect and binding on no one. this is not the
exercise of a substantive power to review and nullify acts of congress,
for no such substantive power exists. it is simply a necessary
concomitant of the power to hear and dispose of a case or controversy
properly before the court, to the determination of which must be brought
the test and measure of the law." adkins v. children's hospital, 
u.s. ,  (). in united states v. butler,  u.s. , 
(), justice roberts for the court reduced judicial review to very
simple terms when he declared that when an act is challenged as being
unconstitutional, "the judicial branch of the government has only one
duty,—to lay the article of the constitution which is invoked beside
the statute which is challenged and to decide whether the latter squares
with the former."
[] note, for example, the following statement of chief
justice marshall: "judicial power, as contradistinguished from the power
of the laws, has no existence. courts are the mere instruments of the
law, and can will nothing." osborn v. bank of united states,  wheat.
,  (). note also the assertion of justice roberts: "all the
court does, can do, is to announce its considered judgment upon the
question. the only power it has, if such it may be called, is the power
of judgment. this court neither approves nor condemns any legislative
policy. its delicate and difficult office is to ascertain and declare
whether the legislation is in accordance with, or in contravention of,
the constitution; and, having done that, its duty ends." united states
v. butler,  u.s. , - ().
[] chicago & grand trunk r. co. v. wellman,  u.s. ,
[] ibid. see also muskrat v. united states,  u.s. 
(); massachusetts v. mellon,  u.s.  (); alabama state
federation of labor v. mcadory,  u.s.  (); united public
workers of america v. mitchell,  u.s.  (); fleming v.
rhodes,  u.s. ,  ()
[] rescue army v. municipal court of los angeles,  u.s.
, - (). see also alma motor co. v. timken-detroit axle
co.,  u.s.  (); spector motor service v. mclaughlin, 
u.s. ,  (); coffman v. breeze corporations,  u.s. ,
- (); carter v. carter coal co.,  u.s. ,  ();
siler v. l. & n.r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); berea college v.
kentucky,  u.s. ,  (); and the cases cited in the notes to
the preceding paragraph.
[] see pp. -. for the distinction between inherent
and precautionary limitations to the exercise of judicial review and the
operation of judicial review within them, see edward s. corwin,
judicial review in action,  univ. of pennsylvania l. rev.  ().
for the limitations generally see also the concurring opinion of
justice brandeis in ashwander v. tennessee valley authority,  u.s.
, - (), and the cases cited therein.
[] one of the earliest formulations of this rule is that by
justice iredell in calder v. bull,  dall. ,  (), and by
justice chase in the same case, p. . on the other hand justice chase
in this same case asserted that there were certain powers which "it
cannot be presumed" have been entrusted to the legislature. see also
sinking-fund cases,  u.s.  ().
[] ogden v. saunders,  wheat.  (); providence
bank v. billings,  pet. ,  () (argument of counsel); legal
tender cases,  wall.  (); madden v. kentucky,  u.s. 
(); alabama state federation of labor v. mcadory,  u.s. 
(). see also justice moody's dissenting opinion in howard v.
illinois c.r. co. (the employers' liability cases),  u.s. ,
[] adkins v. children's hospital,  u.s.  ().
"but freedom of contract is, nevertheless, the general rule and
restraint the exception; and the exercise of legislative authority to
abridge it can be justified only by the existence of exceptional
circumstances." ibid. .
[] kovacs v. cooper,  u.s. ,  () opinion of
justice reed. see justice frankfurter's concurring opinion for a
criticism of this rule. for other cases imputing to freedom of religion
and the press a preferred position so as to reverse the presumption of
validity see herndon v. lowry,  u.s. ,  (); united
states v. carolene products co.,  u.s. , , n.  ();
thornhill v. alabama,  u.s. ,  (); schneider v. state,
 u.s. ,  (); bridges v. california,  u.s. , -
(); murdock v. pennsylvania,  u.s. ,  (); prince v.
massachusetts,  u.s. ,  (); follett v. mccormick, 
u.s. ,  (); marsh v. alabama,  u.s.  (); board of
education v. barnette,  u.s. ,  (); thomas v. collins,
 u.s. ,  (); saia v. new york,  u.s. ,  ().
justice frankfurter has criticized the concept of "the preferred
position" of these rights as a phrase that has "uncritically crept into
some recent opinions" of the court, kovacs v. cooper,  u.s. , 
(); and justice jackson in a dissent has also opposed the idea that
some constitutional rights have a preferred position. brinegar v.
united states,  u.s. ,  (). "we cannot," he said, "give
some constitutional rights a preferred position without relegating
others to a deferred position; ***"
[] watson v. buck,  u.s.  (); justice iredell's
opinion in calder v. bull,  dall.  (); jacobson v.
massachusetts,  u.s.  (). see also cohen v. beneficial
industrial loan corp.,  u.s.  (); daniel v. family security
life ins. co.,  u.s.  (); railway express agency v. new
york,  u.s.  (); wickard v. filburn,  u.s.  ();
united states v. petrillo,  u.s.  (); american power & light
co. v. securities & exchange commission,  u.s.  (); sunshine
anthracite coal co. v. adkins,  u.s.  (). see also
railroad retirement board v. alton r. co.,  u.s.  (); home
bldg. & loan assoc. v. blaisdell,  u.s.  (); arizona v.
california,  u.s.  (); mccray v. united states,  u.s. 
(); hamilton v. kentucky distilleries & w. co.,  u.s. 
(). compare, however, bailey v. drexel furniture co. (child labor
tax case),  u.s.  (), where the court considered the motives of
the legislation.
[]  u.s.  (). the majority opinion evoked a protest
from justice stone who said in dissenting: "the power of courts to
declare ... [an act of congress unconstitutional] is subject to two
guiding principles of decision which ought never to be absent from
judicial consciousness. one is that courts are concerned only with the
power to enact statutes, not with their wisdom. the other is that while
unconstitutional exercise of power by the executive and legislative
branches of the government is subject to judicial restraint, the only
check upon our own exercise of power is our own sense of self-restraint.
for the removal of unwise laws from the statute books appeal lies not to
the courts but to the ballot and to the processes of democratic
government." ibid. -.
[] united states v. congress of industrial organizations,
 u.s.  (); miller v. united states,  wall.  ().
[] see, for example, michaelson v. united states, 
u.s.  (), where the court narrowly construed those sections of the
clayton act regulating the power of courts to punish contempt in order
to avoid constitutional difficulties. see also united states v.
delaware & h.r. co.,  u.s.  (), where the hepburn act was
narrowly construed. judicial disallowance in the guise of statutory
interpretation was foreseen by hamilton, see federalist no. .
[] pollock v. farmers' l. & t. co.,  u.s. , , 
[] in the first guffey-snyder (bituminous coal) act of 
( stat. ), there was a section providing for separability of
provisions, but the court none the less held the price-fixing provisions
inseparable from the labor provisions which it found void and thereby
invalidated the whole statute. carter v. carter coal co.,  u.s.
, - (). on this point see also the dissent of chief
justice hughes. ibid. -.
[] justice brandeis dissenting in burnet v. coronado oil &
gas co.,  u.s. , - () states the rules governing the
binding force of precedents and collects the decisions overruling
earlier decisions to . in helvering v. griffiths,  u.s. ,
 (), justice jackson lists other cases overruled between  and
. cf. smith v. allwright,  u.s.  () for similar list.
[]  u.s. , . justice roberts in a dissent, in which
justice frankfurter joined, also protested against overruling "earlier
considered opinions" in mahnich v. southern s.s. co.,  u.s. ,
- (). more recently in united states v. rabinowitz,  u.s.
 (), justice frankfurter has protested in a dissent against
reversals of earlier decisions immediately following changes of the
court's membership. "especially ought the court not reenforce needlessly
the instabilities of our day by giving fair ground for the belief that
law is the expression of chance—for instance, of unexpected changes in
the court's composition and the contingencies in the choice of
successors." ibid. .
[] see corwin, judicial review in action,  university of
pennsylvania law review  ().
[] levering & garrigues co. v. morrin,  u.s. , 
(), citing mosher v. phoenix,  u.s. ,  ().
[] levering & garrigues co. v. morrin,  u.s. , 
(). see also binderup v. pathe exchange,  u.s. , -
(); south covington & c. st. ry. co. v. newport,  u.s. , 
(); hull v. burr,  u.s. ,  (); the fair v. kohler
die co.,  u.s. ,  (); montana catholic missions v. missoula
county,  u.s. ,  (); western union tel. co. v. ann arbor
r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] newburyport water co. v. newburyport,  u.s. , 
(). for these issues, see also bell v. hood,  u.s. 
[] levering & garrigues co. v. morrin,  u.s. ,
[] whether the doctrine that the plaintiff must allege the
constitutional question to make the case one arising under the
constitution rests on constitutional or statutory grounds is uncertain.
see tennessee v. union and planters' bank,  u.s.  ();
oregon short line and utah n. ry. co. v. skottowe,  u.s. , 
(); galveston, h. & s.a. ry. co. v. texas,  u.s. , 
(); sawyer v. kochersperger,  u.s.  (); board of
councilmen of frankfort v. state national bank,  u.s.  ();
boston and montana consolidated copper & silver mining co. v. montana
ore purchasing co.,  u.s. ,  (). some of these cases apply
to the removal of cases from state courts where the plaintiff does not
aver a federal question. on this point note the following statement of
chief justice fuller in arkansas v. kansas & t.c. co. & s.f.r., 
u.s. ,  (): "hence it has been settled that a case cannot be
removed from a state court into the circuit court of the united states
on the sole ground that it is one arising under the constitution, laws
or treaties of the united states, unless that appears by plaintiff's
statement of his own claim; and if it does not so appear, the want of it
cannot be supplied by any statement of the petition for removal or in
the subsequent pleadings. and moreover that jurisdiction is not
conferred by allegations that defendant intends to assert a defence
based on the constitution or a law or treaty of the united states, or
under statutes of the united states, or of a state, in conflict with the
constitution."
[]  cr.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  stat. , § ().
[]  stat. , § ().
[]  stat. ,  ();  u.s.c.a. §.
[]  stat. ,  ().
[]  stat. , , § ().
[]  stat. , , § ().
[]  u.s.c.a. §(a)().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  u.s. , . see also the mayor of nashville v.
cooper,  wall.  ().
[] lovell v. city of griffin,  u.s.  ().
[] stoll v. gottlieb,  u.s.  ().
[] indiana ex rel. anderson v. brand,  u.s.  ().
[] southwestern bell telephone co. v. oklahoma,  u.s.
[] adam v. saenger,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united gas public service co. v. texas,  u.s. ,
[] lane v. wilson,  u.s. ,  (). it is fairly
obvious, of course, that whether state courts have exceeded their powers
under the state constitution is not a federal question. this rule was
applied in schuylkill trust co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. , 
(), where it was contended that instead of construing a state
statute, the courts had actually amended it by a species of judicial
legislation prohibited by the state constitution.
[] united states v. ravara,  dall.  ().
[] börs v. preston,  u.s.  ().
[] ames v. kansas ex rel. johnston,  u.s. , 
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ex parte gruber,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] see w.w. willoughby, the constitutional law of the
united states, iii, ,  (new york, ).
[] willoughby, op. cit., iii, .
[]  stat. , § ().
[] justice washington in davis v. brig seneca,  fed.
cas. no. , ().
[] the "vengeance,"  dall.  (); the "schooner
sally,"  cr.  (); the "schooner betsey,"  cr.  (); the
"samuel,"  wheat.  (); the "octavia,"  wheat.  ().
[] new jersey steam nav. co. v. merchants' bank,  how.
[] waring v. clarke,  how.  (); ex parte easton,
 u.s.  (); north pacific s.s. co. v. hall brothers m.r. & s.
co.,  u.s.  (); grant smith-porter ship co. v. rohde, 
[] sheppard v. taylor,  pet. ,  ().
[] new england m. ins. co. v. dunham,  wall. , 
[] knapp, stout & co. v. mccaffrey,  u.s.  ().
[] atlee v. northwestern union p. co.,  wall. 
(); ex parte mcniel,  wall.  ().
[] o'brien v. miller,  u.s.  (); the "grapeshot"
v. wallerstein,  wall.  ().
[] new bedford dry dock co. v. purdy,  u.s.  ();
north pac. s.s. co. v. hall bros. m.r. & s. co.,  u.s.  ();
the general smith,  wheat.  ().
[] new jersey steam nav. co. v. merchants' bank,  how.
[] ex parte easton,  u.s.  ().
[] andrews v. wall,  how.  ().
[] janney v. columbia ins. co.,  wheat. , , ,
 (), cited by justice story in the "tilton,"  fed. cas. no.
[] the "belfast" v. boon,  wall.  ().
[] ex parte garnett,  u.s.  ().
[] the "city of panama,"  u.s.  (); see also
kenward v. "admiral peoples,"  u.s.  (); the "harrisburg,"
 u.s.  (). although a suit for damages for wrongful death will
not lie in the courts of the united states under the general maritime
law, admiralty courts will enforce a state law creating liability for
wrongful death. just v. chambers,  u.s.  ().
[] the "raithmoor,"  u.s.  (); erie r. co. v.
erie & western t. co.,  u.s.  (). see also canadian aviator
v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] l'invincible,  wheat.  (). see also in re
fassett,  u.s.  ().
[] sherlock v. alling,  u.s. ,  (). see also
old dominion s.s. co. v. gilmore (the "hamilton"),  u.s. 
[] jennings v. carson,  cr.  (); taylor v. carryl,
 how.  ().
[] thirty hogsheads of sugar v. boyle,  cr.  ();
the siren,  wall. ,  ().
[] hudson v. guestier,  cr.  ().
[] la vengeance,  dall.  (); church v. hubbart, 
cr.  (); the schooner sally,  cr.  ().
[] the brig. ann,  cr.  (); the sarah,  wheat. 
(); maul v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] section  of the original judiciary act, since carried
over in  u.s.c.a. §, saves to suitors such a common law remedy.
[] for example, the court stated in the "moses taylor" v.
hammons,  wall. ,  (), that a proceeding in rem as used in
the admiralty courts, is not a remedy afforded by the common law and
that a proceeding in rem is essentially a proceeding possible only in
admiralty.
[]  u.s.  (). in the course of his opinion for the
court which contains a lengthy historical account of admiralty
jurisdiction in this country, chief justice stone cited smith v.
maryland,  how.  (), where the court without discussion
sustained the seizure and forfeiture of a vessel in a judgment in rem
of a state court for violation of a maryland fishing law within the
navigable waters of the state.
[] judiciary act of ,  stat. , §; la vengeance, 
dall.  (); united states v. the schooner sally,  cr. 
(); united states v. schooner betsey and charlotte,  cr. 
(); whelan v. united states,  cr.  (); the samuel, 
wheat.  ().
[] hendry v. moore,  u.s. ,  ().
[] charles warren, the supreme court in united states
history, ii, - (boston, ).
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  how.  (). see also new jersey steam nav. co.
v. merchants' bank,  how.  (). aside from rejecting english
rules, waring v. clarke did not affect the rule concerning the ebb and
flow of the tide, inasmuch as the collision occurred within the ebb and
flow of the tide, though within the body of a county. citing peyroux
v. howard,  pet.  (); the "orleans" v. phoebus,  pet. 
(); the "thomas jefferson,"  wheat.  (); united states v.
coombs,  pet.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] soon afterwards in jackson v. steamboat magnolia, 
how.  (), the court rejected what was left of narrow doctrines of
the extent of admiralty jurisdiction by holding that a collision on the
alabama river above tidal flow and wholly within the state of alabama
came within the grant of admiralty jurisdiction in the judiciary act of
 which extended it "to rivers navigable from the sea *** as well
as upon the high seas."
[] see warren, ii, -.
[]  u.s.  (); see also perry v. haines, 
u.s.  () where the admiralty jurisdiction was extended to inland
canals.
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. . see also the montello,  wall.  (),
where this doctrine was applied to the fox river in wisconsin after it
had been improved to become navigable.
[]  u.s. , - (). this case contains a good
review of admiralty cases to the time of its decision.
[]  wheat.  (). see also manchester v.
massachusetts,  u.s.  () which followed this rule and which
seems to contain a rule analogous to the "silence of congress" doctrine
applied in cases involving state legislation which affect interstate
commerce.
[] ibid. .
[] the st. lawrence,  bl. ,  ().
[] the "lottawanna,"  wall. , , (); see also
janney v. columbian ins. co.,  wheat. ,  (), where it was
held that the admiralty jurisdiction rests on the grant in the
constitution and can only be exercised under the laws of the united
states extending that grant to the respective courts of the united
states.
[]  wall. , , (); the hine v. trevor,  wall.
[] knapp, stout & co. v. mccaffrey,  u.s.  ();
red cross line v. atlantic fruit co.,  u.s.  ().
[] chelentis v. luckenbach s.s. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] rodd v. heartt,  wall.  ().
[] old dominion s.s. co. v. gilmore,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid.
[] ibid. , -. this was a five to four decision with
justices holmes, pitney, brandeis, and clarke dissenting. justice
holmes' dissent is notable among other reasons for his epigrams that
"judges do and must legislate, but they can do so only interstitially;
they are confined from molar to molecular motions," ibid. ; and that
"the common law is not a brooding omnipresence in the sky but the
articulate voice of some sovereign or some quasi-sovereign that can be
identified." ibid. . justice pitney attacked the decision as
unsupported by precedent and contended that article iii speaks only of
jurisdiction and does not prescribe the procedural or substantive law by
which the exercise of admiralty jurisdiction is to be governed. ibid.
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. . for the discussion of the statute as an
invalid delegation of power, see ibid. -. justice holmes wrote a
dissent in which justices pitney, brandeis and clarke concurred.
[]  stat.  (); overturned in washington v. w.c.
dawson & co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. .
[] nogueira v. new york, n.h. & h.r. co.,  u.s. 
(); vancouver s.s. co. v. rice,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . citing baizley iron works v. span,  u.s.
[]  u.s.  (). cases cited as strengthening the
claim were sultan ry. & timber co. v. dept. of labor,  u.s. 
(); grant smith-porter co. v. rohde,  u.s.  (); millers'
underwriters v. braud,  u.s.  (); ex parte rosengrant, 
ala.  ( so. ), affirmed  u.s.  (); state industrial
board of new york v. terry & tench co.,  u.s.  (); alaska
packers asso. v. industrial accident commission,  u.s.  ().
cases cited against the claim were baizley iron works v. span, 
u.s.  (); gonsalves v. morse dry dock co.,  u.s.  ();
nogueira v. n.y., n.h. & h.r. co.,  u.s.  (); northern coal
& dock co. v. strand,  u.s.  (); employers' liability
assurance co. v. cook,  u.s.  (). justice black also cites
stanley morrison, workmen's compensation and the maritime law,  yale
l.j.  (). in the davis case the court was not guilty of
exaggeration when it declared that "the very closeness of the cases
cited *** has caused much serious confusion," and went on to picture
rather vividly the jurisdictional dilemma of an injured employee who
might suffer great financial loss as a result of the delay and expense
if he guessed wrong, and might even discover that his claim was "barred
by the statute of limitations in the proper forum while he was
erroneously pursuing it elsewhere."  u.s. , . likewise the
dilemma affected employers who might not be protected by contributions
to a state fund and at the same time be liable for substantial
additional payments. the court had harsh words for the jensen rule but
indicated that its reversal would not solve the problem. ibid. .
justice black also pointed to parker v. motor boat sales,  u.s. 
(), where the court, after stating that congress by the
longshoremen's act accepted the jensen line of demarcation between state
and federal jurisdiction, had proceeded to hold that, in shadowy cases
where the claimant was in a twilight zone he was entitled to recover
under the state statute in the absence of federal administrative action
under the longshoremen's act on the ground of its constitutionality. in
brief it would seem that in shadowy cases a claimant may elect either a
federal court applying the longshoremen's act or a state forum applying
the state compensation law.
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] the "lottawanna,"  wall. , .
[] in re garnett,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s. ,  (), citing butler v. boston &
savannah s.s. co.,  u.s.  (), and in re garnett,  u.s. 
[]  u.s. ,  (), citing o'donnell v. great lakes
dredge & dock co.,  u.s. ,  (), and the cases cited therein.
[] davis v. department of labor,  u.s.  ().
[]  commentaries (d ed., boston, ), §.
[] dugan v. united states,  wheat.  ().
[] united states v. san jacinto tin co.,  u.s. 
(); united states v. beebe,  u.s.  (); united states
v. american bell tel. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. san jacinto tin co.,  u.s. 
[]  u.s.c.a. §§-. the original jurisdiction of
the supreme court does not extend to suits brought by the united states
against persons or corporations alone. see also revised statutes,
§§, . united states v. west virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -. this suit, it may be noted, was
specifically authorized by the act of congress of may , , providing
for a temporary government for the oklahoma territory to determine the
ownership of greer county.  stat. , , §.
[] united states v. minnesota,  u.s.  (). for an
earlier suit against a state by the united states, see united states
v. michigan,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. utah,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. louisiana,  u.s.  (); united
states v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[]  dall. ,  ().
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[]  pet. ,  ().
[] united states v. mclemore,  how.  (); hill v.
united states,  how. ,  (); degroot v. united states, 
wall. ,  (); united states v. eckford,  wall. , 
(); the siren,  wall. ,  (); nichols v. united states,
 wall. ,  (); the davis,  wall. ,  (); carr v.
united states,  u.s. , - (). "it is also clear that the
federal government, in the absence of its consent, is not liable in tort
for the negligence of its agents or employees. gibbons v. united
states,  wall. ,  (); peabody v. united states,  u.s.
,  (); keokuk & hamilton bridge co. v. united states, 
u.s. ,  (). the reason for such immunity as stated by mr.
justice holmes in kawananakoa v. polyblank,  u.s. ,  (),
is because 'there can be no legal right as against the authority that
makes the law on which the right depends.' see also the western maid,
 u.s. ,  (). as the housing act does not purport to
authorize suits against the united states as such, the question is
whether the authority—which is clearly an agency of the united
states—partakes of this sovereign immunity. the answer must be sought
in the intention of the congress. sloan shipyards case,  u.s. ,
 (); federal land bank v. priddy,  u.s. ,  ().
this involves a consideration of the extent to which other
government-owned corporations have been held liable for their wrongful
acts."  op. atty. gen. ,  ().
[] lonergan v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. n.y. rayon importing co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. shaw,  u.s.  (). here it was
said that the reasons for sovereign immunity "partake somewhat of
dignity and decorum, somewhat of practical administration, somewhat of
the political desirability of an impregnable legal citadel where
government, as distinct from its functionaries may operate undisturbed
by the demands of litigants," ibid. -. the court went on to hold
that when the united states took possession of the assets of fleet
corporation and assumed its obligations, it did not waive its immunity
from suit in a state court on a counterclaim based on the corporation's
breach of contract, ibid. . any consent to be sued will not be held
to embrace action in the federal courts unless the language giving
consent is clear. great northern life ins. co. v. read,  u.s. 
[] minnesota v. united states,  u.s.  (). the
united states was held here to be an indispensable party defendant in a
condemnation proceeding brought by a state to acquire a right of way
over lands owned by the united states and held in trust for indian
allottees.
[] brady v. roosevelt s.s. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. lee,  u.s. , - (). the
principle of sovereign immunity was further disparaged in a brief essay
by justice miller on the subject of the rule of law, as follows: "under
our system the people *** are sovereign. their rights, whether
collective or individual, are not bound to give way to a sentiment of
loyalty to the person of a monarch. the citizen here knows no person,
however near to those in power, or however powerful himself, to whom he
need yield the rights which the law secures to him when it is well
administered. when he, in one of the courts of competent jurisdiction,
has established his right to property, there is no reason why deference
to any person, natural or artificial, not even the united states, should
prevent him from using the means which the law gives him for the
protection and enforcement of that right." ibid. -.
[] louisiana v. mcadoo,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s.  (). at page  justice gray endeavors
to distinguish between this and the lee case. it was justice gray who
spoke for the dissenters in the lee case.
[] land v. dollar,  u.s. ,  (). justice
douglas cites for this proposition cunningham v. macon & b.r. co., 
u.s. ,  (); tindal v. wesley,  u.s.  (); smith
v. reeves,  u.s. ,  (); scranton v. wheeler,  u.s.
, ,  (); philadelphia co. v. stimson,  u.s. , ,
 (); goltra v. weeks,  u.s.  (). this last case
actually extended the rule of the lee case and was virtually overruled
in larson v. domestic & foreign corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] oregon v. hitchcock,  u.s.  (); louisiana v.
garfield,  u.s.  (); new mexico v. lane,  u.s.  ();
wells v. roper,  u.s.  (); morrison v. work,  u.s. 
(); minnesota v. united states,  u.s.  (); mine safety
appliances co. v. forrestal,  u.s.  (). see also minnesota
v. hitchcock,  u.s.  (). for a review of the cases dealing
with sovereign immunity see joseph d. block, suits against government
officers and the sovereign immunity doctrine,  harv. l. rev. 
[] cunningham v. macon & b.r. co.,  u.s. , 
(), quoted by chief justice vinson in the opinion of the court in
larson v. domestic & foreign corp.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] larson v. domestic & foreign corp., supra, .
justice frankfurter's dissent also contains a useful classification of
immunity cases and an appendix listing them.
[]  u.s. ,  (). the italics are added.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -. this rule was applied in united states ex
rel. goldberg v. daniels,  u.s.  (), which also involved a
sale of government surplus property. after the secretary of the navy
rejected the highest bid, plaintiff sought mandamus to compel delivery.
the suit was held to be against the united states. see also perkins,
secretary of labor v. lukens steel co.,  u.s.  (), which
held that prospective bidders for contracts derive no enforceable rights
against a federal official for an alleged misinterpretation of his
government's authority on the ground that an agent is answerable only to
his principal for misconstruction of instructions, given for the sole
benefit of the principal. in the larson case the court not only refused
to follow goltra v. weeks,  u.s.  (), but in effect
overruled it. the goltra case involved an attempt of the government to
repossess barges which it had leased under a contract reserving the
right to repossess in certain circumstances. a suit to enjoin
repossession was held not to be a suit against the united states on the
ground that the actions were personal and in the nature of a trespass.
[]  u.s. , -. justice frankfurter, dissenting,
would have applied the rule of the lee case.
[] larson v. domestic & foreign corp.,  u.s. ,
[] oregon v. hitchcock,  u.s.  (); louisiana v.
mcadoo,  u.s.  (); wells v. roper,  u.s.  (). see
also belknap v. schild,  u.s.  (); and international postal
supply co. v. bruce,  u.s.  ().
[] rickert rice mills v. fontenot,  u.s.  ();
and tennessee electric power co. v. tennessee valley authority, 
u.s.  () which held that one threatened with direct and special
injury by the act of an agent of the government under a statute may
challenge the constitutionality of the statute in a suit against the
agent.
[] philadelphia co. v. stimson,  u.s.  (); waite
v. macy,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. lee,  u.s.  (); goltra v.
weeks,  u.s.  (); ickes v. fox,  u.s.  (); land
v. dollar,  u.s.  ().
[] federal housing authority v. burr,  u.s.  ().
nonetheless, the court held that a congressional waiver of immunity in
the case of a government corporation did not mean that funds or property
of the united states can be levied on to pay a judgment obtained against
such a corporation as the result of waiver of immunity.
[] united states v. united states fidelity co.,  u.s.
[] charles warren, the supreme court and disputes between
states, bulletin of the college of william and mary, vol. , no. , pp.
- (). for a more comprehensive treatment of backgrounds as well
as the general subject, see charles warren, the supreme court and
sovereign states, (princeton, ).
[] warren, the supreme court and disputes between states, p.
. however, only three such suits were brought in this period,
-. during the next  years, -, at least twenty-nine
such suits were brought. ibid. , .
[]  dall.  ().
[] rhode island v. massachusetts,  pet. , 
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. . chief justice taney dissented because of his
belief that the issue was not one of property in the soil, but of
sovereignty and jurisdiction, and hence political. ibid. -. for
different reasons, it should be noted, a suit between private parties
respecting soil or jurisdiction of two states, to which neither state is
a party does not come within the original jurisdiction of the supreme
court. fowler v. lindsay,  dall.  ().
[] kansas v. colorado,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . see also nebraska v. wyoming,  u.s. 
(), for the restatement of the familiar principle that the power of
apportionment among several states of waters of an interstate river
where the demands of the users exceeds the supply is a matter of
sufficient importance and dignity as to be justiciable in the supreme
court.
[] south dakota v. north carolina,  u.s.  ().
[] virginia v. west virginia,  u.s.  (). this case
is also significant for justice holmes' statement that, "the case is to
be considered in the untechnical spirit proper for dealing with a
quasi-international controversy, remembering that there is no municipal
code governing the matter, and that this court may be called on to
adjust differences that cannot be dealt with by congress or disposed of
by the legislature of either state alone." ibid. .
[] kentucky v. indiana,  u.s.  ().
[] texas v. florida et al.,  u.s.  ().
[] pennsylvania and ohio v. west virginia,  u.s. 
[]  pet.  ().
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] massachusetts v. missouri,  u.s. , - (),
citing florida v. mellon,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. , , citing oklahoma v. atchison, t. &
s.f.r. co.,  u.s. ,  (), and oklahoma v. cook,  u.s.
,  (). see also new hampshire v. louisiana,  u.s. 
(), which held that a state cannot bring a suit on behalf of its
citizens to collect on bonds issued by another state, and louisiana v.
texas,  u.s.  (), which held that a state cannot sue another to
prevent maladministration of quarantine laws.
[] ibid. .
[] the various litigations of virginia v. west virginia
are to be found in  u.s.  ();  u.s.  ();  u.s. 
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] warren, the supreme court and sovereign states, .
[]  dall.  ().
[] massachusetts v. mellon,  u.s.  (); florida
v. mellon,  u.s.  (); new jersey v. sargent,  u.s. 
[] pennsylvania v. quicksilver min. co.,  wall. 
(); california v. southern pacific co.,  u.s.  ();
minnesota v. northern securities co.,  u.s.  ().
[] wisconsin v. pelican ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] oklahoma v.. atchison, t. & s.f.r. co.,  u.s. 
(); oklahoma v. cook,  u.s.  ().
[]  wheat. , - ().
[] pennsylvania v. quicksilver min. co.,  wall. 
[] california v. southern pacific co.,  u.s. 
(); minnesota v. northern securities co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  wheat. , -.
[]  dall. , - ().
[]  u.s. , -. this case also follows the general
rule that a corporation chartered by the laws of a state, is a citizen
of that state for purposes of federal jurisdiction.
[]  u.s.  (). here the court entertained a suit by
georgia and enjoined the copper company from discharging noxious gases
from their works in tennessee over georgia's territory.
[]  u.s. , -, citing and quoting georgia v.
tennessee copper co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. , , citing missouri v. illinois, 
u.s. , -,  (); virginia v. west virginia,  u.s.
,  (); georgia v. tennessee copper co.,  u.s. , 
[] ibid. , . chief justice stone, joined by justices
roberts, frankfurter, and jackson dissented on the ground that the suit
actually was one for a district court, that a state is without standing
to maintain suit for injuries sustained by its citizens and residents
for which they may sue in their own behalf, and that as presented the
suit was not one in which a court of equity could give effective
relief.
[]  cr. , - ().
[] ibid. .
[] new orleans v. winter et al.,  wheat.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c.a. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] knox v. greenleaf,  dall.  ().
[] shelton v. tiffin,  how.  ().
[] williamson v. osenton,  u.s.  ().
[] shelton v. tiffin,  how.  ().
[] williamson v. osenton,  u.s.  ().
[] jones v. league,  how.  ().
[] shelton v. tiffin,  how.  ().
[]  cr. ,  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] strawbridge v. curtiss,  cr.  (). the slocomb
case had to be dismissed because two members of the defendant
corporation were citizens of the same state as the plaintiffs.
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] muller v. dows,  u.s. ,  (). this fiction
had its beginning in marshall v. baltimore & ohio r. co.,  how. ,
 () and attained final approval in st. louis & s.f. ry. co. v.
james,  u.s. ,  ().
[] john chipman gray, the nature and sources of the law, d
ed. (new york, ), .
[] dodge v. woolsey,  how.  (); mechanics' &
traders' bank v. debolt,  how.  ().
[] gray, op. cit., -. although justice wayne
criticized the strawbridge case as going too far, later developments in
determining the citizenship of corporations, have enabled the court to
restore it to its original status. consequently the rule still requires
that to maintain a diversity proceeding all the parties on one side must
be citizens of different states from all the parties on the other side.
treinies v. sunshine mining co.,  u.s.  (); city of
indianapolis v. chase national bank,  u.s.  ().
[] see southern realty co. v. walker,  u.s. 
(), where two georgians who conducted all of that business in
georgia created a sham corporation in south dakota for the sole purpose
of bringing suits in the federal courts which ordinarily would have been
brought in the georgia courts. diversity jurisdiction was held not to
exist because of collusion.
[] black and white taxicab & t. co. v. brown & yellow
taxicab & t. co.,  v. u.s.  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[]  pet. .
[] ibid. . justice story concluded this portion of the
opinion as follows: "the law respecting negotiable instruments may be
truly declared in the language of cicero, adopted by lord mansfield in
luke v. lyde,  burr. , , to be in great measure, not the law of
a single country only, but of the commercial world. non erit alia lex
romae, alia athenis; alia nunc, alia posthac, sed et apud omenes gentes,
et omni tempore una eademque lex obtinebit." ibid. .
[] see simeon e. baldwin, the american judiciary (new
york, ), -. see also justice catron's statement in swift
v. tyson,  pet. , .
[] the tyson doctrine was extended to wills in lane v.
vick,  how.  (); to torts in chicago city v. robbins,  bl.
 (); to real estate titles and the rights of riparian owners in
yates v. milwaukee,  wall.  (); to mineral conveyances in
kuhn v. fairmont coal co.,  u.s.  (); to contracts in rowan
v. runnels,  how.  (); and to the right to exemplary or
punitive damages in lake shore & m.s.r. co. v. prentice,  u.s. 
(). by  there were  kinds of cases in which federal and state
courts applied different rules of the common law. see george c. holt,
the concurrent jurisdiction of the federal and state courts (new york,
[] rowan v. runnels,  how.  (); gelpcke v.
dubuque,  wall.  ().
[] williamson v. berry,  how.  (); pease v.
peck,  how.  (); watson v. tarpley,  how.  ().
[] lane v. vick,  how.  (); williamson v. berry,
 how.  (); gelpcke v. dubuque,  wall.  ().
[] ibid. . justice holmes was influenced in part by the
article of charles warren, new light on the history of the federal
judiciary act of ,  harv. l. rev. , - (), in which mr.
warren produced evidence to show that justice story's interpretation in
the tyson case was contrary to the intention of the framers of the act.
mr. warren did not, however, contend that the tyson rule was
unconstitutional. justice holmes was joined in his dissent by justices
brandeis and stone. in addition to judicial dissatisfaction with the
tyson rule as manifested in dissents, disapproval in congressional
quarters resulted in bills by senators walsh and norris in the th and
st congresses, s. , th cong., st. sess., s. rept.  of
committee on the judiciary, march , ; s. , th cong., d.
sess., s. rept. , committee on the judiciary, may , ; s. ,
th cong., st. sess.; s. , st cong., st. sess.
[] this concept was first used by justice bradley in burgess
v. seligman,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. , -.
[]  u.s.  (). this decision has been thoroughly
criticized by arthur l. corbin in the laws of the several states, 
yale l.j.  (). see also mitchell wendell, relations between
federal and state courts (new york, ), -. this book contains a
good account of the operation of the tyson and tompkins rules, pp.
[]  u.s.  (). for other cases applying the rule
that decisions of state intermediate courts are binding unless there is
convincing evidence that the state law is otherwise, see six companies
of california v. highway dist.,  u.s.  (); stoner v. new
york life ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] vandenbark v. owens-illinois co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.c.a. §;  stat.  (). in , the
year of the tompkins decision, the conformity act of  ( stat. 
§) was superseded; and from that time until the enactment of  stat.
, the federal courts were guided in diversity cases by the federal
rules of civil procedure formulated by the supreme court by virtue of
the authority delegated it, in , by  stat. .
[] ruhlin v. new york life ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. . justice rutledge wrote a dissent in which
justice murphy concurred. justice rutledge objected to the rigid
application of a statute of limitations to suits in equity and to the
implication that congress could not authorize federal courts to
administer equitable relief in accordance with the substantive rights of
the parties, notwithstanding state statutes of limitations barring such
suits in state courts. in his view, if any change were to be made, it
was for congress and not the court to make it. in line with this ruling
see ragan v. merchants transfer & w. co.,  u.s.  ();
also cohen v. beneficial industrial loan corp.,  u.s. , 
[]  story, commentaries,  § (d. ed., ).
[] an interesting case which reached the supreme court under
this clause was pawlet v. clark,  cr.  (). in his opinion for
the court, justice story took occasion to assert that grants of land by
a state to a town could not afterwards be repealed so as to divest the
town of its rights under the grant. ibid. ; cf. trenton v. new
jersey,  u.s.  ().
[] the exchange v. mcfaddon,  cr.  (); berizzi
bros. co. v. s.s. pesaro,  u.s.  (); compania espanola v.
the navemar,  u.s.  (); guaranty trust co. v. united states,
[] principality of monaco v. mississippi,  u.s. ,
[] ibid.
[] the "sapphire,"  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. . this case also held that a change in the
person of the sovereign does not affect the continuity or rights of
national sovereignty, including the right to bring suit, or to continue
one that has been brought.
[] guaranty trust co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
(); citing jones v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
matter of lehigh valley r. co.,  u.s.  (). whether a
government is to be regarded as the legal representative of a foreign
state is, of course, a political question.
[] guaranty trust co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
(); citing united states v. the thekla,  u.s. , , 
(); united states v. stinson,  u.s. ,  (); the davis,
 wall.  (); the siren,  wall. ,  (). see also ex
parte republic of colombia,  u.s.  ().
[] guaranty trust co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
(). among other benefits which the court cites as not extending to
foreign states as litigants include exemption from costs and from giving
discovery. decisions are also cited to the effect that a sovereign
plaintiff "should so far as the thing can be done, be put in the same
position as a body corporate." ibid, note , pp. -.
[]  pet. , - ().
[] hodgson & thompson v. bowerbank,  cr.  ().
[] jackson v. twentyman,  pet.  ().
[] susquehanna & wyoming v.r. & c. co. v. blatchford, 
wall.  (). see, however, lacassagne v. chapuis,  u.s. 
(), which held that a lower federal court had jurisdiction over a
proceeding to impeach its former decree, although the parties were new
and were both aliens.
[] browne v. strode,  cr.  ().
[]  dall.  (). for an earlier case where the point
of jurisdiction was not raised, see georgia v. brailsford,  dall.
 (). for subsequent cases prior to , see rhode island v.
massachusetts,  pet.  (); florida v. georgia,  how. 
[] kentucky v. dennison,  how. ,  ().
[]  cr.  ().
[] ibid. . see also wiscart v. dauchy,  dall. 
(). this exclusive interpretation of article iii posed temporary
difficulties for marshall in cohens v. virginia,  wheat.  (),
where he gave a contrary interpretation to other provisions of the
article. the exclusive interpretation as applied to original
jurisdiction of the supreme court has been followed in ex parte bollman,
 cr.  (); new jersey v. new york,  pet.  (); ex parte
barry,  how.  (); ex parte vallandigham,  wall. ,  ();
and ex parte yerger,  wall. ,  (). in the curious case of ex
parte levitt, petitioner,  u.s.  (), the court was asked to
purge itself of justice black on the ground that his appointment to it
violated the second clause of section  of article i. although it
rejected petitioner's application, it refrained from pointing out that
it was being asked to assume original jurisdiction contrary to the
holding in marbury v. madison.
[]  u.s. ,  (). here the court refused to take
jurisdiction on the ground that the city of oakland and the oakland
water company, a citizen of california, were so situated that they would
have to be brought into the case, which would make it then a suit
between a state and citizens of another state and its own citizens. the
same rule was followed in new mexico v. lane,  u.s. ,  ();
and in louisiana v. cummins,  u.s.  (). see also texas
v. interstate commerce commission,  u.s. ,  (). for the
original jurisdiction of the supreme court in specific classes of cases
see the discussion of suits affecting ambassadors and suits between
states, supra, pp. , -.
[] ames v. kansas ex rel. johnston,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. , .
[]  u.s. , . note also the dictum in cohens v.
virginia,  wheat. , - () to the effect that "*** the
original jurisdiction of the supreme court, in cases where a state is a
party, refers to those cases in which, according to the grant of power
made in the preceding clause, jurisdiction might be exercised in
consequence of the character of the party, and an original suit might be
instituted in any of the federal courts; not to those cases in which an
original suit might not be instituted in a federal court. of the last
description, is every case between a state and its citizens, and,
perhaps every case in which a state is enforcing its penal laws. in such
cases, therefore, the supreme court cannot take original jurisdiction."
[] ohio ex rel. popovici v. agler,  u.s.  ().
[]  dall.  (). justice wilson dissented from this
holding and contended that the appellate jurisdiction, as being derived
from the constitution, could be exercised without an act of congress or
until congress made exceptions to it.
[] durousseau v. united states,  cr.  ().
[]  wall.  ();  wall.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  wall. , . the court also took occasion to
reiterate the rule that an affirmation of appellate jurisdiction is a
negative of all other and stated that as a result acts of congress
providing for the exercise of jurisdiction had "come to be spoken of as
acts granting jurisdiction, and not as acts making exceptions to ***
it." it continued grandly: "*** judicial duty is not less fitly
performed by declining ungranted jurisdiction than in exercising firmly
that which the constitution and the laws confer." ibid. , .
[] see especially the parallel case of ex parte yerger, 
wall.  (). for cases following ex parte mccardle, see railroad
co. v. grant,  u.s. ,  (); kurtz v. moffitt,  u.s.
,  (); cross v. burke,  u.s. ,  (); missouri v.
missouri pacific r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); stephan v. united
states,  u.s. ,  (). see also united states v. bitty,
 u.s. , - (), where it was held that there is no right
to appeal to the supreme court except as an act of congress confers it.
[] ibid. . see also barry v. mercein,  how. , 
(); national exchange bank v. peters,  u.s.  ();
american construction co. v. jacksonville t. & k.w.r. co.,  u.s.
 (); colorado central consol. min. co. v. turck,  u.s. 
(); st. louis, i.m. & s.r. co. v. taylor,  u.s.  ();
luckenbach s.s. co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . this recognition, however, is followed by the
statement that "the whole judicial power of the united states should be
at all times, vested either in an original or appellate form, in some
courts created under its authority."
[]  commentaries, §§-.
[]  stat. , §§-.
[] ibid.
[] ibid. §§, , , .
[] ibid. §.
[] dall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ex parte bollman,  cr. ,  (). two years later
chief justice marshall in bank of united states v. deveaux,  cr. 
(), held for the court that the right to sue does not imply a right
to sue in a federal court unless conferred expressly by an act of
congress.
[]  cr.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid.
[]  pet. , - ().
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. -. to these sweeping assertions of
legislative supremacy justices story and mclean took vigorous exception.
they denied the authority of congress to deprive the courts of power and
vest it in an executive official because "the right to construe the laws
in all matters of controversy is of the very essence of judicial power."
in their view the act as interpreted violated the principle of the
separation of powers, impaired the independence of the judiciary, and
merged the executive and judicial department. dissent of justice mclean,
pp.  and following.
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] rice v. m. & n.w.r. co.,  bl. ,  (); mayor
of nashville v. cooper,  wall. , - (); united states
v. eckford,  wall. ,  (); ex parte yerger,  wall. , 
(); case of the sewing machine companies,  wall. , -
(); morgan v. gay,  wall. ,  (); gaines v. fuentes, 
u.s. ,  (); jones v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
holmes v. goldsmith,  u.s. ,  (); johnson steel street
rail co. v. wharton,  u.s. ,  (); plaquemines tropical
fruit co. v. henderson,  u.s. , - (); stevenson v.
fain,  u.s. ,  (); kentucky v. powers,  u.s. , 
(); venner v. great northern r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); ladew
v. tennessee copper co.,  u.s. ,  (); kline v. burke
construction co.,  u.s. , ,  (). see also lauf v.
e.g. shinner & co.,  u.s.  (); federal power commission v.
pacific power & light co.,  u.s.  ().
[] mayor of nashville v. cooper,  wall. , -
(). the rule of cary v. curtis and sheldon v. sill was restated
with emphasis many years later in kline v. burke construction co., 
u.s. , - (), where justice sutherland, speaking for the
court, proceeded to say to article iii, §§ and : "the effect of these
provisions is not to vest jurisdiction in the inferior courts over the
designated cases and controversies but to delimit those in respect of
which congress may confer jurisdiction upon such courts as it creates.
only the original jurisdiction of the supreme court is derived directly
from the constitution. every other court created by the general
government derives its jurisdiction wholly from the authority of
congress. that body may give, withhold or restrict such jurisdiction at
its discretion, provided it be not extended beyond the boundaries fixed
by the constitution. *** the constitution simply gives to the inferior
courts the capacity to take jurisdiction in the enumerated cases, but it
requires an act of congress to confer it. *** and the jurisdiction
having been conferred may, at the will of congress, be taken away in
whole or in part; and if withdrawn without a saving clause all pending
cases though cognizable when commenced must fall."
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] see infra, pp. -.
[] see for example snyder v. marks,  u.s.  ();
cheatham v. united states,  u.s.  (); shelton v. platt, 
u.s.  (); pacific steam whaling co. v. united states,  u.s.
 (); dodge v. osborn,  u.s.  ().
[] dodge v. brady,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hill v. wallace,  u.s.  (); lipke v.
lederer,  u.s.  (); miller v. standard nut margarine co.,
[] enjoining the assessment and collection of federal taxes
despite statutory prohibition,  harv. l. rev.  ().
[] allen v. regents of university system of georgia, 
[]  stat.  ().
[] lauf v. e.g. shinner & co.,  u.s.  (); new
negro alliance v. sanitary grocery co.,  u.s. . - ();
milk wagon drivers' union v. lake valley farm products co.,  u.s.
[]  u.s.  (). virginian r. co. v. system
federation no. ,  u.s.  (), in some ways constitutes an
exception to section  of the statute by sustaining a mandatory
injunction issued against an employer on the petition of employees on
the ground that the prohibition of section  does not include mandatory
injunctions, but "blanket injunctions which are usually prohibitory in
form." for other acts of congress limiting the power of the federal
courts to issue injunctions see infra, pp. -.
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid -. cf., however, shields v. utah, idaho r.
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] mayor of nashville v. cooper,  wall. ,  ();
kline v. burke construction co.,  u.s. , ,  (). see
also hodgson v. bowerbank,  cr. ,  () where chief justice
marshall disposed of the effort of british subjects to docket a case in
a circuit court, saying, "turn to the article of the constitution of the
united states, for the statute cannot extend the jurisdiction beyond the
limits of the constitution."
[] hayburn's case,  dall.  ().
[] united states v. ferriera,  how.  (); gordon
v. united states,  u.s.  (); muskrat v. united states, 
[] in addition to the cases cited in note , see chicago &
s. air lines v. waterman s.s. corp.,  u.s. , - ().
[] in addition to the cases cited in notes , , and  see
federal radio commission v. general electric co.,  u.s. , 
(); postum cereal co. v. california fig nut co.,  u.s. 
(); keller v. potomac electric power co.,  u.s.  ().
see also the dissenting opinion of justice rutledge in yakus v.
united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] tutun v. united states,  u.s.  (), where the
court held that the united states is always a possible adverse party to
a naturalization petition.
[] fong yue ting v. united states,  u.s.  (),
where the court sustained an act of congress requiring the registration
of chinese and creating agencies for the expulsion of aliens unlawfully
within the country and for the issuance of certificates to those
entitled to remain. the act provided for special proceedings in such
cases and prescribed the evidence the courts were to receive and the
weight to be attached to it. the procedure was held to contain all the
elements of a case—"a complainant, a defendant, and a judge—actor,
reus, et judex." pp. -.
[] la abra silver mining co. v. united states,  u.s.
 (). here the court sustained an act of congress which directed
the attorney general to bring a suit on behalf of the united states
against the appellants to determine whether an award made by an
international claims commission was obtained by fraud. the court of
claims was vested with full jurisdiction with appeal to the supreme
court to hear the case, decide it, to issue all proper decrees therein,
and to enforce them by injunction. the court regarded the money received
by the united states from mexico as property of the united states. this
together with the interest of congress in national honor in dealing with
mexico was sufficient to enable it to authorize a suit for the decision
of a question "peculiarly judicial in nature." pp. -.
[] southern pacific co. v. jensen,  u.s.  ().
[] taylor v. carryl,  how.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] for a full account of this episode see warren, supreme
court in united states history, ii, -. see also baldwin, the
american judiciary, .
[]  pet. ,  (). see also warren, supreme court
in united states history, ii, ; and baldwin, op. cit., . it was
worcester v. georgia which allegedly provoked the probably apocryphal
comment attributed to president jackson, "'well, john marshall has made
his decision, now let him enforce it.'"  warren, ibid. .
[] mast, foos & co. v. stover mfg. co.,  u.s. 
[] covell v. heyman,  u.s.  ().
[] riehle v. margolies,  u.s.  (); harkin v.
brundage,  u.s.  (); wabash r. co. v. adelbert college, 
u.s.  (); harkrader v. wadley,  u.s.  (); central
national bank v. stevens,  u.s.  (); shields v. coleman,
 u.s.  (); moran v. sturges,  u.s.  ();
krippendorf v. hyde,  u.s.  (); covell v. heyman,  u.s.
 (); watson v. jones,  wall.  (); buck v. colbath, 
wall.  (); freeman v. howe,  how.  (); orton v.
smith,  how.  (); taylor v. carryl,  how.  (); peck
v. jenness,  how.  (). for later cases see toucey v. new
york life ins. co.,  u.s.  (). princess lida of thurn & taxis
v. thompson,  u.s.  (); brillhart v. excess ins. co., 
u.s.  (); mandeville v. canterbury,  u.s.  (); markham
v. allen,  u.s.  (); propper v. clark,  u.s. 
[] mckim v. voorhies,  cr.  (); duncan v. darst,
 how.  (); united states ex rel. riggs v. johnson county, 
wall.  (); moran v. sturges,  u.s.  (); farmers' loan
& trust co. v. lake st. elev. r. co.,  u.s.  ()
[]  wall.  ().
[] princess lida of thurn & taxis v. thompson,  u.s.
 (). this case rests on the principle of comity that where there
are two suits in rem or quasi in rem, as they were held to be here,
so that the court has possession of property which is the subject of
litigation or must have control of it in order to proceed with the cause
and grant the relief sought, the jurisdiction of one court must yield to
that of the other. the principle, applicable to both federal and state
courts, that the court first assuming jurisdiction over property may
maintain and exercise that jurisdiction to the exclusion of the other,
was held not to be confined to cases where the property has actually
been seized under judicial process, but applies as well to suits brought
for marshalling assets, administering trusts, or liquidating estates and
to suits of a similar nature, where to give effect to its jurisdiction
the court must control the property.
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c.a. §. in the judicial
code an exception is made to proceedings in bankruptcy.
[] diggs v. wolcott,  cr.  (); orton v. smith,
 how.  (); see especially peck v. jenness,  how. 
() where the court held that the prohibition of the act of 
extended to injunction suits brought against the parties to a state
court proceeding as well as to the state court itself.
[] freeman v. howe,  how.  (); julian v.
central trust co.,  u.s.  (); riverdale cotton mills v.
alabama & georgia mfg. co.,  u.s.  (); looney v. eastern
texas r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] farmers' loan & trust co. v. lake st. elev. r. co., 
u.s.  (); riverdale cotton mills v. alabama & georgia mfg. co.,
 u.s.  (); julian v. central trust co.,  u.s.  ();
kline v. burke construction co.,  u.s.  (). for a discussion
of this rule see toucey v. new york life ins. co.,  u.s. ,
[] ex parte young,  u.s.  (), is the leading
case.
[] arrowsmith v. gleason,  u.s.  (); marshall
v. holmes,  u.s.  (); simon v. southern r. co.,  u.s.
[] french v. hay,  wall.  (); dietzsch v.
huidekoper,  u.s.  (); madisonville traction co. v. st.
bernard mining co.,  u.s.  ().
[] the earlier cases are root v. woolworth,  u.s. 
(); prout v. starr,  u.s.  (); juilian v. central
trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -. justice reed, in a dissent in which chief
justice stone and justice roberts concurred, also reviewed the
authorities.
[] southern ry. co. v. painter,  u.s.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also smyth v. ames,  u.s.
 (); reagan v. farmers' loan & trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] harkrader v. wadley,  u.s.  (); in re sawyer,
[] ex parte young,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. . the young case evoked sharp criticism in
congress and led to the enactment of § of the judicial code,
prohibiting the issuance of injunctions to restrain enforcement of state
laws by a single federal judge, providing for a three-judge court in
such cases, limiting the effect of temporary injunctions, and expediting
appeals in such cases to the supreme court. act of june , , 
stat. ;  u.s.c.a. §, , . a supplementary act in 
( stat. ) amended § of the judicial code providing for the
stay of federal proceedings to enjoin state legislation if a suit has
been brought in a state court to enforce the legislation until the state
court has determined the issues. section  was amended again in 
when the provisions concerning interlocutory injunctions were extended
to include permanent injunctions. act of february , ,  stat.
[] prentis v. atlantic coast line r. co.,  u.s. 
(); gilchrist v. interborough rapid transit co.,  u.s. 
(); grubb v. public utilities commission,  u.s.  ();
beal v. missouri pacific r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] phillips v. united states,  u.s. ,  (),
citing and quoting ex parte collins,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. , , citing moore v. fidelity & deposit
co.,  u.s.  (); smith v. wilson,  u.s.  ();
oklahoma gas co. v. packing co.,  u.s.  (); ex parte
williams,  u.s.  (); ex parte public national bank,  u.s.
 (); rorick v. commissioners,  u.s.  (); ex parte
bransford,  u.s.  ().
[] warren, federal and state court interference,  harv. l.
rev. ,  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. -, -, .
[] united states v. tarble (tarble's case),  wall. ,
[]  stat. , §.
[]  stat. , § ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] rev. stat., §;  u.s.c.a. §.
[] in re neagle,  u.s.  ().
[] in re loney,  u.s.  ().
[] boske v. comingore,  u.s.  ().
[] ohio v. thomas,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] harkrader v. wadley,  u.s.  (); whitten v.
tomlinson,  u.s.  ().
[] frank v. mangum,  u.s.  (); tinsley v.
anderson,  u.s.  ().
[] maryland v. soper,  u.s. , ,  (). in
addition to the cases cited above see ex parte fonda,  u.s. 
(); duncan v. mccall,  u.s.  (); new york v. eno, .
u.s.  (); baker v. grice,  u.s.  (); matter of moran,
 u.s.  (); mooney v. holohan,  u.s.  (); ex parte
hawk,  u.s.  (). compare, however, wade v. mayo,  u.s.
 (), where it was held that failure of the petitioner to appeal
to the supreme court from a conviction sustained by the florida supreme
court did not bar relief by habeas corpus because of denial of
counsel. in ex parte hawk,  u.s.  (), the rule pertaining to
the exhaustion of remedies was applied so as to include a certiorari
petition in the supreme court. in adopting a new united states code in
 ( stat. ) congress added a new section to existing habeas
corpus provisions which stipulated that no application for a writ of
habeas corpus by a person in custody pursuant to a judgment of a state
court shall be granted until the applicant has exhausted the remedies
available in the courts of the states and that an applicant shall not be
deemed to have exhausted state remedies if he has the right under state
law to raise, by any available procedure, the question presented, 
u.s.c.a. §. this section codified ex parte hawk.
[] ibid. .
[] houston v. moore,  wheat. , - ().
[] carriage tax act,  stat.  (); license tax on wine
and spirits act,  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat. .
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  stat.  ();  stat. 
();  stat.  ();  stat.  ();  stat.  (); 
stat.  ();  stat.  ();  stat.  ().
[]  stat. . for the trial of federal offenses in state
courts see charles warren, federal criminal laws and state courts, 
harv. l. rev.  ().
[] charles warren, federal criminal laws and state courts,
 harv. l. rev. , - ().
[] justice story dissenting in houston v. moore,  wheat.
,  (); justice mclean dissenting in united states v. bailey, 
pet. ,  ().
[]  pet. ,  ().
[] robertson v. baldwin,  u.s.  (); dallemagne
v. moisan,  u.s.  (). see also teal v. felton,  how.
 (); claflin v. houseman,  u.s.  (). this last case
proceeds on the express assumption that the state and national
governments are part of a single nation and implicity repudiates the
idea of separate sovereignties, as set out in prigg v. pennsylvania,
 pet.  ().
[] mitchell wendell, relations between the federal and state
courts (new york, ), .
[]  stat.  ().
[] hoxie v. new york, n.h. & h.r. co.,  conn. 
[] brown v. western ry. co. of alabama,  u.s. 
(). see justice frankfurter's dissent in this case for a summary
of rulings to the contrary.
[]  stat. , -,  (c).
[] ibid. . justice black refers to prigg v.
pennsylvania,  pet. ,  (), and other cases as broadly
questioning the power and duty of state courts to enforce federal
criminal law. the cases primarily relied upon in the opinion are claflin
v. houseman,  u.s.  (); mondou v. new york, n.h. & h.r. co.
(second employers' liability cases),  u.s.  ().
[] cf. doyle v. continental ins. co.,  u.s. 
(), (which upheld a similar wisconsin statute), and security mut. l.
ins. co. v. prewitt,  u.s.  (); with home ins. co. v.
morse,  wall.  (); barron v. burnside,  u.s.  ();
southern p. co. v. denton,  u.s.  (); gerling v. baltimore
& o.r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); barrow s.s. co. v. kane, 
u.s. ,  (); herndon v. chicago, r.i. & p.r. co.,  u.s.
 (); harrison v. st. louis & s.f.r. co.,  u.s.  ();
donald v. philadelphia & r. coal & i. co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  edward iii, stat. , ch. . see also story's
commentaries on the constitution of the united states, vol. , -,
(th ed.).
[]  cr.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. burr,  cr. , appx. ().
[] there have been a number of lower court cases in some of
which convictions were obtained. as a result of the whiskey rebellion
convictions of treason were obtained on the basis of the ruling that
forcible resistance to the enforcement of the revenue laws was a
constructive levying of war. united states v. vigol,  fed. cas. no.
, (); united states v. mitchell,  fed. cas. no. ,
(). after conviction, the defendants were pardoned. see also for
the same ruling in a different situation the case of fries,  fed. cas.
nos. , (); , (). the defendant was again pardoned after
conviction. about a half century later participation in forcible
resistance to the fugitive slave law was held not to be a constructive
levying of war. united states v. hanway,  fed. cas. no. ,
(). although the united states government regarded the activities of
the confederate states as a levying of war, the president by amnesty
proclamation of december , , pardoned all those who had
participated on the southern side in the civil war. in applying the
captured and abandoned property act of  ( stat. ) in a civil
proceeding, the court declared that the foundation of the confederacy
was treason against the united states. sprott v. united states, 
wall.  (). see also hanauer v. doane,  wall.  ();
thorington v. smith,  wall.  (); young v. united states, 
u.s.  (). these four cases bring in the concept of adhering to the
enemy and giving him aid and comfort, but these are not criminal cases
and deal with attempts to recover property under the captured and
abandoned property act by persons who claimed that they had given no aid
or comfort to the enemy. these cases are not, therefore, an
interpretation of the constitution.
[]  law. ed. - (argument of counsel).
[] ibid. -. earlier justice jackson had declared that
this phase of treason consists of two elements: "adherence to the enemy;
and rendering him aid and comfort." a citizen, it was said, may take
actions "which do aid and comfort the enemy—***—but if there is no
adherence to the enemy in this, if there is no intent to betray, there
is no treason." ibid. . justice jackson states erroneously that the
requirement of two witnesses to the same overt act was an original
invention of the convention of . actually it comes from the british
treason trials act of  ( and  wm. iii, c. ).
[] ibid. -.
[]  u.s. , -. justice douglas cites no cases for
these propositions. justice murphy in a solitary dissent stated: "but
the act of providing shelter was of the type that might naturally arise
out of petitioner's relationship to his son, as the court recognizes. by
its very nature, therefore, it is a non-treasonous act. that is true
even when the act is viewed in light of all the surrounding
circumstances. all that can be said is that the problem of whether it
was motivated by treasonous or non-treasonous factors is left in doubt.
it is therefore not an overt act of treason, regardless of how unlawful
it might otherwise be." ibid. . the following summary, taken from the
appendix to the government's brief in cramer v. united states, 
u.s.  (), and incorporated as note  in the court's opinion (pp.
-), contains all the cases in which, prior to kawakita v. united
states, which is dealt with immediately below, construction of the
treason clause has been involved except grand jury charges and cases to
which interpretation of the clause was incidental: whiskey rebellion
cases: united states v. vigol,  fed. cas. no. , (), united
states v. mitchell,  fed. cas. no. , () (constructive
levying of war, based on forcible resistance to execution of a statute;
defendants convicted and later pardoned). house tax case: fries's case,
 fed. cas. nos. ,, , (, ) (constructive levying of war,
based on forcible resistance to execution of a statute; defendant
convicted and later pardoned). the burr conspiracy: ex parte bollman, 
cr.  (); united states v. burr,  fed. cas. nos. ,a
(); , () (conspiracy to levy war held not an overt act of
levying war). united states v. lee,  fed. cas. no. , ()
(sale of provisions a sufficient overt act; acquittal). united states
v. hodges,  fed. cas no. , () (obtaining release of
prisoners to the enemy is adhering to the enemy, the act showing the
intent; acquittal). united states v. hoxie,  fed. cas. no. ,
() (attack of smugglers on troops enforcing embargo is riot and not
levying of war). united states v. pryor,  fed. cas. no. ,
() (proceeding under flag of truce with enemy detachment to help buy
provisions is too remote an act to establish adhering to the enemy).
united states v. hanway,  fed. cas. no. , () (forcible
resistance to execution of fugitive slave law no levying of war). united
states v. greiner,  fed. cas. no. , () (participation as
members of state militia company in seizure of a federal fort is a
levying of war). united states v. greathouse,  fed. cas. no. ,
() (fitting out and sailing a privateer is a levying of war;
defendants convicted, later pardoned). cases of confiscation of property
or refusal to enforce obligations given in connection with sale of
provisions to the confederacy: hanauer v. doane,  wall.  ();
carlisle v. united states,  wall.  (); sprott v. united
states,  wall. , [transcriber's note: "" is incorrect—case
occupies  wall. - ()] (); united states v. athens
armory,  fed. cas. no. , () (mixed motive, involving
commercial profit, does not bar finding of giving aid and comfort to the
enemy). united states v. cathcart and united states v. parmenter, 
fed. cas. no. , (). chenoweth's case (unreported: see ex
parte vallandigham,  fed. cas. no. ,, at  ()) (indictment
bad for alleging aiding and abetting rebels, instead of directly
charging levying of war). case of jefferson davis,  fed. cas. no. a
(-) (argument that rebels whose government achieved status of a
recognized belligerent could not be held for treason; davis was not
tried on the indictment); see  warren, supreme court in united states
history ( ed.) -; watson, trial of jefferson davis () 
yale l.j. . philippine insurrections: united states v. magtibay, 
phil.  (), united states v. de los reyes,  phil.  ()
(mere possession of rebel commissions insufficient overt acts; strict
enforcement of two-witness requirement; convictions reversed); united
states v. lagnason,  phil.  () (armed effort to overthrow the
government is levying war). united states v. fricke,  f.  ()
(acts "indifferent" on their face held sufficient overt acts). united
states v. robinson,  f.  () (dictum, acts harmless on their
face are insufficient overt acts). united states v. werner,  f. 
(), affirmed in  u.s.  () (act indifferent on its face may
be sufficient overt act). united states v. haupt,  f. (d) 
() (reversal of conviction on strict application of two-witness
requirement and other grounds; inferentially approves acts harmless on
their face as overt acts). stephan v. united states,  f. (d) 
() (acts harmless on their face may be sufficient overt acts;
conviction affirmed but sentence commuted). united states v. cramer,
 f. (d)  ().
[] ibid. . for citations on the subject of dual
nationality, see ibid.  note . three dissenters asserted that
kawakita's conduct in japan clearly showed he was consistently
demonstrating his allegiance to japan. "as a matter of law, he
expatriated himself as well as that can be done." ibid. .
[] ex parte bollman,  cr.  ().
[] united states v. burr,  cr.  ().
[] cramer v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] haupt v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte bollman,  cr. , ,  ().
[]  stat. . this act incidentally did not designate
rebellion as treason.
[] miller v. united states,  wall. ,  ().
[] wallach v. van riswick,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lord de la warre's case,  coke,  a. a number of cases
dealt with the effect of a full pardon by the president of owners of
property confiscated under this act. they held that a full pardon
relieved the owner of forfeiture as far as the government was concerned,
but did not divide the interest acquired by third persons from the
government during the lifetime of the offender. illinois central r. co.
v. bosworth,  u.s. ,  (); knote v. united states, 
u.s.  (); wallach v. van riswick,  u.s. ,  ();
armstrong's foundry v. united states,  wall. ,  (). there
is no direct ruling on the question of whether only citizens can commit
treason. in carlisle v. united states,  wall. , - (),
the court declared that aliens while domiciled in this country owe a
temporary allegiance to it and may be punished for treason equally with
a native-born citizen in the absence of a treaty stipulation to the
contrary. this case involved the attempt of certain british subjects to
recover claims for property seized under the captured and abandoned
property act,  stat.  () which provided for the recovery of
property or its value in suits in the court of claims by persons who had
not rendered aid and comfort to the enemy. earlier in united states v.
wiltberger,  wheat. ,  (), which involved a conviction for
manslaughter under an act punishing manslaughter and treason on the high
seas, chief justice marshall going beyond the necessities of the case
stated that treason "is a breach of allegiance, and can be committed by
him only who owes allegiance either perpetual or temporary."
[pg ]
section . full faith and credit page
sources and effect of this provision 
private international law 
importance of the constitutional provision 
acts of  and  
force and effect of same 
judgments: primary concern of the provision 
two principal classes of judgments 
effect to be given in forum state 
jurisdictional prerequisite 
judgments in personam 
jurisdictional question 
service on foreign corporations 
service on out-of-state owners of motor vehicles 
judgments in rem 
thompson v. whitman 
divorce decrees 
jurisdictional prerequisite: domicile 
haddock v. haddock 
emergence of the domicile question 
williams i and ii 
cases involving claims for alimony or property arising in forum state 
recent cases 
state of the law today: quaere 
decrees awarding alimony, custody of children 
collateral attack by child 
decrees of other types 
probate decrees 
adoption decrees 
garnishment decrees 
fraud as a defense to suits on foreign judgments 
penal judgments: types entitled to recognition 
recognition of rights based upon constitutions, statutes, common law 
the early rule 
development of the modern rule 
transitory actions: death statutes 
actions upon contract: when governed by law of place of making 
stockholder-corporation relationship 
fraternal benefit society--member relationship 
insurance company, building and loan association--contractual relationships 
workmen's compensation statutes 
development of section to date and possibilities 
evaluation of results 
scope of powers of congress under section 
full faith and credit in the federal courts 
judgments of foreign states 
section . interstate comity 
clause . the comity clause 
sources 
theories as to its purpose 
how implemented 
"citizens of each state" 
corporations 
"all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states" 
discrimination in private rights 
access to courts 
taxation 
clause . fugitives from justice 
duty to surrender 
"fugitive from justice" 
procedure of removal 
trial of fugitive after removal 
clause . fugitives from labor 
section . new states and government of territory, etc. 
clause . admission of states 
doctrine of equality of the states 
earlier scope of the doctrine 
citizenship of inhabitants 
judicial proceedings 
property rights; united states v. texas 
rights conveyed to private persons before admission of state 
clause . property and territory; regulatory powers of congress 
property of the united states 
methods of disposing 
public lands 
power of the states 
power of congress over territories 
section . obligations of united states to the states 
republican form of government 
protection against domestic violence 
decline in importance of this guaranty 
[pg ]
article iv
section . full faith and credit shall be given in each state
to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other
state. and the congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in
which such acts, records and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect
thereof.
sources and effect of this provision
the historical background of the above section is furnished by that
branch of private law which is variously termed "private international
law," "conflict of laws," "comity." this comprises a body of rules,
based largely on the writings of jurists and judicial decisions, in
accordance with which the courts of one country or "jurisdiction" will
ordinarily, in the absence of a local policy to the contrary, extend
recognition and enforcement to rights claimed by individuals by virtue
of the laws or judicial decisions of another country or "jurisdiction."
most frequently applied examples of these rules include the following:
the rule that a marriage which is good in the country where performed
(lex loci) is good elsewhere; likewise the rule that contracts are to
be interpreted in accordance with the laws of the country where entered
into (lex loci contractus) unless the parties clearly intended
otherwise; also the rule that immovables may be disposed of only in
accordance with the law of the country where situated (lex rei
sitae);[] also the converse rule that chattels adhere to the person of
their owner and hence are disposable by him, even when located
elsewhere, in accordance with the law of his domicile (lex domicilii);
also the rule that regardless of where the cause arose, the courts of
any country where personal service can be got upon the defendant will
take jurisdiction of certain types of personal actions, hence termed
"transitory," and accord such remedy as the lex fori affords. still
other rules, of first importance in the present connection, determine
the recognition which the judgments of the courts of one country shall
receive from those of another country.
[pg ]
so even had the states of the union remained in a mutual relationship of
entire independence, still private claims originating in one would often
have been assured recognition and enforcement in the others. the framers
of the constitution felt, however, that the rules of private
international law should not be left as among the states altogether on a
basis of comity, and hence subject always to the overruling local policy
of the lex fori, but ought to be in some measure at least placed on
the higher plane of constitutional obligation. in fulfillment of this
intent the section now under consideration was inserted, and congress
was empowered to enact supplementary and enforcing legislation.
congressional legislation under the full faith and credit clause, so far
as it is pertinent to adjudication thereunder, is today embraced in
section  of title  of the united states code, which consolidates
the acts of may ,  and of march , .[] "the acts of the
legislature of any state or territory, or of any country subject to the
jurisdiction of the united states, shall be authenticated by having the
seals of such state, territory, or country affixed thereto. the records
and judicial proceedings of the courts of any state or territory, or of
any such country, shall be proved or admitted in any other court within
the united states, by the attestation of the clerk, and the seal of the
court annexed, if there be a seal, together with a certificate of the
judge, chief justice, or presiding magistrate, that the said attestation
is in due form. and the said records and judicial proceedings, so
authenticated, shall have such faith and credit given to them in every
court within the united states as they have by law or usage in the
courts of the state from which they are taken."
several points clearly emerge: () the word "effect" is construed as
referring to the effect of the records when authenticated, not to the
effect of the authentication; () the faith and credit which is required
by the rules of private international law is superseded as to "the
records and judicial proceedings" of each state by a rule of complete
obligation; as to these the local policy of the forum state can validly
have no application. on the other hand, () while the act of  lays
down a rule for the authentication of the statutes of the several
states, it says nothing regarding their extraterritorial operation; and
() it is similarly silent regarding the common law of the several
states. these silences, however, have been repealed, in part, by
judicial decision. (see pp. -.)
[pg ]
judgments: the primary concern of the provision
article iv, section , has had its principal operation in relation to
judgments. the cases fall into two groups: first, those in which the
judgment involved was offered as a basis of proceedings for its own
enforcement outside the state where rendered, as for example, when an
action for debt is brought in the courts of state b on a judgment for
money damages rendered in state a; secondly, those in which the judgment
involved was offered, in conformance with the principle of res
judicata, in defense in a new or "collateral" proceeding growing out of
the same facts as the original suit, as for example, when a decree of
divorce granted in state a is offered as barring a suit for divorce by
the other party to the marriage in the courts of state b.
the english courts and the different state courts in the united states,
while recognizing "foreign judgments in personam" which were reducible
to money terms as affording a basis for actions in debt, originally
accorded them generally only the status of prima facie evidence in
support thereof, so that the merits of the original controversy could
always be opened. when offered in defense, on the other hand, "foreign
judgments in personam" were ordinarily treated as conclusive, as
between parties, of the issues they purported to determine, provided
they had been rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction and were not
tainted with fraud. and judgments "in rem" rendered under the same
conditions were regarded as conclusive upon everybody on the theory
that, as stated by chief justice marshall, "it is a proceeding in rem,
to which all the world are parties."[]
the pioneer case was mills v. duryee,[] decided in . in an action
brought in the circuit court of the district of columbia—the equivalent
of a state court for this purpose—on a judgment from a new york court,
the defendant endeavored to reopen the whole question of the merits of
the original case by a plea of "nil debet." it was answered in the
words of the act of  itself, that such records and proceedings were
entitled in each state to the same faith and credit as in the state of
origin; and that inasmuch as they were records of a court in the state
of origin, and so conclusive of the merits of the case there, they were
equally so in the forum state. the court adopted the latter view, saying
that it had not been the intention of the constitution merely to reenact
the common law—that is, the principles of private international law—as
to the reception of foreign judgments, but to amplify and fortify
these.[] and in hampton v. mcconnell[] some years later, chief
justice marshall went even further, [pg ]using language which seems to show
that he regarded the judgment of a state court as constitutionally
entitled to be accorded in the courts of sister states not simply the
faith and credit of conclusive evidence, but the validity of a final
judgment.
when, however, the next important case arose, the court has come under
new influences. this was mcelmoyle v. cohen,[] decided in , in
which the issue was whether a statute of limitations of the state of
georgia, which applied only to judgments obtained in courts other than
those of georgia, could constitutionally bar an action in georgia on a
judgment rendered by a court of record of south carolina. declining to
follow marshall's lead in hampton v. mcconnell, the court held that
the constitution was not intended "materially to interfere with the
essential attributes of the lex fori"; that the act of congress only
established a rule of evidence, of conclusive evidence to be sure, but
still of evidence only; and that it was necessary, in order to carry
into effect in a state the judgment of a court of a sister state, to
institute a fresh action in the court of the former, in strict
compliance with its laws; and that consequently, when remedies were
sought in support of the rights accruing in another jurisdiction, they
were governed by the lex fori. in accord with this holding it has been
further held that foreign judgments enjoy, not the right of priority or
privilege or lien which they have in the state where they are
pronounced, but only that which the lex fori gives them by its own
laws, in their character of foreign judgments.[] a judgment of a state
court, in a cause within its jurisdiction, and against a defendant
lawfully summoned, or against lawfully attached property of an absent
defendant, is entitled to as much force and effect against the person
summoned or the property attached, when the question is presented for
decision in a court in another state, as it has in the state in which it
was rendered.[]
[pg ]a judgment enforceable in the state where rendered must be given effect
in the other state, although the modes of procedure to enforce its
collection may not be the same in both states.[] if the court has
acquired jurisdiction, the judgment is entitled to full faith and credit
though the court may not be able to enforce it by execution in the state
in which it was rendered, as where the defendant left the state after
service upon him and took all his property with him. while the want of
power to enforce a judgment or decree may afford a reason against
entertaining jurisdiction, it has nothing to do with the validity of a
judgment or decree when made.[] in the words of the court in a recent
case: "a cause of action on a judgment is different from that upon which
the judgment was entered. in a suit upon a money judgment for a civil
cause of action, the validity of the claim upon which it was founded is
not open to inquiry, whatever its genesis. regardless of the nature of
the right which gave rise to it, the judgment is an obligation to pay
money in the nature of a debt upon a specialty. recovery upon it can be
resisted only on the grounds that the court which rendered it was
without jurisdiction, *** or that it has ceased to be obligatory
because of payment or other discharge *** or that it is a cause of
action for which the state of the forum has not provided a court
on the other hand, the clause is not violated when a judgment is
disregarded because it is not conclusive of the issues before a court of
the forum. conversely, no greater effect can be given than is given in
the state where rendered. thus an interlocutory judgment may not be
given the effect of a final judgment.[] likewise when a federal court
does not attempt to foreclose the state court from hearing all matters
of personal defense which landowners might plead, a state court may
refuse to accept the former's judgment as determinative of the
landowners' liabilities.[] similarly, though a confession of judgment
upon a note, with a warrant of attorney annexed, in favor of the holder,
is in conformity with a state law and usage as declared by the highest
court of the state in which the judgment is rendered, the judgment may
be collaterally impeached upon the ground that the party in whose behalf
it was rendered was not in fact the holder.[] but a consent decree,
which under the law of the state has the same force and effect as a
decree in invitum, must be given the same effect in the courts of
another state.[]
[pg ]one result produced by not following hampton v. mcconnell is that even
nowadays the court is sometimes confronted with the contention that a
state need not provide a forum for some particular type of judgment from
a sister state, a claim which it has by no means met with clear-cut
principles. thus in one case it held that a new york statute forbidding
foreign corporations doing a domestic business to sue on causes
originating outside the state was constitutionally applicable to prevent
such a corporation from suing on a judgment obtained in a sister
state.[] but in a later case it ruled that a mississippi statute
forbidding contracts in cotton futures could not validly close the
courts of the state to an action on a judgment obtained in a sister
state on such a contract, although the contract in question had been
entered into in the forum state and between its citizens.[] following
the later rather than the earlier precedent, subsequent cases[] have
held: () that a state may adopt such system of courts and form of
remedy as it sees fit, but cannot, under the guise of merely affecting
the remedy, deny enforcement of claims otherwise within the protection
of the full faith and credit clause when its courts have general
jurisdiction of the subject matter and the parties;[] () that,
accordingly, a forum state, which has a shorter period of limitations
than the state in which a judgment was granted and later reviewed, erred
in concluding that, whatever the effect of the revivor under the law of
the state of origin, it could refuse enforcement of the revived
[pg ]judgment;[] () that the courts of one state have no jurisdiction to
enjoin the enforcement of judgments at law obtained in another state,
when the same reasons assigned for granting the restraining order were
passed upon on a motion for new trial in the action at law and the
motion denied;[] () that the constitutional mandate requires credit
to be given to a money judgment rendered in a civil cause of action in
another state, even though the forum state would have been under no duty
to entertain the suit on which the judgment was founded, inasmuch as a
state cannot, by the adoption of a particular rule of liability or of
procedure, exclude from its courts a suit on a judgment;[] and ()
that similarly, tort claimants in state a, who obtain a judgment against
a foreign insurance company, notwithstanding that, prior to judgment,
domiciliary state b appointed a liquidator for the company, vested
company assets in him, and ordered suits against the company stayed, are
entitled to have such judgment recognized in state b for purposes of
determining the amount of their claim, although not for determination of
what priority, if any, their claim should have.[] moreover, there is
no apparent reason why congress, acting on the implications of
marshall's words in hampton v. mcconnell, should not clothe extrastate
judgments of any particular type with the full status of domestic
judgments of the same type in the several states.[]
the jurisdictional prerequisite
the second great class of cases to arise under the full faith and credit
clause comprises those raising the question whether a judgment for which
extrastate operation was being sought, either as a basis of an action or
as a defense in one, has been rendered with jurisdiction. records and
proceedings of courts wanting jurisdiction are not entitled to
credit.[] the jurisdictional question arises both in connection with
[pg ]judgments in personam against nonresident defendants upon whom it is
alleged personal service was not obtained in the state of origin of the
judgment, and in relation to judgments in rem against property or a
status alleged not to have been within the jurisdiction of the court
which handed down the original decree.[]
the pioneer case is that of d'arcy v. ketchum,[] decided in .
the question presented was whether a judgment rendered by a new york
court under a statute which provided that, when joint debtors were sued
and one of them was brought into court on a process, a judgment in favor
of the plaintiff would entitle him to execute against all, and so must
be accorded full faith and credit in louisiana when offered as the basis
of an action in debt against a resident of that state who had not been
served by process in the new york action. pressed with the argument that
by "the immutable principles of justice" no man's rights should be
impaired without his being given an opportunity to defend them, the
court ruled that, interpreted in the light of the principles of
"international law and comity" as they existed in , the act of
congress of that year did not reach the case.[] the truth is that the
decision virtually amended the act, for had the louisiana defendant
ventured to new york, he could, as the constitution of the united states
then stood, have been subjected to the judgment of the same extent as
the new york defendant who had been personally served. subsequently,
this disparity between the operation of a personal judgment in the home
state and a sister state has been eliminated, thanks to the adoption of
the fourteenth amendment. in divorce cases, however, it still persists
in some measure. (see pp. -.)
[pg ]in pennoyer v. neff,[] decided in , and so under the amendment,
the court held that a judgment given in a case in which the state court
had endeavored to acquire jurisdiction of a nonresident defendant by an
attachment upon property of his within the state and constructive notice
to him, had not been rendered with jurisdiction and hence could not
afford the basis of an action in the court of another state against such
defendant, although it bound him so far as the property attached was
concerned, on account of the inherent right of a state to assist its own
citizens in obtaining satisfaction of their just claims. nor would such
a judgment, the court further indicated, be due process of law to any
greater extent in the state where rendered. in the words of a later
case, "an ordinary personal judgment for money, invalid for want of
service amounting to due process of law, is as ineffective in the state
as outside of it."[]
in short, when the subject matter of a suit is merely the determination
of the defendant's liability, it is necessary that it should appear from
the record that the defendant had been brought within the jurisdiction
of the court by personal service of process, or his voluntary
appearance, or that he had in some manner authorized the proceeding.[]
the claim that a judgment was "not responsive to the pleadings" raises
the jurisdictional question;[] but the fact that a nonresident
defendant was only temporarily in the state when he was served in the
original action does not vitiate the judgment rendered as the basis of
an action in his home state.[] also, a judgment rendered in the state
of his domicile against a defendant who, pursuant to the statute thereof
providing for the service of process on absent defendants, was
personally served in another state is entitled to full faith and
credit.[] also, when the matter of fact or law on which jurisdiction
depends was not litigated in the original suit, it is a matter to be
adjudicated in the suit founded upon the judgment.[]
inasmuch as the principle of res judicata applies only to proceedings
between the same parties and privies, the plea by defendant in an action
based on a judgment that he was no party or privy to the [pg ]original
action raises the question of jurisdiction; and while a judgment against
a corporation in one state may validly bind a stockholder in another
state to the extent of the par value of his holdings,[] an
administrator acting under a grant of administration in one state stands
in no sort of relation of priority to an administrator of the same
estate in another state.[] but where a judgment of dismissal was
entered in a federal court in an action against one of two joint
tortfeasors, in a state in which such a judgment would constitute an
estoppel in another action in the same state against the other
tort-feasor, such judgment is not entitled to full faith and credit in
an action brought against the other tortfeasor in another state.[]
in  the court decided lafayette insurance co. v. french et
al.,[] a pioneer case in its general class. here it was held that
"where a corporation chartered by the state of indiana was allowed by a
law of ohio to transact business in the latter state upon the condition
that service of process upon the agent of the corporation should be
considered as service upon the corporation itself, a judgment obtained
against the corporation by means of such process" ought to receive in
indiana the same faith and credit as it was entitled to in ohio.[]
later cases establish under both the fourteenth amendment and article
iv, section , that the cause of action must have arisen within the
state obtaining service in this way,[] that service on an officer of a
corporation, not its resident agent and not present in the state in an
official capacity, will not confer jurisdiction over the
corporation;[] that the question whether the corporation was actually
"doing business" in the state may be raised.[] on the other hand, the
fact that the business was interstate is no objection.[]
by analogy to the above cases, it has been held that a state may require
nonresident owners of motor vehicles to designate an official within the
state as an agent upon whom process may be served in any legal
proceedings growing out of their operation of a motor vehicle within the
state;[] and while these cases arose under the fourteenth [pg ]amendment
alone, unquestionably a judgment validly obtained upon this species of
service could be enforced upon the owner of a car through the courts of
his home state.
in sustaining the challenge to jurisdiction in cases involving judgments
in personam, the court was in the main making only a somewhat more
extended application of recognized principles. in order to sustain the
same kind of challenge in cases involving judgments in rem it has had
to make law outright. the leading case is thompson v. whitman,[]
decided in . thompson, sheriff of monmouth county, new jersey,
acting under a new jersey statute, had seized a sloop belonging to
whitman, and by a proceeding in rem had obtained its condemnation and
forfeiture in a local court. later, whitman, a citizen of new york,
brought an action for trespass against thompson in the united states
circuit court for the southern district of new york, and thompson
answered by producing a record of the proceedings before the new jersey
tribunal. whitman thereupon set up the contention that the new jersey
court had acted without jurisdiction inasmuch as the sloop which was the
subject matter of the proceedings had been seized outside the county to
which, by the statute under which it had acted, its jurisdiction was
confined.
thompson v. whitman
as previously explained, the plea of lack of privity cannot be set up in
defense in a sister state against a judgment in rem. it is, on the
other hand, required of a proceeding in rem that the res be within
the court's jurisdiction, and this, it was urged, had not been the case
in thompson v. whitman. could, then, the court consider this challenge
with respect to a judgment which was offered not as the basis for an
action for enforcement through the courts of a sister state, but merely
as a defense in a collateral action? as the law stood in , it
apparently could not.[] all difficulties, nevertheless, to its
consideration of the challenge to jurisdiction in the case were brushed
aside by the court. whenever, it said, the record of a judgment rendered
in a state court is offered "in evidence" by either of the parties to an
action in another state, it may be contradicted as to the facts
necessary to sustain the former court's jurisdiction; "and if it be
shown that such facts did not exist, the record will be a nullity,
notwithstanding the claim that they did exist."[]
[pg ]
divorce decrees
this however, was only the beginning of the court's lawmaking in cases
in rem. the most important class of such cases is that in which the
respondent to a suit for divorce offers in defense an earlier decree
from the courts of a sister state. by the almost universally accepted
view prior to  a proceeding in divorce was one against the marriage
status, i.e., in rem, and hence might be validly brought by either
party in any state where he or she was bona fide domiciled;[] and,
conversely, when the plaintiff did not have a bona fide domicile in
the state, a court could not render a decree binding in other states
even if the nonresident defendant entered a personal appearance.[] but
in  the court discovered, by a vote of five-to-four, a situation in
which a divorce proceeding is one in personam.
haddock v. haddock
the case referred to is haddock v. haddock,[] while the earlier rule
is illustrated by atherton v. atherton,[] decided five years
previously. in the latter it was held, in the former denied, that a
divorce granted a husband without personal service upon the wife, who at
the time was residing in another state, was entitled to recognition
under the full faith and credit clause and the acts of congress; the
difference between the cases consisting solely in the fact that in the
atherton case the husband had driven the wife from their joint home by
his conduct, while in the haddock case he had deserted her. the court
which granted the divorce in atherton v. atherton was held to have had
jurisdiction of the marriage status, with the result that the proceeding
was one in rem and hence required only service by publication upon the
respondent. haddock's suit, on the contrary, was held to be as to the
wife in personam, and so to require personal service upon her, or her
voluntary appearance, neither of which had been had; although,
notwithstanding this, the decree in the latter case was held to be valid
as to the state where obtained on account of the state's inherent power
to determine the status of its own citizens. the upshot was a situation
in which a man and a woman, when both were in connecticut, were
divorced; when both were in new york, [pg ]were married; and when the one
was in connecticut and the other in new york, the former was divorced
and the latter married. in atherton v. atherton the court had earlier
acknowledged that "a husband without a wife, or a wife without a
husband, is unknown to the law."
the practical difficulties and distresses likely to result from such
anomalies were pointed out by critics of the decision at the time. in
point of fact, they have been largely avoided, because most of the state
courts have continued to give judicial recognition and full faith and
credit to one another's divorce proceedings on the basis of the older
idea that a divorce proceeding is one in rem, and that if the
applicant is bona fide domiciled in the state the court has
jurisdiction in this respect. moreover, until the second of the williams
v. north carolina cases[] was decided in , there had not been
manifested the slightest disposition to challenge judicially the power
of the states to determine what shall constitute domicile for divorce
purposes. shortly prior thereto, in , the court in davis v.
davis[] rejected contentions adverse to the validity of a virginia
decree of which enforcement was sought in the district of columbia. in
this case, a husband, after having obtained in the district a decree of
separation subject to payment of alimony, established years later a
residence in virginia, and sued there for a divorce. personally served
in the district, where she continued to reside, the wife filed a plea
denying that her husband was a resident of virginia and averred that he
was guilty of a fraud on the court in seeking to establish a residence
for purposes of jurisdiction. in ruling that the virginia decree,
granting to the husband an absolute divorce minus any alimony payment,
was enforceable in the district, the court stated that in view of the
wife's failure, while in virginia litigating her husband's status to
sue, to answer the husband's charges of wilful desertion, it would be
unreasonable to hold that the husband's domicile in virginia was not
sufficient to entitle him to a divorce effective in the district. the
finding of the virginia court on domicile and jurisdiction was declared
to bind the wife. davis v. davis is distinguishable from the williams
v. north carolina decisions in that in the former, determination of
the jurisdictional prerequisite of domicile was made in a contested
proceeding, while in the williams cases it was not.
[pg ]
williams i and ii
in the williams i and williams ii cases, the husband of one marriage and
the wife of another left north carolina, obtained six-week divorce
decrees in nevada, married there, and resumed their residence in north
carolina where both previously had been married and domiciled.
prosecuted for bigamy, the defendants relied upon their nevada decrees;
and won the preliminary round of this litigation; that is, williams
i,[] when a majority of the justices, overruling haddock v. haddock,
declared that in this case, the court must assume that the petitioners
for divorce had a bona fide domicile in nevada, and not that their
nevada domicile was a sham. "*** each state, by virtue of its command
over its domiciliaries and its large interest in the institution of
marriage, can alter within its own borders the marriage status of the
spouse domiciled there, even though the other spouse is absent. there is
no constitutional barrier if the form and nature of substituted service
meet the requirements of due process." accordingly, a decree granted by
nevada to one, who, it is assumed, is at the time bona fide domiciled
therein, is binding upon the courts of other states, including north
carolina in which the marriage was performed and where the other party
to the marriage is still domiciled when the divorce was decreed. in view
of its assumptions, which it justified on the basis of an inadequate
record, the court did not here pass upon the question whether north
carolina had the power to refuse full faith and credit to a nevada
decree because it was based on residence rather than domicile; or
because, contrary to the findings of the nevada court, north carolina
found that no bona fide domicile had been acquired in nevada.[]
presaging what ruling the court would make when it did get around to
passing upon the latter question, justice jackson, dissenting in
williams i, protested that "this decision repeals the divorce laws of
all the states and substitutes the law of nevada as to all marriages one
of the parties to which can afford a short trip there. *** while a
state can no doubt set up its own standards of domicile as to its
internal concerns, i do not think it can require us to accept and in the
name of the constitution impose them on other states. *** the effect
of the court's decision today—that we must give extraterritorial effect
to any judgment that a state honors for its own purposes—is to deprive
this court of control over the operation of the full faith and credit
and the due process clauses of the federal constitution in cases of
contested jurisdiction and to vest it in the first state to pass on the
facts necessary to jurisdiction."[]
[pg ]notwithstanding that one of the deserted spouses had died since the
initial trial and that another had remarried, north carolina, without
calling into question the status of the latter marriage began a new
prosecution for bigamy; and when the defendants appealed the conviction
resulting therefrom, the supreme court, in williams ii,[] sustained
the adjudication of guilt as not denying full faith and credit to the
nevada divorce decree. reiterating the doctrine that jurisdiction to
grant divorce is founded on domicile,[] a majority of the court held
that a decree of divorce rendered in one state may be collaterally
impeached in another by proof that the court which rendered the decree
lacked jurisdiction (the parties not having been domiciled therein),
even though the record of proceedings in that court purports to show
jurisdiction.[]
[pg ]
in esenwein v. commonwealth,[] decided on the same day as the second
williams case, the supreme court also sustained a pennsylvania court in
its refusal to recognize an ex parte nevada decree on the ground that
the husband who obtained it never acquired a bona fide domicile in the
latter state. in this instance, the husband and wife had separated in
pennsylvania, where the wife was granted a support order; and after two
unsuccessful attempts to win a divorce in that state, the husband
departed for nevada. upon the receipt of a nevada decree, the husband
thereafter established a residence in ohio, and filed an action in
pennsylvania for total relief from the support order. in a concurring
opinion, in which he was joined by justices black and rutledge, justice
douglas stressed the "basic difference [pg ]between the problem of marital
capacity and the problem of support," and stated that it was "not
apparent that the spouse who obtained the decree can defeat an action
for maintenance or support in another state by showing that he was
domiciled in the state which awarded him the divorce decree," unless the
other spouse appeared or was personally served. "the state where the
deserted wife is domiciled has a deep concern in the welfare of the
family deserted by the head of the household. if he is required to
support his former wife, he is not made a bigamist and the offspring of
his second marriage are not bastardized." or as succinctly stated by
justice rutledge, "the jurisdictional foundation for a decree in one
state capable of foreclosing an action for maintenance or support in
another may be different from that required to alter the marital status
with extraterritorial effect."[]
three years later, but on this occasion as spokesman for a majority of
the court, justice douglas reiterated these views in the case of estin
v. estin.[] even though it acknowledged the validity of an ex
parte nevada decree obtained by a husband, new york was held not to
have denied full faith and credit to said decree when, subsequently
thereto, it granted the wife a judgment for arrears in alimony founded
upon a decree of separation previously awarded to her when both she and
her husband were domiciled in new york. the nevada decree, issued to the
husband after he had resided there a year and upon constructive notice
to the wife in new york who entered no appearance, was held to be
effective only to change the marital status of both parties in all
states of the union but ineffective on the issue of alimony. divorce, in
other words, was viewed as being divisible; and nevada, in the absence
of acquiring jurisdiction over the wife, was held incapable of
adjudicating the rights of the wife in the prior new york judgment
awarding her alimony. accordingly, the nevada decree could not prevent
new york from applying its own rule of law which, unlike that of
pennsylvania,[] does permit a support order to survive a divorce
decree.[] such a result was justified as accommodating the interests
of both new york and nevada in the broken marriage by restricting each
state to matters of her dominant concern, the concern of new york being
that of protecting the abandoned wife against impoverishment.
[pg ]
fears registered by the dissenters in the second williams case that the
stability of all divorces might be undermined thereby and that
thereafter the court of each forum state, by its own independent
determination of domicile, might refuse recognition of foreign decrees
were temporarily set at rest by the holding in sherrer v. sherrer,[]
wherein massachusetts, a state of domiciliary origin, was required to
accord full faith and credit to a -day florida decree which had been
contested by the husband. the latter, upon receiving notice by mail,
retained florida counsel who entered a general appearance and denied all
allegations in the complaint, including the wife's residence. at the
hearing the husband, though present in person and by counsel, did not
offer evidence in rebuttal of the wife's proof of her florida residence;
and when the florida court ruled that she was a bona fide resident,
the husband did not appeal. inasmuch as the findings of the requisite
jurisdictional facts, unlike those in the second williams case, were
made in proceedings in which the defendant appeared and participated,
the requirements of full faith and credit were held to bar him from
collaterally attacking such findings in a suit instituted by him in his
home state of massachusetts, particularly in the absence of proof that
the divorce decree was subject to such collateral attack in a florida
court. having failed to take advantage of the opportunities afforded him
by his appearance in the florida proceeding, the husband was thereafter
precluded from re-litigating in another state the issue of his wife's
domicile already passed upon by the florida court.
in coe v. coe,[] embracing a similar set of facts, the court applied
like reasoning to reach a similar result. massachusetts again was
compelled to recognize the validity of a six-week nevada decree obtained
by a husband who had left massachusetts after a court of that state had
refused him a divorce and had granted his wife separate support. in the
nevada proceeding, the wife appeared personally and by counsel filed a
cross-complaint for divorce, admitted the husband's residence, and
participated personally in the proceedings. after finding that it had
jurisdiction of the plaintiff, defendant, and the subject matter
involved, the nevada court granted the wife a [pg ]divorce, which was valid,
final, and not subject to collateral attack under nevada law. the
husband married again, and on his return to massachusetts, his ex-wife
petitioned the massachusetts court to adjudge him in contempt for
failing to make payments for her separate support under the earlier
massachusetts decree. inasmuch as there was no intimation that under
massachusetts law a decree of separate support would survive a divorce,
recognition of the nevada decree as valid accordingly necessitated a
rejection of the ex-wife's contention.
appearing to revive williams ii, and significant for the social
consequences produced by the result decreed therein, is the recent case
of rice v. rice.[] to determine the widowhood status of the party
litigants in relation to inheritance of property of a husband who had
deserted his first wife in connecticut, had obtained an ex parte
divorce in nevada, and after remarriage, had died without ever returning
to connecticut, the first wife, joining the second wife and the
administrator of his estate as defendants, petitioned a connecticut
court for a declaratory judgment. after having placed upon the first
wife the burden of proving that the decedent had not acquired a bona
fide domicile in nevada, and after giving proper weight to the claims
of power by the nevada court, the connecticut court concluded that the
evidence sustained the contentions of the first wife; and in so doing,
it was upheld by the supreme court. the cases of sherrer v. sherrer,
 u.s.  () and coe v. coe,  u.s.  (), previously
discussed, were declared not to be in point; inasmuch as no personal
service was made upon the first wife, nor did she in any way participate
in the nevada proceedings. she was not, therefore, precluded from
challenging the finding of the nevada court that the decedent was, at
the time of the divorce, domiciled in that state.[]
[pg ]
upon summation one may speculate as to whether the doctrine of divisible
divorce, as developed by justice douglas in estin v. estin,  u.s.
 (), has not become the prevailing standard for determining the
enforceability of foreign divorce decrees. if such be the case, it may
be tenable to assert that an ex parte divorce, founded upon
acquisition of domicile by one spouse in the state which granted it, is
effective to destroy the marital status of both parties in the state of
domiciliary origin and probably in all other states and therefore to
preclude subsequent prosecutions for bigamy, but not to alter rights as
to property, alimony, or custody of children in the state of domiciliary
origin of a spouse who was neither served nor personally appeared.
resulting as a by-product of divorce litigation are decrees for the
payment of alimony, judgments for accrued and unpaid instalments of
alimony, and judicial awards of the custody of children, all of which
necessitate application of the full faith and credit clause when
extrastate enforcement is sought for them. thus a judgment in state a
for alimony in arrears and payable under a prior judgment of separation
which is not by its terms conditional, nor subject by the law of state a
to modification or recall, and on which execution was directed to issue,
is entitled to recognition in the forum state. although an obligation
for accrued alimony could have been modified or set aside in state a
prior to its merger in the judgment, such a judgment, by the law of
state a, is not lacking in finality.[] as to the finality of alimony
decrees in general, the court had previously ruled that where such a
decree is rendered, payable in future instalments, the right to such
instalments becomes absolute and vested on becoming due, provided no
modification of the decree has been made prior to the maturity of the
instalments.[] however, a judicial order requiring the payment of
arrearages in alimony, which exceeded the alimony previously decreed, is
invalid for want of due process, the respondent having been given no
opportunity to contest it.[] "a judgment obtained in violation of
procedural due process," said chief [pg ]justice stone, "is not entitled to
full faith and credit when sued upon in another jurisdiction."[]
a recent example of a custody case was one involving a florida divorce
decree which was granted ex parte to a wife who had left her husband
in new york, where he was served by publication. the decree carried with
it an award of the exclusive custody of the child, whom the day before
the husband had secretly seized and brought back to new york. the court
ruled that the decree was adequately honored by a new york court when,
in habeas corpus proceedings, it gave the father rights of visitation
and custody of the child during stated periods, and exacted a surety
bond of the wife conditioned on her delivery of the child to the father
at the proper times,[] it having not been "shown that the new york
court in modifying the florida decree exceeded the limits permitted
under florida law. there is therefore a failure of proof that the
florida decree received less credit in new york than it had in florida."
a florida divorce decree was also at the bottom of another recent case
in which the daughter of a divorced man by his first wife, and his
legatee under his will, sought to attack his divorce in the new york
courts, and thereby indirectly his third marriage. the court held that
inasmuch as the attack would not have been permitted in florida under
the doctrine of res judicata, it was not permissible under the full
faith and credit clause in new york.[] on the whole, it appears that
the principle of res judicata is slowly winning out against the
principle of domicile.
[pg ]
decrees of other types
many judgments, enforcement of which has given rise to litigation,
embrace decrees of courts of probate respecting the distribution of
estates. in order that a court have jurisdiction of such a proceeding,
the decedent must have been domiciled in the state, and the question
whether he was so domiciled at the time of his death may be raised in
the court of a sister state.[] thus, when a court of state a, in
probating a will and issuing letters, in a proceeding to which all
distributees were parties, expressly found that the testator's domicile
at the time of death was in state a, such adjudication of domicile was
held not to bind one subsequently appointed as domiciliary administrator
c.t.a. in state b, in which he was liable to be called upon to deal with
claims of local creditors and that of the state itself for taxes, he
having not been a party to the proceeding in state a. in this situation,
it was held, a court of state c, when disposing of local assets claimed
by both personal representatives, was free to determine domicile in
accordance with the law of state c.[] similarly, there is no such
relation of privity between an executor appointed in one state and an
administrator c.t.a. appointed in another state as will make a decree
against the latter binding upon the former.[] on the other hand,
judicial proceedings in one state, under which inheritance taxes have
been paid and the administration upon the estate has been closed, are
denied full faith and credit by the action of a probate court in another
state in assuming jurisdiction and assessing inheritance taxes against
the beneficiaries of the estate, when under the law of the former state
the order of the probate court barring all creditors who had failed to
bring in their demand from any further claim against the executors was
binding upon all.[]
what is more important, however, is that the res in such a proceeding,
that is, the estate, in order to entitle the judgment to recognition
under article iv, section , must have been located in the state [pg ]or
legally attached to the person of the decedent. such a judgment is
accordingly valid, generally speaking, to distribute the intangible
property of the decedent, though the evidences thereof were actually
located elsewhere.[] this is not so, on the other hand, as to
tangibles and realty. in order that the judgment of a probate court
distributing these be entitled to recognition under the constitution,
they must have been located in the state; as to tangibles and realty
outside the state, the decree of the probate court is entirely at the
mercy of the lex rei sitae.[] so, the probate of a will in one
state, while conclusive therein, does not displace legal provisions
necessary to its validity as a will of real property in other
states.[]
that a statute legitimizing children born out of wedlock does not
entitle them by the aid of the full faith and credit clause to share in
the property located in another state is not surprising, in view of the
general principle—to which, however, there are exceptions (see pp.
-)—that statutes do not have extraterritorial operation.[] for
the same reason adoption proceedings in one state are not denied full
faith and credit by the law of the sister state which excludes children
adopted by proceedings in other states from the right to inherit land
therein.[]
a proceeding which combines some of the elements of both an in rem and
an in personam action is the proceeding in garnishment cases. suppose
that a owes b and b owes c, and that the two former live in a different
state than c. a, while on a brief visit to c's state, is presented with
a writ attaching his debt to b and also a summons to appear in court on
a named day. the result of the proceedings thus instituted is that a
judgment is entered in c's favor against a to the amount of his
indebtedness to b. subsequently a is sued by b in their home state, and
offers the judgment, which he has in the meantime paid, in defense. it
was argued in behalf of b that a's debt to him had a situs in their
home state, and furthermore that c could [pg ]not have sued b in this same
state without formally acquiring a domicile there. both propositions
were, however, rejected by the court, which held that the judgment in
the garnishment proceedings was entitled to full faith and credit as
against c's action.[]
as to whether recognition of a state judgment can be refused by the
forum state on other than jurisdictional grounds, there are dicta to
the effect that judgments, for which extraterritorial operation is
demanded under article iv, section i and acts of congress, are
"impeachable for manifest fraud." but unless the fraud affected the
jurisdiction of the court, the vast weight of authority is against the
proposition. also it is universally agreed that a judgment may not be
impeached for alleged error or irregularity,[] or as contrary to the
public policy of the state where recognition is sought for it under the
full faith and credit clause.[] previously listed cases indicate,
however, that the court has in fact permitted local policy to determine
the merits of a judgment under the pretext of regulating
jurisdiction.[] thus in one case, cole v. cunningham,[] the court
sustained a massachusetts court in enjoining, in connection with
insolvency proceedings instituted in that state, a massachusetts
creditor from continuing in new york courts an action which had been
commenced there before the insolvency suit was brought. this was done on
the theory that a party within the jurisdiction of a court may be
restrained from doing something in another jurisdiction opposed to
principles of equity, it having been shown that the creditor was aware
of the debtor's embarrassed condition when the new york action was
instituted. the injunction unquestionably denied full faith and credit
and commanded the assent of only five justices.
finally, the clause has been interpreted in the light of the
"incontrovertible maxim" that "the courts of no country execute the
penal laws of another."[] in the leading case of huntington v.
attrill,[] however, the court so narrowly defined "penal" in this
connection as to make it substantially synonymous with "criminal," and
on this [pg ]basis held a judgment which had been recovered under a state
statute making the officers of a corporation who signed and recorded a
false certificate of the amount of its capital stock liable for all of
its debts, to be entitled under article iv, section , to recognition
and enforcement in the courts of sister states. nor, in general, is a
judgment for taxes to be denied full faith and credit in state and
federal courts merely because it is for taxes.[]
recognition of rights based upon constitutions, statutes, common law
as to the extrastate protection of rights which have not matured into
final judgments, the full faith and credit clause has never abolished
the general principle of the dominance of local policy over the rules of
comity.[] this was stated by justice nelson in the dred scott case, as
follows: "no state, ***, can enact laws to operate beyond its own
dominions, *** nations, from convenience and comity, ***, recognizes
[sic] and administer the laws of other countries. but, of the nature,
extent, and utility, of them, respecting property, or the state and
condition of persons within her territories, each nation judges for
itself; ***" he added that it was the same with the states of the
union in relation to another. it followed that even though dred had
become a free man in consequence of his having resided in the "free"
state of illinois, he had nevertheless upon his return to missouri,
which had the same power as illinois to determine its local policy
respecting rights acquired extraterritorially, reverted to servitude
under the laws and judicial decisions of that state.[]
in a case decided in , however, the court remarked: "without doubt
the constitutional requirement, art. iv, §i, that 'full faith and
credit shall be given in each state to the public acts, records, and
judicial proceedings of every other state,' implies that the public acts
of every state shall be given the same effect by the courts of another
state that they have by law and usage at home."[] and this
[pg ]proposition was later held to extend to state constitutional
provisions.[] more recently this doctrine has been stated in a very
mitigated form, the court saying that where statute or policy of the
forum state is set up as a defense to a suit brought under the statute
of another state or territory, or where a foreign statute is set up as a
defense to a suit or proceedings under a local statute, the conflict is
to be resolved, not by giving automatic effect to the full faith and
credit clause and thus compelling courts of each state to subordinate
its own statutes to those of others, but by appraising the governmental
interest of each jurisdiction and deciding accordingly.[] obviously
this doctrine endows the court with something akin to an arbitral
function in the decision of cases to which it is applied.
the initial effort in this direction was made in connection with
transitory actions based on statute. earlier, such actions had rested
upon the common law, which was fairly uniform throughout the states, so
that there was usually little discrepancy between the law under which
the plaintiff from another jurisdiction brought his action (lex loci)
and the law under which the defendant responded (lex fori). in the
late seventies, however, the states, abandoning the common law rule on
the subject, began passing laws which authorized the representatives of
a decedent whose death had resulted from injury to bring an action for
damages.[] the question at once presented itself whether, if such an
action was brought in a state other than that in which the injury
occurred, it was governed by the statute under which it arose or by the
law of the forum state, which might be less favorable to the defendant.
nor was it long before the same question presented itself with respect
to transitory action ex contractu, where the contract involved had
been made under laws peculiar to the state where made, and with those
laws in view.
[pg ]
in chicago and alton r.r. v. wiggins,[] referred to above, the
court, confronted with the latter form of the question, indicated its
clear opinion that in such situations it was the law under which the
contract was made, not the law of the forum state, which should govern.
its utterance on the point was, however, not merely obiter; it was
based on an error, namely, the false supposition that the constitution
gives "acts" the same extraterritorial operation as the act of  does
"judicial records and proceedings." notwithstanding which, this dictum
is today the basis of "the settled rule" that the defendant in a
transitory action is entitled to all the benefits resulting from
whatever material restrictions the statute under which plaintiff's right
of action originated sets thereto, except that courts of sister states
cannot be thus prevented from taking jurisdiction in such cases.[]
however, a state court does not violate the full faith and credit clause
by mere error in construing the law upon which a transitory action from
another state depends;[] nor is a court of the forum state guilty of
a disregard thereof when it entertains a suit based on a statute of
another state, albeit the statute in terms limits actions thereunder to
courts of the enacting state.[] moreover, in actions on contracts
made in other states, a state constitutionally may decline to enforce in
its courts, as contrary to its own policy, the laws of such states
relating to the right to add interest to the recovery as an incidental
item of damages.[]
nor is it alone to defendants in transitory actions that the full faith
and credit clause is today a shield and a buckler. some legal
relationships are so complex, the court holds, that the law under which
they were formed ought always to govern them as long as they
persist.[] one such relationship is that of a stockholder and his
[pg ]corporation. hence, if a question arises as to the liability of the
stockholders of a corporation, the courts of the forum state are
required by the full faith and credit clause to determine the question
in accordance with the constitution, laws and judicial decisions of the
corporation's home state.[] illustrative applications of the latter
rule are to be found in the following cases. a new jersey statute
forbidding an action at law to enforce a stockholder's liability arising
under the laws of another state, and providing that such liability may
be enforced only in equity, and that in such a case the corporation, its
legal representatives, all its creditors, and stockholders, should be
necessary parties, was held not to preclude an action at law in new
jersey by the new york state superintendent of banks against  new
jersey stockholders in an insolvent new york bank to recover assessments
made under the laws of new york.[] also, in a suit to enforce double
liability, brought in rhode island against a stockholder in a kansas
trust company, the courts of rhode island were held to be obligated to
extend recognition to the statutes and court decisions of kansas
whereunder it is established that a kansas judgment recovered by a
creditor against the trust company is not only conclusive as to the
liability of the corporation but also an adjudication binding each
stockholder therein. the only defenses available to the stockholder are
those which he could make in a suit in kansas.[]
and the same principle applies to the relationship which is formed when
one takes out a policy in a "fraternal benefit society." thus in royal
arcanum v. green,[] in which a fraternal insurance association
chartered under the laws of massachusetts was being sued in the courts
of new york by a citizen of the latter state on a contract of insurance
made in that state, the court held that the defendant company was
entitled under the full faith and credit clause to have the case
determined in accordance with the laws of massachusetts and its own
constitution and by-laws as these had been construed by the
massachusetts courts.
nor has the court manifested lately any disposition to depart from this
rule. in sovereign camp v. bolin[] it declared that a state in
which a certificate of life membership of a foreign fraternal benefit
[pg ]association is issued, which construes and enforces said certificate
according to its own law rather than according to the law of the state
in which the association is domiciled denies full faith and credit to
the association's charter embodied in the statutes of the domiciliary
state as interpreted by the latter's court. "the beneficiary certificate
was not a mere contract to be construed and enforced according to the
laws of the state where it was delivered. entry into membership of an
incorporated beneficiary society is more than a contract; it is entering
into a complex and abiding relation and the rights of membership are
governed by the law of the state of incorporation. [hence] another
state, wherein the certificate of membership was issued, cannot attach
to membership rights against the society which are refused by the law of
domicile." consistently therewith, the court also held, in order of
travelers v. wolfe,[] that south dakota, in a suit brought therein
by an ohio citizen against an ohio benefit society, must give effect to
a provision of the constitution of the society prohibiting the bringing
of an action on a claim more than six months after disallowance by the
society, notwithstanding that south dakota's period of limitation was
six years and that its own statutes voided contract stipulations
limiting the time within which rights may be enforced. objecting to
these results, justice black dissented on the ground that fraternal
insurance companies are not entitled, either by the language of the
constitution, or by the nature of their enterprise, to such unique
constitutional protection.
whether or not distinguishable by nature of their enterprise, stock and
mutual insurance companies and mutual building and loan associations,
unlike fraternal benefit societies, have not been accorded the same
unique constitutional protection; and, with few exceptions,[] have
had controversies arising out of their business relationships settled by
application of the law of the forum state. in national mutual b. & l.
asso. v. brahan,[] the principle applicable to these three forms of
business organization was stated as follows: where a corporation has
become localized in a state and has accepted the laws of the state as a
condition of doing business there, it cannot abrogate those laws by
attempting to make contract stipulations, and there is no violation of
the full faith and credit clause in instructing a jury to find according
to local law notwithstanding a clause in a contract that it should be
construed according to the laws of another state.
[pg ]thus, when a mississippi borrower, having repaid a mortgage loan to a
new york building and loan association, sued in a mississippi court to
recover, as usurious, certain charges collected by the association, the
usury law of mississippi rather than that of new york was held to
control. in this case, the loan contract, which was negotiated in
mississippi subject to approval by the new york office, did not
expressly state that it was governed by new york law.[] similarly,
when the new york life insurance company, which had expressly stated in
its application and policy forms that they would be controlled by new
york law, was sued in missouri on a policy sold to a resident thereof,
the court of that state was sustained in its application of missouri
rather than new york law.[] also, in an action in a federal court in
texas to collect the amount of a life insurance policy which had been
made in new york and later changed by instruments assigning beneficial
interest, it was held that questions: () whether the contract remained
one governed by the law of new york with respect to rights of assignees,
rather than by the law of texas, () whether the public policy of texas
permits recovery by one named beneficiary who has no beneficial interest
in the life of the insured, and () whether lack of insurable interest
becomes material when the insurer acknowledges liability and pays the
money into court, were questions of texas law, to be decided according
to texas decisions.[]
consistent with the latter holdings are the following two involving
mutual insurance companies. in pink v. a.a.a. highway express,[]
the new york insurance commissioner, as a statutory liquidator of an
insolvent auto mutual company organized in new york sued resident
georgia policyholders in a georgia court to recover assessments alleged
to be due by virtue of their membership in it. the supreme court held
that, although by the law of the state of incorporation, policyholders
of a mutual insurance company become members thereof and as such liable
to pay assessments adjudged to be required in liquidation proceedings in
that state, the courts of another state are not required to enforce such
liability against local resident policyholders who did not appear and
were not personally served in the foreign liquidation proceedings; but
are free to decide according to local law the question whether, by
entering into the policies, residents became members of the company.
again, in state farm ins. v. duel,[] the court ruled that an
insurance company chartered in state a, which does not treat membership
fees as part of premiums, cannot plead denial of full faith and credit
when state b, as a condition of entry, requires the company to maintain
a reserve computed by including membership fees as well as premiums
received in all states. [pg ]were the company's contention accepted, "no
state," the court observed, "could impose stricter financial standards
for foreign corporations doing business within its borders than were
imposed by the state of incorporation." it is not apparent, the court
added, that state a has an interest superior to that of state b in the
financial soundness and stability of insurance companies doing business
in state b,—which is obviously more the language of arbitration than of
adjudication, as conventionally regarded.
finally, the relationship of employer and employee, so far as the
obligations of the one and the rights of the other under workmen's
compensation acts are concerned, has been the subject of similar
treatment. in an earlier case,[] the cause of action was an injury in
new hampshire, resulting in death to a workman who had entered the
defendant company's employment in vermont, the home state of both
parties. the court held that the case was governed under the full faith
and credit clause by the vermont workmen's compensation act, not that of
new hampshire. the relationship, it said, "was created by the law of
vermont, and so long as that relationship persisted its incidents were
properly subject to regulation there."[]
however, in an unacknowledged departure from this ruling the court has
subsequently held that the full faith and credit clause did not preclude
california from disregarding a massachusetts workmen's compensation
statute and applying its own conflicting act in the case of an injury
suffered by a massachusetts employee of a massachusetts employer while
in california in the course of his employment.[] the earlier case was
distinguished as not having decided more than that a state statute,
applicable to employer and employee within the state, which provides
compensation if the employee is injured while temporarily in another
state, will be given full faith and credit in the [pg ]latter when not
obnoxious to its policy. inasmuch as the court in the older decision is
reputed to have observed that reliance on the vermont statute, as a
defense to the new hampshire suit, was not obnoxious to the policy of
new hampshire, it may be possible to reconcile these two cases by
stating that a foreign workmen's compensation statute will be recognized
when it is invoked as a defense but need not be applied when the
plaintiff endeavors to found his suit thereon.
later decisions involving the recognition of a foreign workmen's
compensation act include the following. in magnolia petroleum co. v.
hunt[] the court ruled that a louisiana employee of a louisiana
employer, who is injured on the job in texas and who receives an award
under the texas act, which does not grant further recovery to an
employee who receives compensation under the laws of another state,
cannot obtain additional compensation under the louisiana act. however,
a compensation award by state a to a resident employee of a resident
employer injured on the job in state b will not preclude state b from
awarding added compensation under its own laws, when the compensation
statute of state a does not expressly exclude recovery under a law of
the state in which the injury occurred and when the state a award
incorporated a private settlement contract wherein the employee reserved
his rights in state b.[] also, the district of columbia workmen's
compensation act, which expressly covers an employee of the district
employer, "irrespective of the place where the injury occurs,"
constitutionally may be applied, in the case of injury resulting in
death, to a district resident, employed by a district employer, who was
assigned to a job at quantico, virginia, and who, for three years prior
to his death in virginia, has commuted to the job site from his house in
the district.[]
development of section to date and possibilities
thus the court, from according an extrastate operation to statutes and
judicial decisions in favor of defendants in transitory actions,
proceeded next to confer the same protection upon certain classes of
defendants in local actions in which the plaintiff's claim was the
outgrowth of a relationship formed extraterritorially. but can the court
stop at this point? if it is true, as chief justice marshall once
remarked, that "the constitution was not made for the benefit of
plaintiffs alone," so also it is true that it was not made for the
benefit of defendants alone. the day may come when the court will
approach the question of the relation of the full faith and [pg ]credit
clause to the extrastate operation of laws from the same angle as it
today views the broader question of the scope of state legislative
power. when and if this day arrives, state statutes and judicial
decisions will be given such extraterritorial operation as seems
reasonable to the court to give them. in short, the rule of the
dominance of local policy of the forum state will be superseded by that
of judicial review.[]
the question arises whether the application to date, not by the court
alone but by congress and the court, of article iv, section , can be
said to have met the expectations of its framers. in the light of some
things said at the time of the framing of the clause this may be
doubted. the protest was raised against the clause that in vesting
congress with power to declare the effect state laws should have outside
the enacting state, it enabled the new government to usurp the powers of
the states; but the objection went unheeded. the main concern of the
convention, undoubtedly, was to render the judgments of the state courts
in civil cases effective throughout the union. yet even this object has
been by no means completely realized, owing to the doctrine of the court
that before a judgment of a state court can be enforced in a sister
state, a new suit must be brought on it in the courts of the latter; and
the further doctrine that with respect to such a suit, the judgment sued
on is only evidence; the logical deduction from which proposition is
that the sister state is under no constitutional compulsion to give it a
forum. these doctrines were first clearly stated in the mcelmoyle case
and flowed directly from the new states' rights premises of the court;
but they are no longer in harmony with the prevailing spirit of
constitutional construction nor with the needs of the times. also, the
clause seems always to have been interpreted on the basis of the
assumption that the term "judicial proceedings" refers only to final
judgments and does not include intermediate processes and writs; but the
assumption would seem to be groundless, and if it is, then congress has
the power under the clause to provide for the service and execution
throughout the united states of the judicial processes of the several
states.
under the present system, suit has ordinarily to be brought [pg ]where the
defendant, the alleged wrongdoer, resides, which means generally where
no part of the transaction giving rise to the action took place. what
could be more irrational? "granted that no state can of its own volition
make its process run beyond its borders *** is it unreasonable that
the united states should by federal action be made a unit in the manner
suggested?"[]
indeed, there are few clauses of the constitution, the merely literal
possibilities of which have been so little developed as the full faith
and credit clause. congress has the power under the clause to decree the
effect that the statutes of one state shall have in other states. this
being so, it does not seem extravagant to argue that congress may under
the clause describe a certain type of divorce and say that it shall be
granted recognition throughout the union, and that no other kind shall.
or to speak in more general terms, congress has under the clause power
to enact standards whereby uniformity of state legislation may be
secured as to almost any matter in connection with which interstate
recognition of private rights would be useful and valuable.
as we saw earlier, the legislation of congress comprised in section 
of the revised statutes lays down a rule not merely for the recognition
of the records and judicial proceedings of state courts in the courts of
sister states, but for their recognition in "every court of the united
states," and it further lays down a like rule for the records and
proceedings of the courts "of any territory or any country subject to
the jurisdiction of the united states." thus the courts of the united
states are bound to give to the judgments of the state courts the same
faith and credit that the courts of one state are bound to give to the
judgments of the courts of her sister states.[] so, where suits to
enforce the laws of one state are entertained in courts of another on
principles of comity, federal district courts sitting in that state may
entertain them, and should, if they do not infringe federal law or
policy.[] however, the refusal of a territorial court in hawaii,
having jurisdiction of the action, which was on a policy issued by a new
york insurance company, to admit evidence that an administrator had been
appointed and a suit brought by him on a bond in the federal court in
new york wherein no judgment had been entered, did not violate this
clause.[]
[pg ]the power to prescribe what effect shall be given to the judicial
proceedings of the courts of the united states is conferred by other
provisions of the constitution, such as those which declare the extent
of the judicial power of the united states, which authorize all
legislation necessary and proper for executing the powers vested by the
constitution in the government of the united states, and which declare
the supremacy of the authority of the national government within the
limits of the constitution. as part of its general authority, the power
to give effect to the judgment of its courts is coextensive with its
territorial jurisdiction.[]
doubtless congress might also by virtue of its powers in the field of
foreign relations lay down a mandatory rule regarding recognition of
foreign judgments in every court of the united states. at present the
duty to recognize judgments even in national courts rests only on comity
and is qualified, in the judgment of the supreme court, by a strict rule
of parity.[]
[pg ]
section . the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all
privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states.
the comity clause
the community of rights among the citizens of the several states
guaranteed by this article is traceable to colonial days. it had its
origin in the fact that the colonists were all subjects of the same
monarch.[] after the declaration of independence was signed, the
question arose as to how to reconcile the advantages of a common
citizenship with a dispersed sovereignty. one element of the solution is
to be seen in the fourth of the articles of confederation, which read as
follows: "the better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and
intercourse among the people of the different states in this union, the
free inhabitants of each of these states, paupers, vagabonds and
fugitives from justice excepted, shall be entitled to all privileges and
immunities of free citizens in the several states; and the people of
each state shall have free ingress and regress to and from any other
state, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges of trade and commerce,
subject to the same duties, impositions and restrictions as the
inhabitants thereof respectively ***" madison, writing in the
federalist,[] adverted to the confusion engendered by use of the
different terms "free inhabitants, free citizens," and "people" and by
"superadding to 'all privileges and immunities of free citizens—all the
privileges of trade and commerce,' ***" the more concise phraseology
of article iv, however, did little to dispel the uncertainty. in the
slaughter-house cases,[] justice miller suggested that it was to be
regarded as the compendious equivalent of the earlier version: "there
can be but little question that the purpose of both these provisions is
the same, and that the privileges and immunities intended are the same
in each. in the articles of the confederation we have some of these
specifically mentioned, and enough perhaps to give some general ideal of
the class of civil rights meant by the phrase."[]
first and last, at least four theories have been proffered regarding the
purpose of this clause. the first is that the clause is a guaranty [pg ]to
the citizens of the different states of equal treatment by congress—is,
in other words, a species of equal protection clause binding on the
national government. the second is that the clause is a guaranty to the
citizens of each state of all the privileges and immunities of
citizenship that are enjoyed in any state by the citizens thereof,—a
view which, if it had been accepted at the outset, might well have
endowed the supreme court with a reviewing power over restrictive state
legislation as broad as that which it later came to exercise under the
fourteenth amendment. the third theory of the clause is that it
guarantees to the citizen of any state the rights which he enjoys as
such even when sojourning in another state, that is to say, enables him
to carry with him his rights of state citizenship throughout the union,
without embarrassment by state lines. finally, the clause is interpreted
as merely forbidding any state to discriminate against citizens of other
states in favor of its own. though the first theory received some
recognition in the dred scott case,[] particularly in the opinion of
justice catron,[] it is today obsolete. the second was specifically
rejected in mckane v. durston;[] the third, in detroit v.
osborne.[] the fourth has become a settled doctrine of constitutional
law.[] in the words of justice miller in the slaughter-house
cases,[] the sole purpose of the comity clause was "to declare to the
several states, that whatever these rights, as you grant or establish
them to your own citizens, or as you limit or qualify, or impose
restrictions on their exercise, the same, neither more nor less, shall
be the measure of the rights of citizens of other states within your
jurisdiction."[] it follows that this section has no application in
controversies between a state and its own citizens.[] it is deemed to
be infringed by a hostile discrimination against all nonresidents[]
but not by such differences of treatment between residents and
nonresidents as the nature of the subject matter makes reasonable.[]
[pg ]
this clause is self-executory, that is to say, its enforcement is
dependent upon the judicial process. it does not authorize penal
legislation by congress. federal statutes prohibiting conspiracies to
deprive any person of rights or privileges secured by state laws,[]
or punishing infractions by individuals of the right of citizens to
reside peacefully in the several states, and to have free ingress into
and egress from such states,[] have been held void.
a question much mooted before the civil war was whether the term could
be held to include free negroes. in the dred scott case,[] the court
answered it in the negative. "citizens of each state," chief justice
taney argued, meant citizens of the united states as understood at the
time the constitution was adopted, and negroes were not then regarded as
capable of citizenship. the only category of national citizenship added
under the constitution comprised aliens, naturalized in accordance with
acts of congress.[] in dissent, justice curtis not only denied the
chief justice's assertion that there were no negro citizens of states in
, but further argued that while congress alone could determine what
classes of aliens should be naturalized, the several states retained the
right to extend citizenship to classes of persons born within their
borders who had not previously enjoyed citizenship, and that one upon
whom state citizenship was thus conferred became a citizen of the state
in the full sense of the constitution.[] so far as persons born in
the united states, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are
concerned, the question was put at rest by the fourteenth amendment.
at a comparatively early date the claim was made that a corporation
chartered by a state and consisting of its citizens was entitled to the
benefits of the comity clause in the transaction of business in other
states. it was argued that the court was bound to look beyond the act of
incorporation and see who were the incorporators. if it found these to
consist solely of citizens of the incorporating state, it was bound to
permit them through the agency of the corporation, to exercise in other
states such privileges and immunities as the citizens thereof enjoyed.
in bank of augusta v. earle[] this view was rejected. the supreme
court held that the comity clause was never intended "to give to the
citizens of each state the privileges of citizens [pg ]in the several
states, and at the same time to exempt them from the liabilities which
the exercise of such privileges would bring upon individuals who were
citizens of the state. this would be to give the citizens of other
states far higher and greater privileges than are enjoyed by the
citizens of the state itself."[] a similar result was reached in paul
v. virginia,[] but by a different course of reasoning. the court
there held that a corporation—in this instance, an insurance
company—was "the mere creation of local law" and could "have no legal
existence beyond the limits of the sovereignty"[] which created it;
even recognition of its existence by other states rested exclusively in
their discretion. more recent cases have held that this discretion is
qualified by other provisions of the constitution, notably the commerce
clause and the fourteenth amendment.[] by reason of its similarity to
the corporate form of organization, a massachusetts trust has been
denied the protection of this clause.[]
the classical judicial exposition of the meaning of this phrase is that
of justice washington in corfield v. coryell,[] which was decided
by him on circuit in . the question at issue was the validity of a
new jersey statute which prohibited "any person who is not, at the time,
an actual inhabitant and resident in this state" from raking or
gathering "clams, oysters or shells" in any of the waters of the state,
on board any vessel "not wholly owned by some person, inhabitant of and
actually residing in this state. *** the inquiry is," wrote justice
washington, "what are the privileges and immunities of citizens in the
several states? we feel no hesitation in confining these expressions to
those privileges and immunities which are, in their nature, fundamental;
which belong, of right, to the citizens of all free governments; and
which have, at all times, been enjoyed by the citizens of the several
states which compose this union, ***"[] he specified the following
rights as answering this description: "protection by the government; the
enjoyment of life and liberty, with the right to acquire and possess
property of every kind, and to pursue and obtain happiness and safety;
subject nevertheless to such restraints as the government may justly
prescribe for the general good of the whole. the right of a citizen of
one state to pass through, or to reside in any other state, for purposes
of trade, agriculture, professional pursuits, or otherwise; to claim the
benefit of the writ of [pg ]habeas corpus; to institute and maintain
actions of any kind in the courts of the state; to take, hold and
dispose of property, either real or personal; and an exemption from
higher taxes or impositions than are paid by the other citizens of the
state; ***"[]
after thus defining broadly the private and personal rights which were
protected, justice washington went on to distinguish them from the right
to a share in the public patrimony of the state. "*** we cannot
accede" the opinion proceeds, "to the proposition *** that, under this
provision of the constitution, the citizens of the several states are
permitted to participate in all the rights which belong exclusively to
the citizens of any particular state, merely upon the ground that they
are enjoyed by those citizens; much less, that in regulating the use of
the common property of the citizens of such state, the legislature is
bound to extend to the citizens of all other states the same advantages
as are secured to their own citizens."[] the right of a state to the
fisheries within its borders he then held to be in the nature of a
property right, held by the state "for the use of the citizens thereof;"
the state was under no obligation to grant "co-tenancy in the common
property of the state, to the citizens of all the other states."[]
the precise holding of this case was confirmed in mccready v.
virginia;[] the logic of geer v. connecticut[] extended the same
rule to wild game, and hudson county water co. v. mccarter[]
applied it to the running water of a state. in toomer v. witsell,[]
however, the court refused to apply this rule to free-swimming fish
caught in the three-mile belt off the coast of south carolina. it held
instead that "commercial shrimping in the marginal sea, like other
common callings, is within the purview of the privileges and immunities
clause" and that a heavily discriminatory license fee exacted from
nonresidents was unconstitutional.[] universal practice has also
established another exception to which the court gave approval by a
dictum in blake v. mcclung:[] "a state may, by rule uniform in its
operation as to citizens of the several states, require residence within
its limits for a given time before a citizen of another state who
becomes a resident thereof shall exercise the right of suffrage or
become eligible to office."[]
[pg ]
not only has judicial construction of the comity clause excluded some
privileges of a public nature from its protection; the courts have also
established the proposition that the purely private and personal rights
to which the clause admittedly extends are not in all cases beyond the
reach of state legislation which differentiates citizens and
noncitizens. broadly speaking, these rights are held subject to the
reasonable exercise by a state of its police power, and the court has
recognized that there are cases in which discrimination against
nonresidents may be reasonably resorted to by a state in aid of its own
public health, safety and welfare. to that end a state may restrict the
right to sell insurance to persons who have resided within the state for
a prescribed period of time.[] it may require a nonresident who does
business within the state[] or who uses the highways of the
state[] to consent, expressly or by implication, to service of
process on an agent within the state. without violating this section, a
state may limit the dower rights of a nonresident to lands of which the
husband died seized while giving a resident dower in all lands held
during the marriage,[] or may leave the rights of nonresident married
persons in respect of property within the state to be governed by the
laws of their domicile, rather than by the laws it promulgates for its
own residents.[] but a state may not give a preference to resident
creditors in the administration of the property of an insolvent foreign
corporation.[] an act of the confederate government, enforced by a
state, to sequester a debt owed by one of its residents to a citizen of
another state was held to be a flagrant violation of this clause.[]
the right to sue and defend in the courts is one of the highest and most
essential privileges of citizenship, and must be allowed by each state
to the citizens of all other states to the same extent that it is
allowed to its own citizens.[] the constitutional requirement is
satisfied if the nonresident is given access to the courts of the state
upon terms which, in themselves, are reasonable and adequate for the
enforcing of any rights he may have, even though they may not be
[pg ]technically the same as those accorded to resident citizens.[] the
supreme court upheld a state statute of limitations which prevented a
nonresident from suing in the state's courts after expiration of the
time for suit in the place where the cause of action arose,[] and
another such statute which suspended its operation as to resident
plaintiff, but not as to nonresidents, during the period of the
defendant's absence from the state.[] a state law making it
discretionary with the courts to entertain an action by a nonresident of
the state against a foreign corporation doing business in the state, was
sustained since it was applicable alike to citizens and noncitizens
residing out of the state.[] a statute permitting a suit in the
courts of the state for wrongful death occurring outside the state, only
if the decedent was a resident of the state, was sustained, because it
operated equally upon representatives of the deceased whether citizens
or noncitizens.[]
a state may not, in the exercise of its taxing power, substantially
discriminate between residents and nonresidents. a leading case is ward
v. maryland,[] in which the court set aside a state law which
imposed special taxes upon nonresidents for the privilege of selling
within the state goods which were produced outside it. likewise, a
tennessee statute which made the amount of the annual license tax
exacted for the privilege of doing railway construction work dependent
upon whether the person taxed had his chief office within or without the
state, was found to be incompatible with the comity clause.[] in
travis v. yale and towne mfg. co.,[] the court, while sustaining
the right of a state to tax income accruing within its borders to
nonresidents,[] held the particular tax void because it denied to
nonresidents exemptions which were allowed to residents. the "terms
'resident' and 'citizen' are not synonymous," wrote justice pitney,
"*** but a general taxing scheme *** if it discriminates against all
nonresidents, has the necessary effect of including in the
discrimination those who are citizens of other states; ***"[]
where there was no discrimination between citizens and noncitizens, a
state statute taxing the business of hiring persons within the state for
labor outside the state, was sustained.[] this section of the
constitution does not prevent a territorial government, exercising
powers delegated by congress, from imposing a discriminatory license tax
on nonresident fishermen operating within its waters.[]
[pg ]however, what at first glance may appear to be a discrimination may turn
out not to be when the entire system of taxation prevailing in the
enacting state is considered. on the basis of over-all fairness, the
court sustained a connecticut statute which required nonresident
stockholders to pay a state tax measured by the full market value of
their stock, while resident stockholders were subject to local taxation
on the market value of that stock reduced by the value of the real
estate owned by the corporation.[] occasional or accidental
inequality to a nonresident taxpayer are not sufficient to defeat a
scheme of taxation whose operation is generally equitable.[] in an
early case the court brushed aside as frivolous the contention that a
state violated this clause by subjecting one of its own citizens to a
property tax on a debt due from a nonresident secured by real estate
situated where the debtor resided.[]
clause . a person charged in any state with treason, felony, or other
crime, who shall flee from justice, and be found in another state, shall
on demand of the executive authority of the state from which he fled, be
delivered up, to be removed to the state having jurisdiction of the
crime.
fugitives from justice
although this provision is not in its nature self-executing, and there
is no express grant to congress of power to carry it into effect, that
body passed a law shortly after the constitution was adopted, imposing
upon the governor of each state the duty to deliver up fugitives from
justice found in such state.[] the supreme court has accepted this
contemporaneous construction as establishing the [pg ]validity of this
legislation.[] the duty to surrender is not absolute and unqualified;
if the laws of the state to which the fugitive has fled have been put in
force against him, and he is imprisoned there, the demands of those laws
may be satisfied before the duty of obedience to the requisition
arises.[] in kentucky v. dennison[] the court held, moreover,
that this statute was merely declaratory of a moral duty; that the
federal government "has no power to impose on a state officer, as such,
any duty whatever, and compel him to perform it; ***"[] and
consequently that a federal court could not issue a mandamus to compel
the governor of one state to surrender a fugitive to another. in 
congress plugged the loophole exposed by this decision by making it
unlawful for any person to flee from one state to another for the
purpose of avoiding prosecution in certain cases.[]
to be a fugitive from justice within the meaning of this clause, it is
not necessary that the party charged should have left the state after an
indictment found, or for the purpose of avoiding a prosecution
anticipated or begun. it is sufficient that the accused, having
committed a crime within one state and having left the jurisdiction
before being subjected to criminal process, is found within another
state.[] the motive which induced the departure is immaterial.[]
even if he were brought involuntarily into the state where found by
requisition from another state, he may be surrendered to a third state
upon an extradition warrant.[] a person indicted a second time for
the same offense is nonetheless a fugitive from justice by reason of the
fact that after dismissal of the first indictment, on which he was
originally indicted, he left the state with the knowledge of, or without
objection by, state authorities.[] but a defendant cannot be
extradited if he was only constructively present in the demanding state
at the time of the commission of the crime charged.[] for the purpose
of determining who is a fugitive from justice, the words "treason,
felony or other crime" embrace every act forbidden and made punishable
by a law of a state,[] including misdemeanors.[]
[pg ]
only after a person has been charged with crime in the regular course of
judicial proceedings is the governor of a state entitled to make demand
for his return from another state.[] the person demanded has no
constitutional right to be heard before the governor of the state in
which he is found on the question whether he has been substantially
charged with crime and is a fugitive from justice.[] the
constitutionally required surrender is not to be interfered with by
habeas corpus upon speculations as to what ought to be the result of a
trial.[] nor is it proper thereby to inquire into the motives
controlling the actions of the governors of the demanding and
surrendering states.[] matters of defense, such as the running of the
statute of limitations, cannot be heard on habeas corpus, but must be
determined at the trial.[] a defendant will, however, be discharged
on habeas corpus if he shows by clear and satisfactory evidence that
he was outside the demanding state at the time of the crime.[] if,
however, the evidence is conflicting, habeas corpus is not a proper
proceeding to try the question of alibi.[]
there is nothing in the constitution or laws of the united states which
exempts an offender, brought before the courts of a state for an offense
against its laws, from trial and punishment, even though he was brought
from another state by unlawful violence,[] or by abuse of legal
process,[] and a fugitive lawfully extradited from another [pg ]state may
be tried for an offense other than that for which he was
surrendered.[] the rule is different, however, with respect to
fugitives surrendered by a foreign government pursuant to treaty. in
that case the offender may be tried only "for the offence with which he
is charged in the proceedings for his extradition, until a reasonable
time and opportunity have been given him, after his release or trial
upon such charge, to return to the country from whose asylum he had been
forcibly taken under those proceedings."[]
clause . no person held to service or labour in one state, under the
laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or
regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labour, but shall
be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labour may
be due.
this clause contemplated the existence of a positive unqualified right
on the part of the owner of a slave which no state law could in any way
regulate, control or restrain. consequently the owner of a slave had the
same right to seize and repossess him in another state, as the local
laws of his own state conferred upon him, and a state law which
penalized such seizure was held unconstitutional.[] congress had the
power and the duty, which it exercised by the act of february ,
,[] to carry into effect the rights given by this section,[]
and the states had no concurrent power to legislate on the subject.[]
however, a state statute providing a penalty for harboring a fugitive
slave was held not to conflict with this clause since it did not affect
the right or remedy either of the master or the slave; by it the state
simply prescribed a rule of conduct for its own citizens in the exercise
of its police power.[]
[pg ]
section . new states may be admitted by the congress into this
union; but no new state shall be formed or erected within the
jurisdiction of any other state; nor any state be formed by the junction
of two or more states, or parts of states, without the consent of the
legislatures of the states concerned as well as of the congress.
doctrine of the equality of the states
"equality of constitutional right and power is the condition of all the
states of the union, old and new."[] this doctrine, now a truism of
constitutional law, did not find favor in the constitutional convention.
that body struck out from this section, as reported by the committee on
detail, two sections to the effect that "... new states shall be
admitted on the same terms with the original states. but the legislature
may make conditions with the new states concerning the public debt which
shall be subsisting."[] opposing this action, madison insisted that
"the western states neither would nor ought to submit to a union which
degraded them from an equal rank with the other states."[]
nonetheless, after further expressions of opinion pro and con, the
convention voted nine states to two to delete the requirement of
equality.[] prior to this time, however, georgia and virginia had
ceded to the united states large territories held by them, upon
condition that new states should be formed therefrom, and admitted to
the union on an equal footing with the original states.[] with the
admission of louisiana in , the principle of equality was extended
to states created out of territory purchased from a foreign power.[]
by the joint resolution of december , , texas "was admitted into
the union on an equal footing with the original states in all respects
whatever."[] again and again, in adjudicating the rights and duties
of states admitted after , the supreme court has referred to the
condition of equality as if it were an inherent attribute of the federal
union.[] finally, in , it invalidated a restriction on the change
of location of the state capital, which congress had imposed as a
condition for the admission of oklahoma, on the ground that congress may
not embrace in an enabling act conditions relating wholly to matters
under state control.[] in an opinion, from which justices holmes and
mckenna dissented, justice lurton argued: "the power is to admit 'new
states into this union.' 'this union' was and is a union of states,
equal in power, dignity and authority, each competent to exert that
residuum of sovereignty not delegated to the united states by the
constitution itself. to maintain otherwise would be to say that the
union, through [pg ]the power of congress to admit new states, might come to
be a union of states unequal in power, as including states whose powers
were restricted only by the constitution, with others whose powers had
been further restricted by an act of congress accepted as a condition of
admission."[]
until recently, however, the requirement of equality has applied
primarily to political standing and sovereignty rather than to economic
or property rights.[] broadly speaking, every new state is entitled
to exercise all the powers of government which belong to the original
states of the union.[] it acquires general jurisdiction, civil and
criminal, for the preservation of public order, and the protection of
persons and property throughout its limits except where it has ceded
exclusive jurisdiction to the united states.[] the legislative
authority of a newly admitted state extends over federally owned land
within the state, to the same extent as over similar property held by
private owners, save that the state can enact no law which would
conflict with the constitutional powers of the united states.
consequently it has jurisdiction to tax private activities carried on
within the public domain, if the tax does not constitute an
unconstitutional burden on the federal government.[] statutes
applicable to territories, e.g., the northwest territory ordinance of
, cease to have any operative force when the territory, or any part
thereof, is admitted to the union, except as adopted by state law.[]
when the enabling act contains no exclusion of jurisdiction as to crimes
committed on indian reservations by persons other than indians, state
courts are vested with jurisdiction.[] but the constitutional
authority of congress to regulate commerce with indian tribes is not
inconsistent with the equality of new states,[] and conditions
inserted in the new mexico enabling act forbidding the introduction of
liquor into indian territory were therefore valid.[]
[pg ]
admission of a state on an equal footing with the original states
involves the adoption as citizens of the united states of those whom
congress makes members of the political community, and who are
recognized as such in the formation of the new state.[]
whenever a territory is admitted into the union, the cases pending in
the territorial court which are of exclusive federal cognizance are
transferred to the federal court having jurisdiction over the area;
cases not cognizable in the federal courts are transferred to the
tribunals of the new state, and those over which federal and state
courts have concurrent jurisdiction may be transferred either to the
state or federal courts by the party possessing that option under
existing law.[] where congress neglected to make provision for
disposition of certain pending cases in an enabling act for the
admission of a state to the union, a subsequent act supplying the
omission was held valid.[] after a case, begun in a united states
court of a territory, is transferred to a state court under the
operation of the enabling act and the state constitution, the appellate
procedure is governed by the state statutes and procedure.[] the new
state cannot, without the express or implied assent of congress, enact
that the records of the former territorial court of appeals should
become records of its own courts, or provide by law for proceedings
based thereon.[]
[pg ]
property rights: united states v. texas
holding that a "mere agreement in reference to property" involved "no
question of equality of status," the supreme court upheld, in stearns
v. minnesota,[] a promise exacted from minnesota upon its admission
to the union which was interpreted to limit its right to tax lands held
by the united states at the time of admission and subsequently granted
to a railroad. the "equal footing" doctrine has had an important effect,
however, on the property rights of new states to soil under navigable
waters. in pollard v. hagan,[] the court held that the original
states had reserved to themselves the ownership of the shores of
navigable waters and the soils under them, and that under the principle
of equality the title to the soils of navigable waters passes to a new
state upon admission. after refusing to extend the inland-water rule of
this case to the three mile marginal belt under the ocean along the
coast,[] the court applied the principle of the pollard case in
reverse in united states v. texas.[] since the original states had
been found not to own the soil under the three mile belt, texas, which
concededly did own this soil before its annexation to the united states,
was held to have surrendered its dominion and sovereignty over it, upon
entering the union on terms of equality with the existing states. to
this extent, the earlier rule that unless otherwise declared by congress
the title to every species of property owned by a territory passes to
the state upon admission[] has been qualified.
while the territorial status continues, the united states has power to
convey property rights, such as rights in soil below high-water mark
along navigable waters,[] or the right to fish in designated
waters,[] which will be binding on the state. but a treaty with an
indian tribe which gave hunting rights on unoccupied lands of the united
states, which rights should cease when the united states parted with its
title to any of the land, was held to be repealed by the admission to
the union of the territory in which the hunting lands were
situated.[]
[pg ]
clause . the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all
needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property
belonging to the united states; and nothing in this constitution shall
be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the united states, or of
any particular state.
property of the united states
the constitution is silent as to the methods of disposing of property of
the united states. in united states v. gratiot,[] in which the
validity of a lease of lead mines on government lands was put in issue,
the contention was advanced that "disposal is not letting or leasing,"
and that congress has no power "to give or authorize leases." the court
sustained the leases, saying "the disposal must be left to the
discretion of congress."[] nearly a century later this power to
dispose of public property was relied upon to uphold the generation and
sale of electricity by the tennessee valley authority. the reasoning of
the court ran thus: the potential electrical energy made available by
the construction of a dam in the exercise of its constitutional powers
is property which the united states is entitled to reduce to possession;
to that end it may install the equipment necessary to generate such
energy. in order to widen the market and make a more advantageous
disposition of the product, it may construct transmission lines, and may
enter into a contract with a private company for the interchange of
electric energy.[]
no appropriation of public lands may be made for any purpose except by
authority of congress.[] however, the long-continued practice of
withdrawing land from the public domain by executive orders for the
purpose of creating indian reservations has raised an implied delegation
of authority from congress to take such action.[] the comprehensive
authority of congress over public lands includes the power to prescribe
the times, conditions and mode of transfer thereof, and to designate the
persons to whom the transfer shall be made;[] [pg ]to declare the dignity
and effect of titles emanating from the united states;[] to determine
the validity of grants which antedate the government's acquisition of
the property;[] to exempt lands acquired under the homestead laws
from previously contracted debts;[] to withdraw land from settlement
and to prohibit grazing thereon;[] to prevent unlawful occupation of
public property and to declare what are nuisances, as affecting such
property, and provide for their abatement;[] and to prohibit the
introduction of liquor on lands purchased and used for an indian
colony.[] congress may limit the disposition of the public domain to
a manner consistent with its views of public policy. a restriction
inserted in a grant of public lands to a municipality which prohibited
the grantee from selling or leasing to a private corporation the right
to sell or sublet water or electric energy supplied by the facilities
constructed on such land was held valid.[]
no state can tax public lands of the united states within its
borders;[] nor can state legislation interfere with the power of
congress under this clause or embarrass its exercise.[] the question
whether title to land which has once been the property of the united
states has passed from it must be resolved by the laws of the united
states; after title has passed, "that property, like all other property
in the state, is subject to state legislation; so far as that
legislation is consistent with the admission that the title passed and
vested according to the laws of the united states."[] in construing a
conveyance by the united states of land within a state, the settled and
reasonable rule of construction of the state affords a guide in
determining what impliedly passes to the grantee as an incident to land
expressly granted.[] [pg ]but a state statute enacted subsequently to a
federal grant cannot be given effect to vest in the state rights which
either remained in the united states or passed to its grantee.[]
in the territories, congress has the entire dominion and sovereignty,
national and local, and has full legislative power over all subjects
upon which a state legislature might act.[] it may legislate directly
with respect to the local affairs of a territory or it may transfer that
function to a legislature elected by the citizens thereof,[] which
will then be invested with all legislative power except as limited by
the constitution of the united states and acts of congress.[] in
, congress prohibited the enactment by territorial legislatures of
local or special laws on enumerated subjects.[] the constitutional
guarantees of private rights are applicable in territories which have
been made a part of the united states by congressional action,[] but
not to unincorporated territories.[] alaska is of the former
description,[] while the status of hawaii appears to be
doubtful.[] congress may establish, or may authorize the territorial
legislature to create, legislative courts whose jurisdiction is derived
from statutes enacted pursuant to this section rather than from article
iv.[] such courts may exercise admiralty jurisdiction despite the
fact that such jurisdiction may be exercised in the states only by
constitutional courts.[]
[pg ]
section . the united states shall guarantee to every state in
this union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of
them against invasion; and on application of the legislature, or of the
executive (when the legislature cannot be convened) against domestic
violence.
a republican form of government
it was established in the pioneer case of luther v. borden,[] that
questions arising under this section are political, not judicial, in
character, and that "it rests with congress to decide what government is
the established one in a state *** as well as its republican
character."[] upon congress also rested the duty to restore
republican governments to the states which seceded from the union at the
time of the civil war. in texas v. white[] the supreme court
declared that the action of the president in setting up provisional
governments at the end of the war was justified, if at all, only as an
exercise of his powers as commander in chief and that such governments
were to be regarded merely as provisional regimes to perform the
functions of government pending action by congress. on the ground that
the questions were not justiciable in character, the supreme court has
refused to consider whether the adoption of the initiative and
referendum,[] or the delegation of legislative power to other
departments of government[] is compatible with a republican form of
government. this guarantee does not give the supreme court jurisdiction
to review a decision of a state court sustaining a determination of an
election contest for the office of governor made by a state legislature
under the authority of a state constitution.[] inasmuch as women were
denied the right to vote in most, if not all, of the original thirteen
states, it was held, prior to the adoption of amendment xix, that a
state government could be challenged under this clause by reason of the
fact that it did not permit women to vote.[]
[pg ]
protection against domestic violence
the supreme court also held in luther v. borden[] that it rested
with congress to determine upon the means proper to fulfill the
constitutional guarantee of protection to the states against domestic
violence. chief justice taney declared that congress might have placed
it in the power of a court to decide when the contingency had happened
which required the federal government to interfere. instead, congress
had, by the act of february , ,[] authorized the president to
call out the militia in case of insurrection against the government of
any state. it followed, said taney, that the president "must, of
necessity, decide which is the government, and which party is unlawfully
arrayed against it, before he can perform the duty imposed upon him by
the act of congress"[] and that his determination was not subject to
review by the courts.
with the recognition in the debs case[] of the power and duty of the
federal government to use "the entire strength of the nation *** to
enforce in any part of the land the full and free exercise of all
national powers and the security of all rights entrusted by the
constitution to its care,"[] this clause has declined in importance.
when that government finds it necessary or desirable to use force to
quell domestic violence, its power to protect the property of the united
states, to remove obstructions to the united states mails, or to protect
interstate commerce from interruption by labor disputes or otherwise,
usually will furnish legal warrant for its action, without reference to
this provision.[]
notes
[] clark v. graham,  wheat.  (), is an early case in
which the supreme court enforced this rule.
[] stat.  ();  stat.  (), r.s. §  u.s.c.
[] mankin v. chandler & co.,  brock. ,  ().
[]  cr.  (). see also everett v. everett,  u.s.
 (); mutual l. ins. co. v. harris,  u.s.  ().
[] on the same basis, a judgment cannot be impeached either in
or out of the state by showing that it was based on a mistake of law.
american exp. co. v. mullins,  u.s. ,  (); fauntleroy
v. lum,  u.s.  (); hartford l. ins. co. v. barber, 
u.s.  (); hartford l. ins. co. v. ibs,  u.s.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  pet.  (). see also bacon v. howard,  how.
,  (); bank of ala. v. dalton,  how. ,  (); great
western telegraph co. v. purdy,  u.s.  (); christmas v.
russell,  wall. ,  (); wisconsin v. pelican insurance co.,
[] cole v. cunningham,  u.s. ,  (). see also
stacy v. thrasher, use of sellers,  how. ,  (); milwaukee
county v. white (m.e.) co.,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago & a.r. co. v. wiggins ferry co.,  u.s. ,
 (); hanley v. donoghue,  u.s. ,  (). see also
bigelow v. old dominion copper min. & s. co.,  u.s.  ();
green v. van buskirk,  wall. ,  (); roche v. mcdonald,
 u.s.  (); ohio v. chattanooga boiler & tank co.,  u.s.
[] sistare v. sistare,  u.s.  ().
[] michigan trust co. v. ferry,  u.s.  (). see
also fall v. eastin,  u.s.  ().
[] milwaukee county v. white (m.e.) co.,  u.s. ,
[] board of public works v. columbia college,  wall. 
(); robertson v. pickrell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] kersh lake drainage dist. v. johnson,  u.s. 
(). see also texas & p.r. co. v. southern p. co.,  u.s. 
[] national exchange bank v. wiley,  u.s. , 
(). see also grover & b. sewing-mach. co. v. radcliffe,  u.s.
[] harding v. harding,  u.s.  (). the following
cases further illustrate the application of the clause when its
protection is sought by a defendant. such claim must be specific, wabash
r. co. v. flannigan,  u.s. ,  (). see also american exp.
co. v. mullins,  u.s.  (). the burden is upon the party
making it to establish the failure of a court to give to decrees of a
federal court and the court of another state the due effect to which
they are entitled. commercial pub. co. v. beckwith,  u.s. , 
(). however, by defending on the merits, after pleading and relying
upon a foreign judgment, a party does not waive the benefits of an
alleged estoppel arising from the foreign judgment. harding v.
harding,  u.s. ,  (). nor is a decree of dismissal, not on
the merits, a bar to suit in another jurisdiction. swift v. mcpherson,
 u.s.  (). nor is an entry of discontinuance. in allowing the
plaintiff to show that such entry of discontinuance was not intended by
the parties as a release and satisfaction of the cause of action, but
was the result of a promissory agreement by the defendant which was
never complied with, the court in the forum state was not refusing full
faith and credit to the judgment. such evidence was properly allowed,
not to contradict the legal import of said judgment, but to show the
true meaning of the parties to the suit in agreeing upon its
discontinuance. jacobs v. marks,  u.s. ,  ().
[] anglo-american provision co. v. davis provision co., 
[] fauntleroy v. lum,  u.s.  (). justice holmes,
who spoke for the court in both cases, asserted in his opinion in the
latter that the new york statute was "directed to jurisdiction," the
mississippi statute to "merits," but four justices could not grasp the
distinction.
[] kenney v. supreme lodge,  u.s.  (), and cases
there cited. holmes again spoke for the court. see also cook, the
powers of congress under the full faith and credit clause,  yale l.j.
[] broderick v. rosner,  u.s.  (), affirmed in
hughes v. fetter,  u.s.  ().
[] union national bank v. lamb,  u.s.  (); see
also roche v. mcdonald,  u.s.  ().
[] embry v. palmer,  u.s. ,  ().
[] titus v. wallick,  u.s. , - ().
[] morris v. jones,  u.s.  ().
[] thus why should not a judgment for alimony be made
directly enforceable in sister states instead of merely furnishing the
basis of an action in debt? see thompson v. thompson,  u.s. 
[] board of public works v. columbia college,  wall. ,
 (). see also spokane & i.e.r. co. v. whitley,  u.s. 
(); bigelow v. old dominion copper min. & s. co.,  u.s. 
(); brown v. fletcher,  u.s.  (); wisconsin v. pelican
ins. co.,  u.s. ,  (); huntington v. attrill,  u.s.
,  (). however a denial of credit, founded upon a mere
suggestion of want of jurisdiction and unsupported by evidence, violates
the clause. see also rogers v. alabama,  u.s. ,  ();
wells fargo & co. v. ford,  u.s.  ().
[] see cooper v. reynolds,  wall.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] justice johnson, dissenting in mills v. duryee,  cr.
 (), had said: "there are certain eternal principles of justice
which never ought to be dispensed with, and which courts of justice
never can dispense with but when compelled by positive statute. one of
those is, that jurisdiction cannot be justly exercised by a state over
property not within the reach of its process, or over persons not owing
them allegiance or not subjected to their jurisdiction, by being found
within their limits." ibid. .
[] mcdonald v. mabee,  u.s. ,  (). see also
wetmore v. karrick,  u.s.  ().
[] grover & b. sewing-mach. co. v. radcliffe,  u.s. 
(). see also brown v. fletcher,  u.s.  (); galpin v.
page,  wall.  (); old wayne mutual life asso. co. v.
mcdonough,  u.s.  ().
[] reynolds v. stockton,  u.s.  ().
[] renaud v. abbott,  u.s.  (); jaster v.
currie,  u.s.  ().
[] milliken v. meyer,  u.s. ,  ().
[] adam v. saenger,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hancock national bank v. farnum,  u.s.  ().
[] stacy v. thrasher, use of sellers,  how. , 
[] bigelow v. old dominion copper min. & s. co.,  u.s.
[]  how.  ().
[] to the same effect is connecticut mut. ins. co. v.
spratley,  u.s.  ().
[] simon v. southern ky.,  u.s.  ().
[] goldey v. morning news,  u.s.  (); riverside
mills v. menefee,  u.s.  ().
[] international harvester co. v. kentucky,  u.s. 
(); riverside mills v. menefee,  u.s.  ().
[] international harvester co. v. kentucky,  u.s. 
[] kane v. new jersey,  u.s.  (); hess v.
pawloski,  u.s.  (). limited in wuchter v. pizzutti, 
[]  wall.  ().
[] see  black, judgments § ().
[] see also simmons v. saul,  u.s. ,  (). in
other words, the challenge to jurisdiction is treated as equivalent to
the plea nul tiel record, a plea which was recognized even in mills
v. duryee as always available against an attempted invocation of the
full faith and credit clause. what is not pointed out by the court, is
that it was also assumed in the earlier case that such a plea could
always be rebutted by producing a transcript, properly authenticated in
accordance with the act of congress, of the judgment in the original
case. see also brown v. fletcher,  u.s.  (); german savings
society v. dormitzer,  u.s. ,  (); grover & sewing-mach.
co. v. radcliffe,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cheever v. wilson,  wall.  ().
[] andrews v. andrews,  u.s.  (). see also
german savings society v. dormitzer,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also thompson v. thompson,
[] ibid. at p. .
[] bell v. bell,  u.s.  (); andrews v. andrews,
[] strong dissents were filed which have influenced
subsequent holdings. among these was that of justice rutledge which
attacked both the consequences of the decision as well as the concept of
jurisdictional domicile on which it was founded.
"unless 'matrimonial domicil,' banished in williams i [by the
overruling of haddock v. haddock], has returned renamed ['domicil of
origin'] in williams ii, every decree becomes vulnerable in every
state. every divorce, wherever granted, ***, may now be reexamined by
every other state, upon the same or different evidence, to redetermine
the 'jurisdictional fact,' always the ultimate conclusion of 'domicil.'
"the constitution does not mention domicil. nowhere does it posit the
powers of the states or the nation upon that amorphous, highly variable
common-law conception. *** no legal conception, save possibly
'jurisdiction,' ***, affords such possibilities for uncertain
application. *** apart from the necessity for travel, [to effect a
change of domicile, the latter], criterion comes down to a purely
subjective mental state, related to remaining for a length of time never
yet defined with clarity. *** when what must be proved is a variable,
the proof and the conclusion which follows upon it inevitably take on
that character. *** [the majority have not held] that denial of credit
will be allowed, only if the evidence [as to the place of domicile] is
different or depending in any way upon the character or the weight of
the difference. the test is not different evidence. it is evidence,
whether the same or different and, if different, without regard to the
quality of the difference, from which an opposing set of inferences can
be drawn by the trier of fact 'not unreasonably.' *** but *** [the
court] does not define 'not unreasonably.' it vaguely suggests a
supervisory function, to be exercised when the denial [of credit]
strikes its sensibilities as wrong, by some not stated standard. ***
there will be no 'weighing' [of evidence], *** only examination for
sufficiency."—( u.s. , , , , - ()).
no less disposed to prophesy undesirable results from this decision was
justice black in whose dissenting opinion justice douglas concurred.
"the full faith and credit clause, as now interpreted, has become a
disrupting influence. the court in effect states that the clause does
not apply to divorce actions, and that states alone have the right to
determine what effect shall be given to the decrees of other states. if
the court is abandoning the principle that a marriage [valid where made
is valid everywhere], a consequence is to subject people to bigamy or
adultery prosecutions because they exercise their constitutional right
to pass from a state in which they were validly married on to another
which refuses to recognize their marriage. such a consequence violates
basic guarantees."
north carolina's interest was to preserve a bare marital status as to
two persons who sought a divorce and two others who had not objected to
it. "it is an extraordinary thing for a state to procure a retroactive
invalidation of a divorce decree, and then punish one of its citizens
for conduct authorized by that decree, when it had never been challenged
by either of the people most immediately interested in it." the state
here did not sue to protect any north carolina property rights nor to
obtain support for deserted families. "i would not permit such an
attenuated state interest to override the full faith and credit clause
the unsettling effect of this decision was expressed statistically by
justice black as follows: "statistics indicate that approximately five
million divorced persons are scattered throughout the forty-eight
states. more than % of these divorces were granted in uncontested
proceedings. not one of this latter group can now retain any feeling of
security in his divorce decree. ever present will be the danger of
criminal prosecution and harassment." ibid. -.
as to the conclusion that the supreme court as well as the state courts
should reach in like situations, justice black asserted that "until
congress has commanded a different 'effect' for divorces granted on a
short sojourn within a state, we should stay our hands. *** if we
follow that course, north carolina cannot be permitted to disregard the
nevada decrees without passing upon the 'faith and credit' which nevada
itself would give to them under its own 'law or usage.' *** for in
nevada, even its attorney general could not have obtained a cancellation
of the decree ***." ibid. , .
the reader should take note of the effect in some of the above opinions
to weigh competing interests against one another and the implication
that the court's relation to the full faith and credit clause is that of
an arbitral tribunal rather than of a court in the conventional sense of
a body whose duty is to maintain an established rule of law.
[] ibid. -.
[]  u.s.  (). see also the companion case of
kreiger v. kreiger,  u.s.  ().
[] esenwein v. commonwealth,  u.s. ,  ().
[] because the record, in his opinion, did not make it clear
whether new york "law" held that no "ex parte" divorce decree could
terminate a prior new york separate maintenance decree, or merely that
no "ex parte" decree of divorce of another state could, justice
frankfurter dissented and recommended that the case be remanded for
clarification. justice jackson dissented on the ground that under new
york law, a new york divorce would terminate the wife's right to
alimony; and if the nevada decree is good, it is entitled to no less
effect in new york than a local decree. however, for reasons stated in
his dissent in the first williams case,  u.s. , he would prefer
not to give standing to constructive service divorces obtained on short
residence.  u.s. , - (). these two justices filed
similar dissents in the companion case of kreiger v. kreiger,  u.s.
[]  u.s.  ().—in a dissenting opinion filed in the
case of sherrer v. sherrer, but applicable also to the case of coe
v. coe, justice frankfurter, with justice murphy concurring, asserted
his inability to accept the proposition advanced by the majority that
"regardless of how overwhelming the evidence may have been that the
asserted domicile in the state offering bargain-counter divorces was a
sham, the home state of the parties is not permitted to question the
matter if the form of a controversy had been gone through."— u.s.
[]  u.s.  ().—of four justices dissenting (black,
douglas, rutledge, jackson), justice jackson alone filed a written
opinion. to him the decision is "an example of the manner in which, in
the law of domestic relations, 'confusion now hath made his
masterpiece,'" but for the first williams case and its progeny, the
judgment of the connecticut court might properly have held that the rice
divorce decree was void for every purpose because it was rendered by a
state court which never obtained jurisdiction of the nonresident
defendant. "but if we adhere to the holdings that the nevada court had
power over her for the purpose of blasting her marriage and opening the
way to a successor, i do not see the justice of inventing a compensating
confusion in the device of divisible divorce by which the parties are
half-bound and half-free and which permits rice to have a wife who
cannot become his widow and to leave a widow who was no longer his
wife." ibid. , , .
[] vermont violated the clause in sustaining a collateral
attack on a florida divorce decree, the presumption of florida's
jurisdiction over the cause and the parties not having been overcome by
extrinsic evidence or the record of the case. cook v. cook,  u.s.
 (). the sherrer and coe cases were relied upon. there seems,
therefore, to be no doubt of their continued vitality.
[] barber v. barber,  u.s. ,  ().
[] sistare v. sistare,  u.s. ,  (). see also
barber v. barber,  how.  (); lynde v. lynde,  u.s. ,
- (); bates v. bodie,  u.s.  (); audubon v.
shufeldt,  u.s. ,  (); yarbrough v. yarbrough,  u.s.
 (); loughran v. loughran,  u.s.  ().
[] griffin v. griffin,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . an alimony case of a quite extraordinary
pattern was that of sutton v. leib. on account of the diverse
citizenship of the parties, who had once been husband and wife, the case
was brought by the latter in a federal court in illinois. her suit was
to recover unpaid alimony which was to continue until her remarriage. to
be sure, she had, as she confessed, remarried in nevada, but the
marriage had been annulled in new york on the ground that the man was
already married, inasmuch as his divorce from his previous wife was null
and void, she having neither entered a personal appearance nor been
personally served. the court, speaking by justice reed, held that the
new york annulment of the nevada marriage must be given full faith and
credit in illinois, but left illinois to decide for itself the effect of
the annulment upon the obligations of petitioner's first husband. sutton
v. leib,  u.s.  ().
[] halvey v. halvey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] johnson v. muelberger,  u.s.  ().
[] tilt v. kelsey,  u.s.  (); burbank v. ernst,
[] riley v. new york trust company,  u.s.  ().
[] brown v. fletcher,  u.s. ,  (). see also
stacy v. thrasher, use of sellers,  how. ,  (); mclean v.
meek,  how. , , ().
[] tilt v. kelsey,  u.s.  (). in the case of borer
v. chapman,  u.s. ,  () involving a complicated set of
facts, it was held, in , that a judgment in a probate proceeding,
which was merely ancillary to proceedings in another state and which
ordered the residue of the estate to be assigned to the legatee and
discharged the executor from further liability, did not prevent a
creditor, who was not a resident of the state in which the ancillary
judgment was rendered, from setting up his claim in the state probate
court which had the primary administration of the estate.
[] blodgett v. silberman,  u.s.  ().
[] kerr v. devisees of moon,  wheat.  (); mccormick
v. sullivant,  wheat.  (); clarke v. clarke,  u.s. 
(). the controlling principle of these cases is not confined to
proceedings in probate. a court of equity "not having jurisdiction of
the res cannot affect it by its decree nor by a deed made by a master
in accordance with the decree." see fall v. eastin,  u.s. , 
[] robertson v. pickrell,  u.s. ,  (). see
also darby v. mayer,  wheat.  (); gasquet v. fenner, 
[] olmsted v. olmsted,  u.s.  ().
[] hood v. mcgehee,  u.s.  ().
[] harris v. balk,  u.s.  (). see also chicago,
r.i. & pac. ry v. sturm,  u.s.  (); king v. cross, 
u.s. ,  (); louisville & n.r. co. v. deer,  u.s. 
(); baltimore & o.r. co. v. hostetter,  u.s.  ().
[] christmas v. russell,  wall.  (); maxwell v.
stewart,  wall.  (); hanley v. donoghue,  u.s.  ();
wisconsin v. pelican ins. co.,  u.s.  (); simmons v. saul,
 u.s.  (); american express co. v. mullins,  u.s. 
[] fauntleroy v. lum,  u.s.  ().
[] anglo-american provision co. v. davis provision co., 
[] the antelope,  wheat. ,  (). see also
wisconsin v. pelican ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also dennick v. r.r.  u.s.
[] milwaukee county v. white (n.e.) co.,  u.s. 
(). see also moore v. mitchell,  u.s.  ().
[] bank of augusta v. earle,  pet. , - ().
see kryger v. wilson,  u.s.  (); bond v. hume,  u.s.
[]  how. ,  (); bonaparte v. tax court, 
u.s.  (), where it was held that a law exempting from taxation
certain bonds of the enacting state did not operate extraterritorially
by virtue of the full faith and credit clause.
[] chicago & alton r. co. v. wiggins ferry,  u.s. ,
[] smithsonian institution v. st. john,  u.s.  ().
when, in a state court, the validity of an act of the legislature of
another state is not in question, and the controversy turns merely upon
its interpretation or construction, no question arises under the full
faith and credit clause. see also western life indemnity co. v.
rupp,  u.s.  (), citing glenn v. garth,  u.s.  ();
lloyd v. matthews,  u.s. ,  (); banholzer v. new york
l. ins. co.,  u.s.  (); allen v. alleghany co.,  u.s.
,  (); texas & n.o.r. co. v. miller,  u.s.  ().
see also national mut. bldg. & loan asso. v. brahan,  u.s. 
(); johnson v. new york life ins. co.,  u.s. ,  ();
pennsylvania f. ins. co. v. gold issue min. & mill. co.,  u.s. 
[] alaska packers asso. v. industrial acci. commission, 
u.s.  (); bradford electric light co. v. clapper,  u.s. 
[] dennick v. r.r.,  u.s.  () was the first of the
so-called "death act" cases to reach the supreme court. see also
stewart v. b.& o.r. co.,  u.s.  (). even today the
obligation of a state to furnish a forum for the determination of death
claims arising in another state under the laws thereof appears to rest
on a rather precarious basis. in hughes v. fetter,  u.s. 
(), the court, by a narrow majority, held invalid under the full
faith and credit clause a statute of wisconsin which, as locally
interpreted, forbade its courts to entertain suits of this nature; and
in first national bank v. united air lines,  u.s.  (), a
like result was reached as to an illinois statute. in both cases the
same four justices dissented.
[] northern pac. r.r. v. babcock,  u.s.  ();
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. sowers,  u.s. ,  ().
[] glenn v. garth,  u.s.  ().
[] tennessee coal co. v. george,  u.s.  ().
[] klaxon co. v. stentor,  u.s.  (); john
hancock mut. life ins. co. v. yates,  u.s.  ()
distinguished.
[] modern woodmen of am. v. mixer,  u.s.  ().
[] converse v. hamilton,  u.s.  (); selig v.
hamilton,  u.s.  (); marin v. augedahl,  u.s. 
[] broderick v. rosner,  u.s.  (). see also
thormann v. frame,  u.s. ,  (); reynolds v. stockton,
[] hancock nat. bank. v. farnum,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (); followed in modern woodmen of am.
v. mixer,  u.s.  ().
[] new york life ins. co. v. head,  u.s.  ();
aetna life ins. co. v. dunken,  u.s.  ().
[] national mutual b. & l. asso. v. brahan,  u.s. 
[] new york life ins. co. v. cravens,  u.s.  ().
see also american fire ins. co. v. king lumber co.,  u.s. 
[] griffin v. mccoach,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. , - (). however, a decree of a
montana supreme court, insofar as it permitted judgment creditors of a
dissolved iowa surety company to levy execution against local assets to
satisfy judgment, as against title to such assets of the iowa insurance
commissioner as statutory liquidator and successor to the dissolved
company, was held to deny full faith and credit to the statutes of
iowa.—clark v. willard,  u.s.  ().
[] bradford electric co. v. clapper,  u.s. , 
[] the court had earlier remarked that "workmen's
compensation legislation rests upon the idea of status, not upon that of
implied contract." cudahy packing co. v. parramore,  u.s. , 
(). in contrast to the above cases, see kryger v. wilson, 
u.s.  (), where it was held that the question whether the
cancellation of a land contract was governed by the lex rei sitae or
the lex loci contractus was purely a question of local common law;
also bond v. hume,  u.s.  ().
[] pacific ins. co. v. comm'n.,  u.s. , , -
[] industrial comm'n. v. mccartin,  u.s.  ().
[] cardillo v. liberty mutual co.,  u.s.  ().
[] reviewing some of the cases treated in this section, a
writer in  said: "it appears, then, that the supreme court has quite
definitely committed itself to a program of making itself, to some
extent, a tribunal for bringing about uniformity in the field of
conflicts *** although the precise circumstances under which it will
regard itself as having jurisdiction for this purpose are far from
clear." e.m. dodd, the power of the supreme court to review state
decisions in the field of conflict of laws (),  harv. l. rev.
-. it can hardly be said that the law has been subsequently
clarified on this point.
[] walter w. cook, the power of congress under the full
faith and credit clause (),  yale l.j. .
[] cooper v. newell,  u.s. ,  (). see also
wisconsin v. pelican ins. co.,  u.s. ,  (); swift v.
mcpherson,  u.s.  (); pennington v. gibson,  how. , 
(); cheever v. wilson,  wall. ,  (); baldwin v. iowa
state traveling men's asso.,  u.s.  (); american surety co.
v. baldwin,  u.s.  (); sanders v. armour fertilizer works,
[] milwaukee county v. white (m.e.) co.,  u.s. 
[] equitable l. assur. soc. v. brown,  u.s.  ().
see also gibson v. lyon,  u.s.  ().
[] embry v. palmer,  u.s. ,  (). see also
northern assur. co. v. grand view bldg. asso.,  u.s.  ();
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. sowers,  u.s.  (); knights of
pythias v. meyer,  u.s. ,  (); louisville & n.r. co. v.
central stockyards co.,  u.s.  (); west side belt r. co. v.
pittsburgh constr. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] no right, privilege, or immunity is conferred by the
constitution in respect to judgments of foreign states and
nations.—aetna life ins. co. v. tremblay,  u.s.  (). in
hilton v. guyot,  u.s. ,  () where a french judgment
offered in defense was held not a bar to the suit. four justices
dissented on the ground that "the application of the doctrine of res
judicata does not rest in discretion; and it is for the government, and
not for its courts, to adopt the principle of retorsion, if deemed under
any circumstances desirable or necessary." at the same sitting of the
court, an action in a united states circuit court on a canadian judgment
was sustained on the same ground of reciprocity. ritchie v. mcmullen,
 u.s.  (). see also ingenohl v. olsen,  u.s. 
(), where a decision of the supreme court of the philippine islands
was reversed for refusal to enforce a judgment of the supreme court of
the british colony of hongkong, which was rendered "after a fair trial
by a court having jurisdiction of the parties." in  foreign
relations of the united states -, will be found a three-cornered
correspondence between the state department, the austro-hungarian
legation, and the governor of pennsylvania, in which the last named
asserts that "under the laws of pennsylvania the judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction in croatia would be respected to the extent of
permitting such judgment to be sued upon in the courts of pennsylvania."
stowell, op. cit. supra note i, at -. another instance of
international cooperation in the judicial field is furnished by letters
rogatory. "when letters rogatory are addressed from any court of a
foreign country to any district court of the united states, a
commissioner of such district court designated by said court to make the
examination of the witnesses mentioned in said letters, shall have power
to compel the witnesses to appear and depose in the same manner as
witnesses may be compelled to appear and testify in courts," 
u.s.c.a., supra note ii, §. some of the states have similar laws.
see  moore, digest of international law () -.
[] david k. watson, the constitution of the united states,
vol. ii,  ().
[] the federalist no. .
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] scott v. sandford,  how.  ().
[] ibid. , -.
[] slaughter-house case,  fed. cas. no.  ();
chambers v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s.  (); whitfield v.
ohio,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] bradwell v. illinois,  wall. ,  (). see
also cole v. cunningham,  u.s.  ().
[] blake v. mcclung,  u.s. ,  (); travis v.
yale & towne mfg. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] la tourette v. mcmaster,  u.s.  (); douglas
v. new york, n.h. & h.r. co.,  u.s.  (); cf. maxwell v.
bugbee,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. harris,  u.s. ,  (). see
also baldwin v. franks,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. wheeler,  u.s.  ().
[] scott v. sandford,  how.  ()
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] crutcher v. kentucky,  u.s.  (). see also
pp. -, -.
[] hemphill v. orloff,  u.s.  ().
[]  fed. cas. no. ,, ,  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] corfield v. coryell,  fed. cas. no. , , 
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . in mullaney v. anderson,  u.s.  ()
an alaska statute providing for the licensing of commercial fishermen in
territorial waters and levying a license fee of $. on nonresident
and only $. on resident fishermen was held void under art. iv, § on
the authority of toomer v. witsell, cited above.
[] ibid. .
[] la tourette v. mcmaster,  u.s.  ().
[] doherty and co. v. goodman,  u.s.  ().
[] hess v. pawloski,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ferry v. spokane p. & s.r. co.,  u.s.  (),
followed in ferry v. corbett,  u.s.  ().
[] conner v. elliott,  how. ,  ().
[] blake v. mcclung,  u.s. ,  ().
[] williams v. bruffy,  u.s. ,  ().
[] chambers v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s. , 
(); mcknett v. st. louis & s.f.r. co.,  u.s. ,  ();
miles v. illinois c.r. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] canadian n.r. co. v. eggen,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] chemung canal bank v. lowery,  u.s. ,  ().
[] douglas v. new york, n.h. & h.r. co.,  u.s. 
[] chambers v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall. ,  (). see also downham v.
alexandria,  wall. ,  ().
[] chalker v. birmingham & m.w.r. co.,  u.s. 
[] ibid. -. see also shaffer v. carter,  u.s. 
[] williams v. fears,  u.s. ,  ().
[] haavik v. alaska packers' asso.,  u.s.  ().
[] travelers' ins. co. v. connecticut,  u.s. , 
[] maxwell v. bugbee,  u.s.  ().
[] kirtland v. hotchkiss,  u.s. ,  (). cf.
colgate v. harvey,  u.s.  () in which discriminatory
taxation of bank deposits outside the state owned by a citizen of the
state was held to infringe a privilege of national citizenship, in
contravention of the fourteenth amendment. the decision in colgate v.
harvey was overruled in madden v. kentucky,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] roberts v. reilly,  u.s. ,  (). see also
innes v. tobin,  u.s.  (). said justice story: "... the
natural, if not the necessary conclusion is, that the national
government, in the absence of all positive provisions to the contrary,
is bound, through its own proper departments, legislative, judicial, or
executive, as the case may require, to carry into effect all the rights
and duties imposed upon it by the constitution"; [and again] "... it
has, on various occasions, exercised powers which were necessary and
proper as means to carry into effect rights expressly given, and duties
expressly enjoined thereby." prigg v. pennsylvania,  pet. , ,
[] taylor v. taintor,  wall. ,  ().
[]  how.  (); cf. prigg v. pennsylvania,  pet.
[]  how. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] roberts v. reilly,  u.s.  (). see also
strassheim v. daily,  u.s.  (); appleyard v.
massachusetts,  u.s.  (); ex parte reggel,  u.s. , 
[] drew v. thaw,  u.s. ,  ().
[] innes v. tobin,  u.s.  ().
[] bassing v. cady,  u.s.  ().
[] hyatt v. new york ex rel. corkran,  u.s. 
[] kentucky v. dennison,  how. ,  ().
[] taylor v. taintor,  wall. ,  ().
[] kentucky v. dennison,  how. ,  (); pierce
v. creecy,  u.s.  (). see also marbles v. creecy, 
u.s.  (); strassheim v. daily,  u.s.  (); re strauss,
[] munsey v. clough,  u.s.  (); pettibone v.
nichols,  u.s.  ().
[] drew v. thaw,  u.s.  ().
[] pettibone v. nichols,  u.s. ,  ().
[] biddinger v. police comr.,  u.s.  (). see
also rodman v. pothier,  u.s.  ().
[] hyatt v. new york ex rel. corkran,  u.s.  ().
see also south carolina v. bailey,  u.s.  ().
[] munsey v. clough,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ker v. illinois,  u.s. ,  (); mahon v.
justice,  u.s. , , ,  ().
[] cook v. hart,  u.s. ,  (); pettibone v.
nichols,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lascelles v. georgia,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. rauscher,  u.s. ,  ().
[] prigg v. pennsylvania,  pet. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] jones v. van zandt,  how. ,  (); ableman
v. booth,  how.  ().
[] prigg v. pennsylvania,  pet. ,  ().
[] moore v. illinois,  how. ,  ().
[] escanaba & l.m. transp. co. v. chicago,  u.s. ,
[] madison, journal of the debates in the convention which
framed the constitution,  (hunt's ed., ).
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] pollard v. hagan,  how. ,  ().
[]  stat. ,  ().
[] justice harlan, speaking for the court in united states
v. texas,  u.s. ,  ();  stat. .
[] permoli v. new orleans,  how. ,  (); mccabe
v. atchison, t. & s.f.r. co.,  u.s.  (); illinois central r.
co. v. illinois,  u.s. ,  (); knight v. united land
asso.,  u.s. ,  (); weber v. state harbor comrs., 
wall. ,  ().
[] coyle v. smith,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. texas,  u.s. ,  ();
stearns v. minnesota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] pollard v. hagan,  how. ,  (); mccabe v.
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] van brocklin v. tennessee,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wilson v. cook,  u.s.  ().
[] permoli v. new orleans,  how. ,  (); sands
v. manistee river imp. co.,  u.s. ,  (); see also
withers v. buckley,  how. ,  (); willamette iron bridge co.
v. hatch,  u.s. ,  (); cincinnati v. louisville & n.r. co.,
 u.s.  (); huse v. glover,  u.s. ,().
[] draper v. united states,  u.s.  () following
united states v. mcbratney,  u.s.  ().
[] dick v. united states,  u.s.  (); ex parte
webb,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. sandoval,  u.s.  ().
[] boyd v. nebraska,  u.s. ,  ().
[] baker v. morton,  wall. ,  ().
[] freeborn v. smith,  wall.  ().
[] john v. paullin,  u.s.  ().
[] hunt v. palao,  how.  (). cf. benner v.
porter,  how. ,  ().
[] how. ,  (). see also martin v. waddell, 
pet. ,  ().
[] united states v. california,  u.s. ,  ();
united states v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
[] brown v. grant,  u.s. ,  ().
[] shively v. bowlby,  u.s. ,  (). see also
joy v. st. louis,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. winans,  u.s. ,  ();
seufert bros. co. v. united states,  u.s.  (). a fishing
right granted by treaty to indians does not necessarily preclude the
application to indians of state game laws regulating the time and manner
of taking fish. kennedy v. becker,  u.s.  (). but it has
been held to be violated by the exaction of a license fee which is both
regulatory and revenue-producing. tulee v. washington,  u.s. 
[] ward v. race horse,  u.s. , ,  ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ashwander v. tennessee valley authority,  u.s. ,
- (). see also alabama power co. v. ickes,  u.s. 
[] united states v. fitzgerald,  pet. ,  ().
see also california v. deseret water, oil & irrig. co.,  u.s. 
(); utah power & light co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] sioux tribe v. united states,  u.s.  ();
united states v. midwest oil co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gibson v. chouteau,  wall. ,  (); see also
irvine v. marshall,  how.  (); emblem v. lincoln land co.,
[] bagnell v. broderick,  pet. ,  (). see
also field v. seabury,  how. ,  ().
[] tameling v. united states freehold & emigration co., 
u.s. ,  (). see also united states v. maxwell land-grant
and r. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ruddy v. rossi,  u.s.  ().
[] light v. united states,  u.s.  (). see also
hutchings v. low,  wall.  ().
[] camfield v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
see also jourdan v. barrett,  how.  (); united states v.
waddell,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. mcgowan,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. san francisco,  u.s.  ().
[] van brocklin v. tennessee,  u.s.  (); cf.
wilson v. cook,  u.s.  ().
[] gibson v. chouteau,  wall ,  (). see also
irvine v. marshall,  how.  (); emblem v. lincoln land co.,
[] wilcox v. jackson ex dem. m'connel,  pet. , 
[] oklahoma v. texas,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. oregon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] simms v. simms,  u.s. ,  (). see also
united states v. mcmillan,  u.s. ,  (); el paso & n.e.r.
co. v. gutierrez,  u.s.  (); first nat. bank v. yankton
county,  u.s. ,  ().
[] binns v. united states,  u.s. ,  (). see
also serè v. pitot,  cr. ,  (); murphy v. ramsey, 
[] walker v. new mexico & s.p.r. co.,  u.s. , 
(); simms v. simms,  u.s. ,  (); wagoner v. evans,
[]  stat.  ().
[] downes v. bidwell,  u.s. ,  (). see also
interstate commerce commission v. united states ex rel. humboldt s.s.
co.,  u.s.  (); church of jesus christ of l.d.s. v. united
states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dorr v. united states,  u.s. ,  (). see
also balzac v. porto rico,  u.s.  ().
[] rassmussen v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] hawaii v. mankichi,  u.s.  (); r.m.c.
littler, the governance of hawaii, chap. iii ().
[] american ins. co. v. canter,  pet. ,  ().
see also romeu v. todd,  u.s. ,  (); united states v.
mcmillan,  u.s. ,  (); mcallister v. united states, 
u.s. ,  (); the "city of panama" v. phelps,  u.s. ,
 (); reynolds v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
hornbuckle v. toombs,  wall. ,  (); clinton v.
englebrecht,  wall. ,  ().
[] american ins. co. v. canter,  pet. ,  ().
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. . see also ohio ex rel. bryant v. akron
metropolitan park district,  u.s. ,  (); mountain timber co.
v. washington,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wall. ,  ().
[] pacific states teleph. & teleg. co. v. oregon,  u.s.
 (); kiernan v. portland,  u.s.  (); ohio ex rel.
davis v. hildebrant,  u.s.  ().
[] ohio ex rel. bryant v. akron metropolitan park
district,  u.s. ,  (); o'neill v. leamer,  u.s. 
(); highland farms dairy inc. v. agnew,  u.s. ,  ();
forsyth v. hammond,  u.s. ,  ().
[] taylor v. beckham,  u.s.  (). see also
marshall v. dye,  u.s.  ().
[] minor v. happersett,  wall. ,  ().
[]  how.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  how. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] on the decline in observance of the formalities required
by the provision both before and during world war i, see corwin, the
president, office and powers (d ed., ), -.
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
amendment of the constitution 
scope of the amending power 
procedure of adoption 
submission of amendment 
ratification 
authentication and proclamation 
judicial review under article v 
[pg ]
article v
the congress, whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments to this constitution, or, on the
application of the legislatures of two thirds of the several states,
shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case,
shall be valid to all intents and purposes, as part of this
constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the
several states, or by conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one
or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the congress;
provided that no amendment which may be made prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first
and fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that
no state, without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage
in the senate.
amendment of the constitution
when this article was before the constitutional convention, a motion to
insert a provision that "no state shall without its consent be affected
in its internal policy" was made and rejected.[] a further attempt to
impose a substantive limitation on the amending power was made in ,
when congress submitted to the states a proposal to bar any future
amendments which would authorize congress to "interfere, within any
state, with the domestic institutions thereof, ***."[] three states
ratified this article before the outbreak of the civil war made it
academic.[] many years later the validity of both the eighteenth and
nineteenth amendments was challenged because of their content. the
arguments against the former took a wide range. counsel urged that the
power of amendment is limited to the correction of errors in the framing
of the constitution; that it does not comprehend the adoption of
additional or supplementary provisions. they contended further that
ordinary legislation cannot [pg ]be embodied in a constitutional amendment
and that congress cannot constitutionally propose any amendment which
involves the exercise or relinquishment of the sovereign powers of a
state.[] the nineteenth amendment was attacked on the narrower ground
that a state which had not ratified the amendment would be deprived of
its equal suffrage in the senate because its representatives in that
body would be persons not of its choosing, i.e., persons chosen by
voters whom the state itself had not authorized to vote for senators.[]
brushing aside these arguments as unworthy of serious attention, the
supreme court held both amendments valid.
submission of amendment
when madison submitted to the house of representatives the proposals
from which the bill of rights evolved, he contemplated that they should
be incorporated in the text of the original instrument.[] instead the
house decided to propose them as supplementary.[] it ignored a
suggestion that the two houses should first resolve that amendments are
necessary before considering specific proposals.[] in the national
prohibition cases[] the supreme court ruled that in proposing an
amendment the two houses of congress thereby indicated that they deemed
it necessary. that same case also established the proposition that the
vote required to propose an amendment was a vote of two thirds of the
members present—assuming the presence of a quorum—and not a vote of
two thirds of the entire membership present and absent.[] the approval
of the president is not necessary for a proposed amendment.[]
ratification
congress may, in proposing an amendment, set a reasonable time limit for
its ratification. two amendments proposed in , one submitted in 
and one in , were never ratified. in dillon v. gloss[] the court
intimated that proposals which were clearly out of date were no longer
open for ratification. however, in coleman v. miller,[] it refused
to pass upon the question whether the proposed [pg ]child labor amendment,
submitted to the states in , was open to ratification thirteen years
later. it held this to be a political question which would have to be
resolved by congress in the event three fourths of the states ever gave
their assent to the proposal. with respect to the eighteenth, twentieth,
twenty-first and twenty-second amendments, congress included in the text
of these proposed amendments a section stating that the article should
be inoperative unless ratified within seven years. in dillon v. gloss
the court sustained this limitation on the ground that it gave effect to
the implication of article v that ratification "must be within some
reasonable time after the proposal."[] congress has complete freedom
of choice between the two methods of ratification recognized by article
v—by the legislatures of the states, or conventions in the states. in
united states v. sprague[] counsel advanced the contention that the
tenth amendment recognized a distinction between powers reserved to the
states and powers reserved to the people, and that state legislatures
were competent to delegate only the former to the national government;
delegation of the latter required action of the people through
conventions in the several states. the eighteenth amendment being of the
latter character, the ratification by state legislatures, so the
argument ran, was invalid. the supreme court rejected the argument. it
found the language of article v too clear to admit of reading any
exceptions into it by implication.
the term "legislatures" as used in article v means deliberative,
representative bodies of the type which in  exercised the
legislative power in the several states. it does not comprehend the
popular referendum which has subsequently become a part of the
legislative process in many of the states, nor may a state validly
condition ratification of a proposed constitutional amendment on its
approval by such a referendum.[] in the words of the court: "*** the
function of a state legislature in ratifying a proposed amendment to the
federal constitution, like the function of congress in proposing the
amendment, is a federal function derived from the federal constitution;
and it transcends any limitations sought to be imposed by the people of
a state."[]
authentication and proclamation
formerly official notice from a state legislature, duly authenticated,
that it had ratified a proposed amendment went to the secretary of
state, upon whom it was binding, "being certified by his proclamation,
[pg ][was] conclusive upon the courts" as against any objection which might
be subsequently raised as to the regularity of the legislative procedure
by which ratification was brought about.[] this function of the
secretary, purely ministerial in character, was, however, derived from
an act of congress, and was recently transferred to a functionary called
administrator of general services.[] in dillon v. gloss,[] the
supreme court held that the eighteenth amendment became operative on the
date of ratification by the thirty-sixth state, rather than on the later
date of the proclamation issued by the secretary of state, and doubtless
the same rule holds as to a similar proclamation by the administrator.
prior to , the supreme court had taken cognizance of a number of
diverse objections to the validity of specific amendments. apart from
holding that official notice of ratification by the several states was
conclusive upon the courts,[] it had treated these questions as
justiciable, although it had uniformly rejected them on the merits. in
that year, however, the whole subject was thrown into confusion by the
inconclusive decision in coleman v. miller.[] this case came up on a
writ of certiorari to the supreme court of kansas to review the denial
of a writ of mandamus to compel the secretary of the kansas senate to
erase an endorsement on a resolution ratifying the proposed child labor
amendment to the constitution to the effect that it had been adopted by
the kansas senate. the attempted ratification was assailed on three
grounds: () that the amendment had been previously rejected by the
state legislature; () that it was no longer open to ratification
because an unreasonable period of time, thirteen years, had elapsed
since its submission to the states, and () that the lieutenant governor
had no right to cast the deciding vote in the senate in favor of
ratification. four opinions were written in the supreme court, no one of
which commanded the support of more than four members of the court. the
majority ruled that the plaintiffs, members of the kansas state senate,
had a sufficient interest in the controversy to give the federal courts
jurisdiction to review the case. without agreement as to the grounds for
their decision, a different majority affirmed the judgment of the kansas
court denying the relief sought. four members who concurred in the
result had voted to dismiss the writ on the ground that the amending
process "is 'political' in its entirety, from submission until an
amendment becomes part of the constitution, and is not subject to
judicial guidance, control or interference at any point."[] whether
the contention that the lieutenant governor should have been permitted
to cast the deciding [pg ]vote in favor of ratification presented a
justiciable controversy was left undecided, the court being equally
divided on the point.[] in an opinion reported as "the opinion of the
court," but in which it appears that only three justices concurred,
chief justice hughes declared that the writ of mandamus was properly
denied because the question as to the effect of the previous rejection
of the amendment and the lapse of time since it was submitted to the
states were political questions which should be left to congress.[] on
the same day, the court dismissed a writ of certiorari to review a
decision of the kentucky court of appeals declaring the action of the
kentucky general assembly purporting to ratify the child labor amendment
illegal and void. inasmuch as the governor had forwarded the certified
copy of the resolution to the secretary of state before being served
with a copy of the restraining order issued by the state court, the
supreme court found that there was no longer a controversy susceptible
of judicial determination.[]
notes
[] ii madison, journal of debates in the constitutional
convention, - (hunt's ed., ).
[] cong. globe,  ().
[] ames, herman v., proposed amendments to the constitution,
[] rhode island v. palmer,  u.s. ,  ().
[] leser v. garnett,  u.s.  ().
[] annals of congress - ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] rhode island v. palmer,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid.
[] hollingsworth v. virginia,  dall.  ().
[] hawke v. smith,  u.s. ,  ().
[] leser v. garnett,  u.s. ,  ().
[] leser v. garnett,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] leser v. garnett,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). cf. fairchild v. hughes,  u.s.
 (), wherein the court held that a private citizen could not sue
in the federal courts to secure an indirect determination of the
validity of a constitutional amendment about to be adopted.
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. , .
[] chandler v. wise,  u.s.  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
clause . validity of debts and engagements 
clause . supremacy of the constitution, etc. 
national supremacy 
marshall's interpretation of the clause 
supremacy clause versus tenth amendment 
status of the issue today 
task of the supreme court under the clause 
federal instrumentalities and the state police power 
obligation of state courts under the supremacy clause 
immunity of the federal judicial process 
effect of laws passed by states in insurrection 
doctrine of tax exemption 
mcculloch v. maryland 
applicability of doctrine in re federal securities, etc. 
taxability of government contractors 
status of doctrine today 
ad valorem taxes under doctrine 
public property and functions 
fiscal institutions; legislative exemptions 
atomic energy commission 
royalties; a judicial anticlimax 
immunity of lessees of indian lands 
summation and evaluation 
clause . oath of office 
power of congress in respect to oaths 
national duties of state officers 
[pg ]
article vi
clause . all debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the
adoption of this constitution, shall be as valid against the united
states under this constitution, as under the confederation.
clause . this constitution, and the laws of the united states which
shall be made in pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which
shall be made, under the authority of the united states, shall be the
supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound
thereby, any thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the
contrary notwithstanding.
national supremacy
although the supreme court had held prior to marshall's appointment to
the bench, that the supremacy clause rendered null and void a state
constitutional or statutory provision which was inconsistent with a
treaty executed by the federal government,[] it was left for him to
develop the full significance of the clause as applied to acts of
congress. by his vigorous opinions in mcculloch v. maryland[] and
gibbons v. ogden[] he gave the principle a vitality which survived a
century of vacillation under the doctrine of dual federalism. in the
former case, he asserted broadly that "the states have no power, by
taxation or otherwise, to retard, impede, burden, or in any manner
control, the operations of the constitutional laws enacted by congress
to carry into execution the powers vested in the general government.
this is, we think, the unavoidable consequence of that supremacy which
the constitution has declared."[] from this he concluded that a state
tax upon notes issued by a branch of the bank of the united states was
void. in gibbons v. ogden, the court held that certain statutes of new
york granting an exclusive right to use steam [pg ]navigation on the waters
of the state were null and void insofar as they applied to vessels
licensed by the united states to engage in coastwise trade. said the
chief justice: "in argument, however, it has been contended, that if a
law passed by a state, in the exercise of its acknowledged sovereignty,
comes into conflict with a law passed by congress in pursuance of the
constitution, they affect the subject, and each other, like equal
opposing powers. but the framers of our constitution foresaw this state
of things, and provided for it, by declaring the supremacy not only of
itself, but of the laws made in pursuance of it. the nullity of an act,
inconsistent with the constitution, is produced by the declaration, that
the constitution is the supreme law. the appropriate application of that
part of the clause which confers the same supremacy on laws and
treaties, is to such acts of the state legislatures as do not transcend
their powers, but though enacted in the execution of acknowledged state
powers, interfere with, or are contrary to the laws of congress, made in
pursuance of the constitution, or some treaty made under the authority
of the united states. in every such case, the act of congress, or the
treaty, is supreme; and the law of the state, though enacted in the
exercise of powers not controverted, must yield to it."[]
the logic of the supremacy clause would seem to require that the powers
of congress be determined by the fair reading of the express and implied
grants contained in the constitution itself, without reference to the
powers of the states. for a century after marshall's death, however, the
court proceeded on the theory that the tenth amendment had the effect of
withdrawing various matters of internal police from the reach of power
expressly committed to congress. this point of view was originally put
forward in new york v. miln,[] which was first argued, but not
decided, before marshall's death. the miln case involved a new york
statute which [pg ]required the captains of vessels entering new york harbor
with aliens aboard to make a report in writing to the mayor of the city,
giving certain prescribed information. it might have been distinguished
from gibbons v. ogden on the ground that the statute involved in the
earlier case conflicted with an act of congress, whereas the court found
that no such conflict existed in this case. but the court was unwilling
to rest its decision on that distinction. speaking for the majority,
justice barbour seized the opportunity to proclaim a new doctrine. he
wrote: "but we do not place our opinion on this ground. we choose rather
to plant ourselves on what we consider impregnable positions. they are
these: that a state has the same undeniable and unlimited jurisdiction
over all persons and things, within its territorial limits, as any
foreign nation, where that jurisdiction is not surrendered or restrained
by the constitution of the united states. that, by virtue of this, it is
not only the right, but the bounden and solemn duty of a state, to
advance the safety, happiness and prosperity of its people, and to
provide for its general welfare, by any and every act of legislation,
which it may deem to be conducive to these ends; where the power over
the particular subject, or the manner of its exercise is not surrendered
or restrained, in the manner just stated. that all those powers which
relate to merely municipal legislation, or what may, perhaps, more
properly be called internal police, are not thus surrendered or
restrained; and that, consequently, in relation to these, the authority
of a state is complete, unqualified, and exclusive."[] justice story,
in dissent, stated that marshall had heard the previous argument and
reached the conclusion that the new york statute was
unconstitutional.[]
status of the issue today
the conception of a "complete, unqualified and exclusive" police power
residing in the states and limiting the powers of the national
government was endorsed by chief justice taney ten years later in the
license cases.[] in upholding state laws requiring licenses for the
sale of alcoholic beverages, including those imported from other states
or from foreign countries, he set up the supreme court as the final
arbiter in drawing the line between the mutually exclusive, reciprocally
limiting fields of power occupied by the national and state
governments.[] this view has, in effect, and it would seem in theory
also, been repudiated in recent cases upholding labor relations,[]
social security,[] and fair labor standards acts[] passed by
congress.
[pg ]
in applying the supremacy clause to subjects which have been regulated
by congress, the primary task of the court is to ascertain whether a
challenged state law is compatible with the policy expressed in the
federal statute. when congress condemns an act as unlawful, the extent
and nature of the legal consequences of the condemnation are federal
questions, the answers to which are to be derived from the statute and
the policy which it has adopted. to the federal statute and policy,
conflicting state law and policy must yield.[] but congress in
enacting legislation within its constitutional authority will not be
deemed to have intended to strike down a state statute to protect the
health and safety of the public unless its purpose to do so is clearly
manifested.[]
when the united states performs its functions directly, through its own
officers and employees, state police regulations clearly are
inapplicable. in reversing the conviction of the governor of a national
soldiers' home for serving oleomargarine in disregard of state law, the
court said that the federal officer was not "subject to the jurisdiction
of the state in regard to those very matters of administration which are
thus approved by federal authority."[] an employee of the post office
department is not required to submit to examination by state authorities
concerning his competence and to pay a license fee before performing his
official duty in driving a motor truck for transporting the mail.[] to
arizona's complaint, in a suit to enjoin the construction of boulder
dam, that her quasi-sovereignty would be invaded by the building of the
dam without first securing approval of the state engineer as required by
its laws, justice brandeis replied that, "if congress has power to
authorize the construction of the dam and reservoir, wilbur [secretary
of the interior] is under no obligation to submit the plans and
specifications to the state engineer for approval."[]
[pg ]
federal instrumentalities and agencies have never enjoyed the same
degree of immunity from state police regulation as from state taxation.
the court has looked to the nature of each regulation to determine
whether it is compatible with the functions committed by congress to the
federal agency. this problem has arisen most often with reference to the
applicability of state laws to the operation of national banks. two
correlative propositions have governed the decisions in these cases. the
first was stated by justice miller in first national bank v.
kentucky:[] "[national banks are] subject to the laws of the state,
and are governed in their daily course of business far more by the laws
of the state than of the nation. all their contracts are governed and
construed by state laws. their acquisition and transfer of property,
their right to collect their debts, and their liability to be sued for
debts, are all based on state law. it is only when the state law
incapacitates the banks from discharging their duties to the government
that it becomes unconstitutional."[] in davis v. elmira savings
bank,[] the court stated the second proposition thus: "national banks
are instrumentalities of the federal government, created for a public
purpose, and as such necessarily subject to the paramount authority of
the united states. it follows that an attempt, by a state, to define
their duties or control the conduct of their affairs is absolutely void,
wherever such attempted exercise of authority expressly conflicts with
the laws of the united states, and either frustrates the purpose of the
national legislation or impairs the efficiency of these agencies of the
federal government to discharge the duties, for the performance of which
they were created."[] instructive, too, is a comparison of two other
decisions. in the first,[] the court held that the fact that the texas
and pacific railway company was a corporation organized under a statute
of the united states did not remove it from the control of the texas
railroad commission as to business done wholly within the state. in the
second,[] the court vetoed the attempt of maryland to require a post
office employee to cease driving a united states motor truck in the
transportation of mail over a post road until he should obtain a license
by submitting to examination before a state official and paying a fee.
"of course," said justice holmes, "an employee of the united states does
not secure a general immunity from state law while acting in the course
of his employment"; but this time the state went too far.
[pg ]the extent to which states may go in regulating contractors who furnish
goods or services to the federal government is not as clearly
established as is their right to tax such dealers. in , a closely
divided court sustained the refusal of the pennsylvania milk control
commission to renew the license of a milk dealer who, in violation of
state law, had sold milk to the united states for consumption by troops
at an army camp located on land belonging to the state, at prices below
the minima established by the commission.[] the majority was unable to
find in congressional legislation, or in the constitution, unaided by
congressional enactment, any immunity from such price-fixing
regulations. on the same day, a different majority held that california
could not penalize a milk dealer for selling milk to the war department
at less than the minimum price fixed by state law where the sales and
deliveries were made in a territory which had been ceded to the federal
government by the state and were subject to the exclusive jurisdiction
of the former.[]
the constitution, laws and treaties of the united states are as much a
part of the law of every state as its own local laws and constitution.
their obligation "is imperative upon the state judges, in their official
and not merely in their private capacities. from the very nature of
their judicial duties, they would be called upon to pronounce the law
applicable to the case in judgment. they were not to decide merely
according to the laws or constitution of the state, but according to the
laws and treaties of the united states—'the supreme law of the
land.'"[] state courts have both the power and the duty to enforce
obligations arising under federal law, unless congress gives the federal
courts exclusive jurisdiction. the power of state courts to entertain
such suits was affirmed in claflin v. houseman[] in , thus
setting at rest the doubts which had been raised by an early dictum of
justice story.[] in the claflin case justice bradley asserted on
behalf of a unanimous court that: "if an act of congress gives a penalty
to a party aggrieved, without specifying a remedy for its enforcement,
there is no reason why it should not be enforced, if not provided
otherwise by some act of congress, by a proper action in a state court.
the fact that a state court derives its existence and functions from the
state laws is no reason why it should not afford relief, because it is
subject also to the laws of the united states, and is just as much bound
to recognize these as operative within the state as it is to recognize
the state laws."[] when the supreme court of connecticut held that
rights created by the federal employer's liability acts could not be
enforced in the courts of that state because the act was contrary to
state policy, the supreme [pg ]court unanimously reversed that decision.
said justice van devanter: "the suggestion that the act of congress is
not in harmony with the policy of the state, and therefore that the
courts of the state are free to decline jurisdiction, is quite
inadmissible, because it presupposes what in legal contemplation does
not exist. when congress, in the exertion of the power confided to it by
the constitution, adopted that act, it spoke for all the people and all
the states, and thereby established a policy for all. that policy is as
much the policy of connecticut as if the act had emanated from its own
legislature, and should be respected accordingly in the courts of the
state."[] even if a federal statute is penal in character, a state may
not refuse to enforce it if congress allows it to take concurrent
jurisdiction. in testa v. katt,[] the supreme court reversed a
holding of rhode island's highest court that, inasmuch as a state need
not enforce the penal laws of another jurisdiction, a suit for treble
damages for violation of opa regulations could not be maintained in the
courts of the state. without determining the nature of the statute, it
affirmed once more without dissent that "the policy of the federal act
is the prevailing policy in every state."[]
it would seem self-evident that a state court cannot interfere with the
functioning of a federal tribunal. but this proposition has not always
gone unchallenged. shortly before the civil war, the supreme court of
wisconsin, holding the federal fugitive slave law invalid, ordered a
united states marshal to release a prisoner who had been convicted of
aiding and abetting the escape of a fugitive slave. in a further act of
defiance, the state court instructed its clerk to disregard and refuse
obedience to the writ of error issued by the united states supreme
court. strongly denouncing this interference with federal authority,
chief justice taney held that when a state court is advised, on the
return of a writ of habeas corpus, that the prisoner is in custody on
authority of the united states, it can proceed no further.[] to
protect the performance of its functions against interference by state
tribunals, congress may constitutionally authorize the removal to a
federal court of a criminal prosecution commenced in a state court
against a revenue officer of the united states on account of any act
done under color of his office.[] in the celebrated case of cunningham
v. neagle,[] a united states marshal who, while assigned to protect
justice field, killed the man who had [pg ]been threatening the life of the
latter, was charged with murder by the state of california. invoking the
supremacy clause, the supreme court held that a person could not be
guilty of a crime under state law for doing what it was his duty to do
as an officer of the united states.
since the efforts of states to depart from the union, if successful,
would have been pro tanto a destruction of the constitution,[] the
ordinances of secession adopted by the confederate states,[] and all
acts of legislation intended to give effect to such ordinances,[] were
treated as absolute nullities. the obligation of every state, as a
member of the union, and the obligation of every citizen of the state,
as a citizen of the united states, remained perfect and unimpaired.[]
but acts necessary to peace and good order among citizens, such, for
example, as acts sanctioning and protecting marriage and domestic
relations, governing the course of descents, regulating the conveyance
of property, real and personal, and providing remedies for injuries to
person and estate, and other similar acts, which would be valid if
emanating from a lawful government, were regarded in general as valid
when proceeding from an actual, though unlawful government.[]
the doctrine of tax exemption
mcculloch v. maryland
five years after the decision in mcculloch v. maryland that a state
may not tax an instrumentality of the federal government, the court was
asked to and did reexamine the entire question in osborn v. bank of
the united states.[] in that case counsel for the state of ohio, whose
attempt to tax the bank was challenged, put forward two arguments of
great importance. in the first place it was [pg ]"contended, that, admitting
congress to possess the power, this exemption ought to have been
expressly asserted in the act of incorporation; and, not being
expressed, ought not to be implied by the court."[] to which marshall
replied that: "it is no unusual thing for an act of congress to imply,
without expressing, this very exemption from state control, which is
said to be so objectionable in this instance."[] secondly the
appellants relied "greatly on the distinction between the bank and the
public institutions, such as the mint or the post-office. the agents in
those offices are, it is said, officers of government, *** not so the
directors of the bank. the connection of the government with the bank,
is likened to that with contractors."[] marshall accepted this
analogy, but not to the advantage of the appellants. he simply indicated
that all contractors who dealt with the government were entitled to
immunity from taxation upon such transactions.[] thus not only was the
decision of mcculloch v. maryland reaffirmed but the foundation was
laid for the vast expansion of the principle of immunity that was to
follow in the succeeding decades.
the first significant extension of the doctrine of the immunity of
federal instrumentalities from state taxation came in weston v.
charleston,[] where chief justice marshall also found in the supremacy
clause a bar to state taxation of obligations of the united states.
during the civil war, when congress authorized the issuance of legal
tender notes, it explicitly declared that such notes, as well as united
states bonds and other securities, should be exempt from state
taxation.[] a modified version of this section remains on the statute
books today.[] the right of congress to exempt legal tender notes to
the same extent as bonds was sustained in people v. board of
supervisors[] over the objection that such notes circulated as money
and should be taxable in the same way as coin. but a state tax on checks
issued by the treasurer of the united states for interest accrued upon
government bonds was sustained since it did not in any wise affect the
credit of the national government.[] similarly, the assessment for an
ad valorem property tax of an open account for money due under a
federal contract,[] and the inclusion of the value of united states
bonds owned by a decedent, in measuring an inheritance tax,[] were
held valid, since neither tax would substantially embarrass the power of
the united states to secure credit.
[pg ]income from federal securities is also beyond the reach of the state
taxing power as the cases now stand.[] nor can such a tax be imposed
indirectly upon the stockholders on such part of the corporate dividends
as corresponds to the part of the corporation's income which is not
assessed, i.e., income from tax exempt bonds.[] a state may
constitutionally levy an excise tax on corporations for the privilege of
doing business, and measure the tax by the property or net income of the
corporation, including tax exempt united states securities or the income
derived therefrom.[] the designation of a tax is not controlling.[]
where a so-called "license tax" upon insurance companies, measured by
gross income, including interest on government bonds, was, in effect, a
commutation tax levied in lieu of other taxation upon the personal
property of the taxpayer, it was still held to amount to an
unconstitutional tax on the bonds themselves.[]
in the course of his opinion in osborn v. bank of the united
states,[] chief justice marshall posed the question: "can a contractor
for supplying a military post with provisions, be restrained from making
purchases within any state, or from transporting the provisions to the
place at which the troops were stationed? or could he be fined or taxed
for doing so? we have not yet heard these questions answered in the
affirmative."[] one hundred and thirteen years later, the court did
answer the last part of his inquiry in the affirmative. in james v.
dravo contracting company[] it held that a state may impose an
occupation tax upon an independent contractor, measured by his gross
receipts under contracts with the united states. previously it had
sustained a gross receipts tax levied in lieu of a property tax upon the
operator of an automobile stage line, who was engaged in carrying the
mails as an independent contractor,[] and an excise tax on gasoline
sold to a contractor with the federal government and used to operate
machinery in the construction of levees in the mississippi river.[]
subsequently it has approved state taxes [pg ]on the net income of a
government contractor,[] income[] and social security[] taxes on
the operators of bath houses maintained in a national park under a lease
from the united states; sales and use taxes on sales of beverages by a
concessionaire in a national park,[] and on purchases of materials
used by a contractor in the performance of a cost-plus contract with the
united states,[] and a severance tax imposed on a contractor who
severed and purchased timber from lands owned by the united states.[]
of a piece with james v. dravo contracting co. was the decision in
graves v. o'keefe,[] handed down two years later. repudiating the
theory "that a tax on income is legally or economically a tax on its
source," the court held that a state could levy a nondiscriminatory
income tax upon the salary of an employee of a government corporation.
in the opinion of the court, justice stone intimated that congress could
not validly confer such an immunity upon federal employees. he wrote:
"the burden, so far as it can be said to exist or to affect the
government in any indirect or incidental way, is one which the
constitution presupposes; and hence it cannot rightly be deemed to be
within an implied restriction upon the taxing power of the national and
state governments which the constitution has expressly granted to one
and has confirmed to the other. the immunity is not one to be implied
from the constitution, because if allowed it would impose to an
inadmissible extent a restriction on the taxing power which the
constitution has reserved to the state governments."[] chief justice
hughes concurred in the result without opinion. justices butler and
mcreynolds dissented and justice frankfurter wrote a concurring opinion
in which he reserved judgment as to "whether congress may, by express
legislation, relieve its functionaries from their civic obligations to
pay for the benefits of the state governments under which they
live...."[]
[pg ]
property owned by a federally chartered corporation engaged in private
business is subject to state and local ad valorem taxes. this was
conceded in mcculloch v. maryland,[] and confirmed a half century
later with respect to railroads incorporated by congress.[] similarly,
a property tax may be levied against the lands under water which are
owned by a person holding a license under the federal water power
act.[] land conveyed by the united states to a corporation for dry
dock purposes was subject to a general property tax, despite a
reservation in the conveyance of a right to free use of the dry dock and
a provision for forfeiture in case of the continued unfitness of the dry
dock for use, or the use of the land for other purposes.[] where
equitable title has passed to the purchaser of land from the government,
a state may tax the equitable owner on the full value thereof, despite
the retention of legal title by the government,[] but the equitable
title passes otherwise.[] recently a divided court held that where the
government purchased movable machinery and leased it to a private
contractor, the lessee could not be taxed on the full value of the
equipment.[] in the pioneer case of van brocklin v. tennessee,[]
the state was denied the right to sell for taxes lands which the united
states owned at the time the taxes were levied, but in which it had
ceased to have any interest at the time of sale. nor can a state assess
land in the hands of private owners for benefits from a road improvement
completed while it was owned by the united states.[]
property owned by the united states is, of course, wholly immune to
state taxation.[] no state can regulate, by the imposition of an
inspection fee, any activity carried on by the united states directly
through its own agents and employees.[] an early case whose authority
is now uncertain held invalid a flat rate tax on telegraphic messages,
as applied to messages sent by public officers on official
business.[]
[pg ]
fiscal institutions chartered by congress, their shares and their
property, are taxable only with the consent of congress and only in
conformity with the restrictions it has attached to its consent.[]
immediately after the supreme court construed the statute authorizing
the states to tax national bank shares as allowing a tax on the
preferred shares of such a bank held by the reconstruction finance
corporation,[] congress passed a law exempting such shares from
taxation. the court upheld this measure saying, "when congress
authorized the states to impose such taxation, it did no more than
gratuitously grant them political power which they theretofore lacked.
its sovereign power to revoke the grant remained unimpaired, the grant
of the privilege being only a declaration of legislative policy
changeable at will."[] in pittman v. home owners' loan
corporation[] the court sustained the power of congress under the
necessary and proper clause to immunize the activities of the
corporation from state taxation; and in federal land bank v. bismarck
lumber co.,[] the like result was reached with respect to an attempt
by the state to impose a retail sales tax on a sale of lumber and other
building materials to the bank for use in repairing and improving
property that had been acquired by foreclosure of mortgages. the state's
principal argument proceeded thus: "congress has authority to extend
immunity only to the governmental functions of the federal land banks;
the only governmental functions of the land banks are those performed by
acting as depositaries and fiscal agents for the federal government and
providing a market for governmental bonds; all other functions of the
land banks are private; petitioner here was engaged in an activity
incidental to its business of lending money, an essentially private
function; therefore § cannot operate to strike down a sales tax upon
purchases made in furtherance of petitioner's lending functions."[]
the court rejected this argument and invalidated the tax saying: "the
argument that the lending functions of the federal land banks are
proprietary rather than governmental misconceives the nature of the
federal government with respect to every function which it performs. the
federal government is one of delegated powers, and from that it
necessarily follows that any constitutional exercise of its delegated
powers is governmental. *** it also follows that, when congress
constitutionally creates a corporation through which the federal
government lawfully acts, the activities of such corporation are
governmental."[] however, in the absence of federal legislation, a
state law laying a percentage tax on the users of safety deposit
services, measured by [pg ]the banks' charges therefor, was held valid as
applied to national banks. the tax, being on the user, did not, the
court held, impose an intrinsically unconstitutional burden on a federal
instrumentality.[]
in the recent case of carson v. roane-anderson co.,[] the court was
confronted with an attempt on the part of tennessee to apply its tax on
the use within the state of goods purchased elsewhere to a private
contractor for the atomic energy commission and to vendors of such
contractors. this, the court held, could not be done under section b
of the atomic energy commission act, which provides in part that: "the
commission, and the property, activities, and income of the commission,
are hereby expressly exempted from taxation in any manner or form by any
state, county, municipality, or any subdivision thereof."[] the power
of exemption, said the court, "stems from the power to preserve and
protect functions validly authorized—the power to make all laws
necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers vested in
congress."[] the term, "activities," as used in the act described, was
held to be nothing less "than all of the functions of the
commission."[]
in  the court went so far as to hold that a state could not tax as
income royalties for the use of a patent issued by the united
states.[] this proposition was soon overruled in fox film corp. v.
doyal,[] where a privilege tax based on gross income and applicable to
royalties from copyrights was upheld. likewise a state may lay a
franchise tax on corporations, measured by the net income from all
sources, and applicable to income from copyright royalties.[]
[pg ]
another line of anomalous decisions conferring tax immunity upon lessees
of restricted indian lands was overruled in . the first of these
cases, choctaw o. & g.r. co. v. harrison,[] held that a gross
production tax on oil, gas and other minerals was an occupational tax,
and, as applied to a lessee of restricted indian lands, was an
unconstitutional burden on such lessee, who was deemed to be an
instrumentality of the united states. next the court held the lease
itself a federal instrumentality immune from taxation.[] a modified
gross production tax imposed in lieu of all ad valorem taxes was
invalidated in two per curiam decisions.[] in gillespie v.
oklahoma[] a tax upon the net income of the lessee derived from sales
of his share of oil produced from restricted lands also was condemned.
finally a petroleum excise tax upon every barrel of oil produced in the
state was held inapplicable to oil produced on restricted indian
lands.[] in harmony with the trend to restricting immunity implied
from the constitution to activities of the government itself, the court
overruled all these decisions in oklahoma tax comm'n v. texas co. and
held that a lessee of mineral rights in restricted indian lands was
subject to nondiscriminatory gross production and excise taxes, so long
as congress did not affirmatively grant them immunity.[]
although mcculloch v. maryland and gibbons v. ogden were expressions
of a single thesis—the supremacy of the national government—their
development after marshall's death has been sharply divergent. during
the period when gibbons v. ogden was eclipsed by the theory of dual
federalism, the doctrine of mcculloch v. maryland was not merely
followed but greatly extended as a restraint on state interference with
federal instrumentalities. conversely, the court's recent return to
marshall's conception of the powers of congress has [pg ]coincided with a
retreat from the more extreme positions taken in reliance upon mcculloch
v. maryland. today the application of the supremacy clause is
becoming, to an ever increasing degree, a matter of statutory
interpretation—a determination of whether state regulations can be
reconciled with the language and policy of federal enactments. in the
field of taxation, the court has all but wiped out the private
immunities previously implied from the constitution without explicit
legislative command. broadly speaking, the immunity which remains is
limited to activities of the government itself, and to that which is
explicitly created by statute, e.g., that granted to federal securities
and to fiscal institutions chartered by congress. but the term,
activities, will be broadly construed.
clause . the senators and representatives before mentioned, and the
members of the several state legislatures, and all executive and
judicial officers, both of the united states and of the several states,
shall be bound by oath or affirmation, to support this constitution; but
no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any
office or public trust under the united states.
oath of office
congress may require no other oath of fidelity to the constitution, but
it may superadd to this oath such other oath of office as its wisdom may
require.[] it may not, however, prescribe a test oath as a
qualification for holding office, such an act being in effect an ex
post facto law;[] and the same rule holds in the case of the
states.[]
commenting in the federalist no.  on the requirement that state
officers, as well as members of the state legislatures, shall be bound
by oath or affirmation to support this constitution, hamilton wrote:
"thus the legislatures, courts, and magistrates, of the respective
members, will be incorporated into the operations of the national
government as far as its just and constitutional authority extends;
and it will be rendered auxiliary to the enforcement of its laws." the
younger pinckney had expressed the same idea on the floor of the
philadelphia convention: "they [the states] are the instruments upon
which the union must frequently depend for the support and execution of
their powers, ***"[] indeed, the constitution itself [pg ]lays many
duties, both positive and negative, upon the different organs of state
government,[] and congress may frequently add others, provided it
does not require the state authorities to act outside their normal
jurisdiction. early congressional legislation contains many
illustrations of such action by congress.
the judiciary act of [] left the state courts in sole possession
of a large part of the jurisdiction over controversies between citizens
of different states and in concurrent possession of the rest. by other
sections of the same act state courts were authorized to entertain
proceedings by the united states itself to enforce penalties and
forfeitures under the revenue laws, while any justice of the peace or
other magistrate of any of the states was authorized to cause any
offender against the united states to be arrested and imprisoned or
bailed under the usual mode of process. even as late as , congress
authorized all pecuniary penalties and forfeitures under the laws of the
united states to be sued for before any court of competent jurisdiction
in the state where the cause of action arose or where the offender might
be found.[] pursuant also of the same idea of treating state
governmental organs as available to the national government for
administrative purposes, the act of  entrusted the rendition of
fugitive slaves in part to national officials and in part of state
officials and the rendition of fugitives from justice from one state to
another exclusively to the state executives.[] certain later acts
empowered state courts to entertain criminal prosecutions for forging
paper of the bank of the united states and for counterfeiting coin of
the united states,[] while still others conferred on state judges
authority to admit aliens to national citizenship and provided penalties
in case such judges should utter false certificates of
naturalization—provisions which are still on the statute books.[]
with the rise of the doctrine of states rights and of the equal
sovereignty of the states with the national government, the availability
of the former as instruments of the latter in the execution of its
power, came to be questioned.[] in prigg v. pennsylvania,[]
[pg ]decided in , the constitutionality of the provision of the act of
 making it the duty of state magistrates to act in the return of
fugitive slaves was challenged; and in kentucky v. dennison,[]
decided on the eve of the civil war, similar objection was leveled
against the provision of the same act which made it "the duty" of the
chief executive of a state to render up a fugitive from justice upon the
demand of the chief executive of the state from which the fugitive had
fled. the court sustained both provisions, but upon the theory that the
cooperation of the state authorities was purely voluntary. in the prigg
case the court, speaking by justice story, said: "*** state
magistrates may, if they choose, exercise the authority, [conferred by
the act] unless prohibited by state legislation."[] in the dennison
case, "the duty" of state executives in the rendition of fugitives from
justice was construed to be declaratory of a "moral duty." said chief
justice taney for the court: "the act does not provide any means to
compel the execution of this duty, nor inflict any punishment for
neglect or refusal on the part of the executive of the state; nor is
there any clause or provision in the constitution which arms the
government of the united states with this power. indeed, such a power
would place every state under the control and dominion of the general
government, even in the administration of its internal concerns and
reserved rights. and we think it clear, that the federal government,
under the constitution, has no power to impose on a state officer, as
such, any duty whatever, and compel him to perform it; for if it
possessed this power, it might overload the officer with duties which
would fill up all his time, and disable him from performing his
obligations to the state, and might impose on him duties of a character
incompatible with the rank and dignity to which he was elevated by the
state. it is true," the chief justice conceded, "that in the early days
of the government, congress relied with confidence upon the co-operation
and support of the states, when exercising the legitimate powers of the
general government, and were accustomed to receive it, [but this, he
explained, was] upon principles of comity, and from a sense of mutual
and common interest, where no such duty was imposed by the
constitution."[]
eighteen years later, in ex parte siebold[] the court sustained the
right of congress, under article i, section , paragraph  of the
constitution, to impose duties upon state election officials in
connection with a congressional election and to prescribe additional
penalties for the violation by such officials of their duties under
state law. [pg ]while the doctrine of the holding is expressly confined to
cases in which the national government and the states enjoy "a
concurrent power over the same subject matter," no attempt is made to
catalogue such cases. moreover, the outlook of justice bradley's opinion
for the court is decidedly nationalistic rather than dualistic, as is
shown by the answer made to the contention of counsel "that the nature
of sovereignty is such as to preclude the joint cooperation of two
sovereigns, even in a matter in which they are mutually concerned." to
this justice bradley replied: "as a general rule, it is no doubt
expedient and wise that the operations of the state and national
governments should, as far as practicable, be conducted separately, in
order to avoid undue jealousies and jars and conflicts of jurisdiction
and power. but there is no reason for laying this down as a rule of
universal application. it should never be made to override the plain and
manifest dictates of the constitution itself. we cannot yield to such a
transcendental view of state sovereignty. the constitution and laws of
the united states are the supreme law of the land, and to these every
citizen of every state owes obedience, whether in his individual or
official capacity."[] three years earlier the court, speaking also by
justice bradley, sustained a provision of the bankruptcy act of 
giving assignees a right to sue in state courts to recover the assets of
a bankrupt. said the court: the statutes of the united states are as
much the law of the land in any state as are those of the state; and
although exclusive jurisdiction for their enforcement may be given to
the federal courts, yet where it is not given, either expressly or by
necessary implication, the state courts having competent jurisdiction in
other respects, may be resorted to.[]
the selective service act of [] was enforced to a great extent
through state "employees who functioned under state supervision";[]
and state officials were frequently employed by the national government
in the enforcement of national prohibition.[] nowadays, there is
constant cooperation, both in peacetime and in wartime, in many fields
between national and state officers and official bodies.[] this
relationship obviously calls for the active fidelity of both categories
of officialdom to the constitution.
notes
[] on the supremacy of treaties over conflicting state law,
see pp. -. the supremacy due to treaties has, within recent
years, been extended to certain executive agreements. see justice
douglas in united states v. pink,  u.s.  (). as to the
supremacy of congressional legislation implementing the national
judicial power, see tennessee v. davis,  u.s. , -
(); and ex parte siebold,  u.s.  ().
[] . wheat.  (). marshall had anticipated his argument
in this case in , in united states v. fisher,  cr.  (), in
which he upheld the act of  asserting for the united states a
priority of its claims over those of the states. see chief justice
taft's opinion in spokane county v. united states,  u.s. , 
(), where united states v. fisher is followed; also  warren,
supreme court in united states history, , ff.
[]  wheat.  ().
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[]  wheat. , - ().
[]  pet.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  how.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] national labor relations board v. jones & laughlin steel
corporation,  u.s.  ().
[] steward machine co. v. davis,  u.s.  ();
helvering v. davis,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. darby,  u.s.  (); see
especially ibid. -.
[] sola electric co. v. jefferson electric co.,  u.s.
,  (); hill v. florida,  u.s.  (); see also
testa v. katt,  u.s. ,  (); francis v. southern pacific
co.  u.s.  (); and bus employers v. wisconsin board, 
[] southern pacific co. v. arizona,  u.s.  ();
rice v. santa fe elevator co.,  u.s. ,  (); auto workers
v. wis. board,  u.s. ,  (); united states v. burnison,
[] ohio v. thomas,  u.s. ,  ().
[] johnson v. maryland,  u.s.  ().
[] arizona v. california,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] reagan v. mercantile trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] johnson v. maryland,  u.s. ,  ().
[] penn dairies v. milk control comm'n.,  u.s. 
[] pacific coast dairy v. dept. of agriculture,  u.s.
[] martin v. hunter's lessee,  wheat. ,  ().
[] martin v. hunter's lessee,  wheat. ,  ().
[] mondou v. new york, n.h. & h.r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] ibid. .
[] ableman v. booth,  how. ,  (), followed in
united states v. tarble,  wall.  ().
[] tennessee v. davis,  u.s.  (); see also
maryland v. soper,  u.s.  ().
[] keith v. clark,  u.s. ,  ().
[] white v. cannon,  wall. ,  (). see also
hickman v. jones,  wall.  (); dewing v. perdicaries,  u.s.
[] ford v. surget,  u.s. ,  (); united states
v. keehler,  wall. ,  ().
[] texas v. white,  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. . see also horn v. lockhart,  wall. ,
 (); thomas v. richmond,  wall. ,  (); white v.
hart,  wall.  (); united states v. home ins. co.,  wall. 
(); taylor v. thomas,  wall.  (); and huntington v.
texas,  wall.  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  pet.  (), followed in new york ex rel. bank of
commerce v. comrs. of taxes and assessments,  bl.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] hibernia sav. & l. soc. v. san francisco,  u.s. ,
[] smith v. davis,  u.s.  ().
[] plummer v. coler,  u.s.  (); blodgett v.
silberman,  u.s. ,  ().
[] northwestern mutual l. ins. co. v. wisconsin,  u.s.
[] miller v. milwaukee,  u.s.  ().
[] provident inst. for savings v. massachusetts,  wall.
 (); society for savings v. coite,  wall.  (); hamilton
mfg. co. v. massachusetts,  wall.  (); home ins. co. v. new
york,  u.s.  ().
[] macallen v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] northwestern mutual l. ins. co. v. wisconsin,  u.s.
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] alward v. johnson,  u.s.  ().
[] trinityfarm const. co. v. grosjean,  u.s. 
[] atkinson v. tax commission,  u.s.  ().
[] superior bath house co. v. mccarroll,  u.s. 
[] buckstaff bath house v. mckinley,  u.s.  ().
[] collins v. yosemite park & curry co.,  u.s. 
[] alabama v. king & boozer,  u.s.  (), overruling
panhandle oil co. v. knox,  u.s.  () and graves v. texas
co.,  u.s.  (). see also curry v. united states,  u.s.
[] wilson v. cook,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (), followed in state tax comm'n. v.
van cott,  u.s.  (). this case overruled by implication
dobbins v. erie county,  pet.  () and new york ex rel. rogers
v. graves,  u.s.  (), which held the income of federal
employees to be immune from state taxation.
[] ibid. .
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] thompson v. union p.r. co.,  wall. ,  ();
railroad co. v. peniston,  wall. ,  ().
[] susquehanna power co. v. state tax comm'n.,  u.s. 
[] baltimore shipbuilding & dry dock co. v. baltimore, 
[] northern p.r. co. v. myers,  u.s.  (); new
brunswick v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] irwin v. wright,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. allegheny county,  u.s.  ().
[] lee v. osceola & l. river road improv. dist,  u.s.
[] clallam county v. united states,  u.s.  ().
see also cleveland v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mayo v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] western u. teleg. co. v. texas,  u.s. , 
[] des moines nat. bank v. fairweather,  u.s. , 
(); owensboro nat. bank v. owensboro,  u.s. ,  ();
first nat. bank v. adams,  u.s.  ().
[] baltimore nat. bank v. state tax comm'n.,  u.s. 
[] maricopa county v. valley national bank,  u.s. ,
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. ; cf.  wheat. , - ().
[] colorado nat. bank v. bedford,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. ;  u.s.c. §(b).
[] ibid. .
[] long v. rockwood,  u.s.  ().
[] educational films corp. v. ward,  u.s.  ().
[] indian territory illuminating oil co. v. oklahoma, 
[] howard v. gipsy oil co.,  u.s.  (); large oil
co. v. howard,  u.s.  ().
[] oklahoma tax comm'n v. barnsdall refiners,  u.s. 
[]  u.s.  (). justice rutledge, speaking for the
court, sketched the history of the immunity of lessees of indian lands
from state taxation, which he found to stem from early rulings that
tribal lands are themselves immune (the kansas indians,  wall. 
(); the new york indians,  wall.  ()). one of the first
steps taken to curtail the scope of the immunity was shaw v.
gibson-zahniser oil corp.,  u.s.  (), which held that lands
outside a reservation, though purchased with restricted indian funds,
were subject to state taxation. congress soon upset the decision,
however, and its act was sustained in board of county comm'rs v.
seber,  u.s.  ().
[] mcculloch v. maryland,  wheat. ,  ().
[] ex parte garland,  wall. ,  ().
[] cummings v. missouri,  wall. ,  ().
[] the federalist no. , p. ; i farrand records, .
[] see article i, section iii, paragraph ; section iv,
paragraph ; section x; article ii, section i, paragraph ; article iii,
section ii, paragraph ; article iv, sections i and ii; article v;
amendments xiii, xiv, xv, xvii, and xix.
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] see  kent's commentaries, - ();  stat. ,
 ();  u.s.c. §§, ;  ibid. § (); also holmgren
v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] for the development of opinion especially on the part of
state courts, adverse to the validity of the above mentioned
legislation, see  kent's commentaries, - ().
[]  pet.  ().
[]  how.  ().
[]  pet. at .
[]  how. at -.
[] ibid. .
[] claflin v. houseman,  u.s. , ,  ();
followed in second employers' liability cases,  u.s. , -
[]  stat.  ().
[] jane perry clark, the rise of a new federalism, 
(columbia university press, ).
[] see james hart in  virginia law review, - ()
discussing president coolidge's order of may , , for prohibition
enforcement.
[] clark, new federalism, cited in note  above; corwin,
court over constitution, - (princeton university press, ).
[pg ]
[pg ]
article vii
the ratification of the conventions of nine states, shall be sufficient
for the establishment of this constitution between the states so
ratifying the same.
in owings v. speed,[] the question at issue was whether the
constitution of the united states operated upon an act of virginia
passed in . the court held it did not, stating in part:
"the conventions of nine states having adopted the constitution,
congress, in september or october, , passed a resolution in
conformity with the opinions expressed by the convention, and appointed
the first wednesday in march of the ensuing year as the day, and the
then seat of congress as the place, 'for commencing proceedings under
the constitution.'
"both governments could not be understood to exist at the same time. the
new government did not commence until the old government expired. it is
apparent that the government did not commence on the constitution being
ratified by the ninth state; for these ratifications were to be reported
to congress, whose continuing existence was recognized by the
convention, and who were requested to continue to exercise their powers
for the purpose of bringing the new government into operation. in fact,
congress did continue to act as a government until it dissolved on the
st of november, by the successive disappearance of its members. it
existed potentially until the d of march, the day preceding that on
which the members of the new congress were directed to assemble.
"the resolution of the convention might originally have suggested a
doubt, whether the government could be in operation for every purpose
before the choice of a president; but this doubt has been long solved,
and were it otherwise, its discussion would be useless, since it is
apparent that its operation did not commence before the first wednesday
in march  ***"
notes
[]  wheat. , - ().
[pg ]
bill of rights
[pg ]
 page
history 
ordinance of  
formulation and adoption of the bill of rights 
bill of rights and the states: barron v. baltimore 
bill of rights and amendment xiv 
[pg ]
bill of rights
while the constitutional convention was engaged in drafting the
constitution, the congress of the confederation included in the
ordinance for the government of the northwest territory, adopted july
, , the following provisions:
"it is hereby ordained and declared by the authority aforesaid, that the
following articles shall be considered as articles of compact between
the original states and the people and states in the said territory and
forever remain unalterable, unless by common consent, to wit:
"art. . no person, demeaning himself in a peaceable and
orderly manner, shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship
or religious sentiments, in the said territory.
"art. . the inhabitants of the said territory shall always be
entitled to the benefits of the writ of habeas corpus, and of the
trial by jury; of a proportionate representation of the people in the
legislature; and of judicial proceedings according to the course of the
common law. all persons shall be bailable, unless for capital offenses,
where the proof shall be evident or the presumption great. all fines
shall be moderate; and no cruel or unusual punishments shall be
inflicted. no man shall be deprived of his liberty or property, but by
the judgment of his peers or the law of the land; and, should the public
exigencies make it necessary, for the common preservation, to take any
person's property, or to demand his particular services, full
compensation shall be made for the same. and, in the just preservation
of rights and property, it is understood and declared, that no law ought
ever to be made, or have force in the said territory, that shall, in any
manner whatever, interfere with or affect private contracts or
engagements, bona fide, and without fraud, previously formed.
"art. . religion, morality, and knowledge, being necessary to
good government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of
education shall forever be encouraged.
"art. . there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary
servitude in the said territory, otherwise than in the punishment of
crimes whereof the party shall have been duly convicted: ***"[]
[pg ]
two months later, at the very end of its labors, the constitutional
convention rejected, with scant consideration, a proposal by gerry and
mason, to prepare a bill of rights.[] this omission furnished the
principal argument urged against ratification of the constitution.
hamilton replied with the following ingenious argument: "*** bills of
rights are in their origin, stipulations between kings and their
subjects, abridgments of prerogative in favor of privilege, reservations
of rights not surrendered to the prince. *** it is evident, therefore,
that according to their primitive signification, they have no
application to the constitutions professedly founded upon the power of
the people, and executed by their immediate representatives and
servants. here, in strictness, the people surrender nothing; and as they
retain everything, they have no need of particular reservations."[]
the people did not find this line of reasoning persuasive. several
states ratified only after washington put forward the suggestion that
the desired guarantees could be added by amendment.[] no less than 
amendments were proposed by the states.[] shortly after the first
congress convened, madison introduced a series of amendments,[]
designed "to quiet the apprehension of many, that without some such
declaration of rights the government would assume, and might be held to
possess, the power to trespass upon those rights of persons and property
which by the declaration of independence were affirmed to be unalienable
***"[] after prolonged debate seventeen proposals were accepted by
the house two of which were rejected by the senate. the remainder were
reduced to twelve in number, all but two of which were ratified by the
requisite number of states.[]
the bill of rights and the states: barron v. baltimore
one of the amendments which the senate refused to accept—the one which
madison declared to be "the most valuable of the whole list"[]—read as
follows: "the equal rights of conscience, the freedom of speech or of
the press, and the right of trial by jury in criminal cases, shall not
be infringed by any state."[] the demand for assurance of these rights
against encroachment by the states would not die. [pg ]in spite of the
deliberate rejection of madison's proposal the contention that the first
ten amendments were applicable to the states was repeatedly pressed upon
the supreme court. by a long series of decisions, beginning with the
opinion of chief justice marshall in barron v. baltimore[] in ,
the argument was consistently rejected. nevertheless the enduring
vitality of natural law concepts encouraged renewed appeals for judicial
protection. expression such as the statement of justice miller in
citizens savings and loan association v. topeka that: "it must be
conceded that there are *** rights in every free government beyond the
control of the states"[] probably account for the fact, reported by
charles warren that: "in at least twenty cases between  and ,
the court was required to rule upon this point and to reaffirm
marshall's decision of , ***"[]
after the adoption of the fourteenth amendment, a fresh attack was
launched on that front. the rights assured against encroachment by the
federal government were claimed as privileges and immunities which no
state may deny to any citizen.[] as early as  the further
contention was made that the procedural safeguards prescribed by these
articles are essential ingredients of due process of law.[] for many
years, the court continued to reject these arguments also, over the
vigorous and prophetic dissents of justice harlan. with respect to the
due process clause it held that these words have the same meaning in the
fourteenth amendment as in the fifth, and hence do not embrace the other
rights more specifically enumerated in the latter, there being no
superfluous language in the constitution.[] in , however, it
retreated from this position to the extent of holding that the fifth
amendment's explicit guarantee against the taking of private property
without just compensation is included in the due process clause of the
fourteenth.[] later cases have established that the terms, "liberty"
and "due process of law" as used in amendment xiv, render available
against the states certain fundamental rights guaranteed accused persons
in the bill of rights[] and the substantive rights which are protected
against congress by amendment i.[]
notes
[]  stat.  n.
[] elliot, the debates in the several state conventions on the
adoption of the federal constitution, v,  ().
[] the federalist no. .
[] mclaughlin, a constitutional history of the united states,
[] ames, the proposed amendments to the constitution, 
[] annals of congress, i, , .
[] monongahela navigation co. v. united states,  u.s.
[] ames, op. cit., ,  ().
[] annals of congress, , .
[] ibid.
[]  pet.  (); lessee of livingston v. moore,  pet.
 (); permoli v. new orleans,  how. ,  (); fox v.
ohio,  how.  (); smith v. maryland,  how.  (); withers
v. buckley,  how.  (); pervear v. massachusetts,  wall. 
(); twitchell v. pennsylvania,  wall.  ().
[]  wall. ,  ().
[] warren, the new "liberty" under the fourteenth amendment,
 harv. l. rev., ,  ().
[] slaughter-house cases,  wall.  (); spies v.
illinois,  u.s.  (); o'neil v. vermont,  u.s.  ();
maxwell v. dow,  u.s.  (); patterson v. colorado,  u.s.
 (); twining v. new jersey,  u.s.  ().
[] hurtado v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago,  u.s.  ().
[] see twining v. new jersey,  u.s.  (); adamson
v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] see gitlow v. new york,  u.s.  ();
beauharnais v. illinois,  u.s. ,  ().
[pg ]
 page
absorption of amendment i into the fourteenth amendment 
"an establishment of religion" 
"no preference" doctrine 
"wall of separation" doctrine 
zorach case 
permissible monetary aids to religion 
free exercise of religion; dimensions 
parochial schools 
free exercise of religion; federal restraints 
free exercise of religion; state and local restraints 
free exercise of religion; obligations of citizenship 
freedom of speech and press 
blackstonian background 
effect of amendment i on the common law 
amendment xiv and blackstone 
clear and present danger rule, meaning 
contrasting operation of the common law rule 
emergence of the clear and present test 
gitlow and whitney cases 
acceptance of the clear and present danger test 
police power and clear and present danger 
public order 
public morals 
picketing and clear and present danger 
contempt of court and clear and present danger 
freedom of speech and press in public parks and streets 
censorship 
clear and present danger test: judicial diversities 
taxation 
federal restraints on freedom of speech and press 
regulations of business and labor activities 
regulation of political activities of federal employees 
legislative protection of the armed forces and the war power 
loyalty regulations: the douds case 
the case of the eleven communists 
subversive organizations 
recent state legislation 
loyalty tests 
group libel 
censorship of the mails 
rights of assembly and petition 
restraints on the right of petition 
the cruikshank case 
hague v. c.i.o. 
recent cases 
lobbying and the right of petition 
[pg ]
amendment 
congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of
speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
absorption of amendment i into the fourteenth amendment
eventually the long sought protection for certain substantive personal
rights was obtained by identifying them with the "liberty" which states
cannot take away without due process of law. the shift in the court's
point of view was made known quite casually in gitlow v. new york,[]
where, although affirming a conviction for violation of a state statute
prohibiting the advocacy of criminal anarchy, it declared that: "for
present purposes we may and do assume that freedom of speech and of the
press—which are protected by the first amendment from abridgment by
congress—are among the fundamental personal rights and 'liberties'
protected by the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment from
impairment by the states."[] this dictum became, two years later,
accepted doctrine when the court invalidated a state law on the ground
that it abridged freedom of speech contrary to the due process clause of
amendment xiv.[] subsequent decisions have brought the other rights
safeguarded by the first amendment, freedom of religion,[] freedom of
the press,[] and the right of peaceable assembly,[] within the
protection of the fourteenth. in consequence of this development the
cases dealing with the safeguarding of these rights against infringement
by the states are included in the ensuing discussion of the first
amendment.
[pg ]
an establishment of religion
the original proposal leading to the first amendment was introduced into
the house of representatives by james madison, and read as follows: "the
civil rights of none shall be abridged on account of religious belief or
worship, nor shall any national religion be established, nor shall the
full and equal rights of conscience be in any manner, or on any
pretence, infringed."[] this was altered in the house to read:
"congress shall make no law establishing religion, or to prevent the
free exercise thereof, or to infringe the rights of conscience."[] in
the senate the above formula was replaced by the following; "congress
shall make no law establishing articles of religion."[] the conference
committee of the two houses adopted the house proposal, but with the
neutral term "respecting an establishment," etc., taking the place of
the original sweeping ban against any law "establishing religion."[]
explaining this phraseology, in his commentaries, story asserted that
the purpose of the amendment was not to discredit the then existing
state establishments of religion, but rather "to exclude from the
national government all power to act on the subject." he wrote: "the
situation, ***, of the different states equally proclaimed the policy
as well as the necessity of such an exclusion. in some of the states,
episcopalians constituted the predominant sect; in others,
presbyterians; in others, congregationalists; in others, quakers; and in
others again, there was a close numerical rivalry among contending
sects. it was impossible that there should not arise perpetual strife
and perpetual jealousy on the subject of ecclesiastical ascendency, if
the national government were left free to create a religious
establishment. the only security was in extirpating the power. but this
alone would have been an imperfect security, if it had not been followed
up by a declaration of the right of the free exercise of religion, and a
prohibition (as we have seen) of all religious tests. thus, the whole
power over the subject of religion is left exclusively to the state
governments, to be acted upon according to their own sense of justice
and the state constitutions; and the catholic and the protestant, the
calvinist and the arminian, the jew and the infidel, may sit down at the
common table of the national councils without any inquisition into their
faith or mode of worship."[]
for the rest, story contended, the no establishment clause, while it
inhibited congress from giving preference to any denomination of the
[pg ]christian faith, was not intended to withdraw the christian religion as
a whole from the protection of congress. he said: "probably at the time
of the adoption of the constitution, and of the amendment to it now
under consideration, the general if not the universal sentiment in
america was, that christianity ought to receive encouragement from the
state so far as was not incompatible with the private rights of
conscience and the freedom of religious worship. an attempt to level all
religions, and to make it a matter of state policy to hold all in utter
indifference, would have created universal disapprobation, if not
universal indignation."[] as late as  cooley expounded the no
establishment clause as follows: "by establishment of religion is meant
the setting up or recognition of a state church, or at least the
conferring upon one church of special favors and advantages which are
denied to others (citing  tuck. bl. com. app. ;  id., app. note
g.). it was never intended by the constitution that the government
should be prohibited from recognizing religion, *** where it might be
done without drawing any invidious distinctions between different
religious beliefs, organizations, or sects."[]
in  president jefferson wrote a letter to a group of baptists in
danbury, connecticut in which he declared that it was the purpose of the
first amendment to build "a wall of separation between church and
state,"[] and in reynolds v. united states,[] the first
anti-mormon case, chief justice waite, speaking for the unanimous court,
characterized this as "almost an authoritative declaration of the scope
and effect of the amendment," one which left congress "free to reach
actions which were in violation of social duties or subversive of good
order."[] recently the court has given jefferson's "almost
authoritative" pronouncement a greatly enlarged application. speaking by
justice black, a sharply divided court sustained in  the right of
local authorities in new jersey to provide free transportation for
children attending parochial schools,[] but accompanied its holding
with these warning words, which appear to have had the approval of most
of the justices: "the 'establishment of religion' clause of the first
amendment means at least this: neither a state nor the federal
government can set up a church. neither can pass laws which aid one
religion, aid all religions, or prefer one religion over another.
neither can force nor influence a person to go to or to remain away from
church against his will or force him to profess a belief or disbelief in
any religion. no person can be punished for entertaining or professing
religious beliefs or disbeliefs, for church attendance or
non-attendance. no tax in any amount, large or small, can be levied [pg ]to
support any religious activities or institutions, whatever they may be
called, or whatever form they may adopt to teach or practice religion.
neither a state nor the federal government can, openly or secretly,
participate in the affairs of any religious organizations of groups and
vice versa."[] and a year later a nearly unanimous court overturned
on the above grounds a "released time" arrangement under which the
champaign, illinois board of education agreed that religious instruction
should be given in the local schools to pupils whose parents signed
"request cards." the classes were to be conducted during regular school
hours in the school building by outside teachers furnished by a
religious council representing the various faiths, subject to the
approval or supervision of the superintendent of schools. attendance
records were kept and reported to the school authorities in the same way
as for other classes; and pupils not attending the religious-instruction
classes were required to continue their regular secular studies.[]
said justice black, speaking for the court: "here not only are the
state's tax-supported public school buildings used for the dissemination
of religious doctrines. the state also affords sectarian groups an
invaluable aid in that it helps to provide pupils for their religious
classes through use of the state's compulsory public school machinery.
this is not separation of church and state."[]
justice frankfurter presented a concurring opinion for himself and
justices jackson, rutledge and burton. "we are all agreed," it begins,
"that the first and fourteenth amendments have a secular reach far more
penetrating in the conduct of government than merely to forbid an
'established church.'"[] what ensues is a well documented account of
the elimination of sectarianism from the american school system which is
reinterpreted as a fight for the secularization of public supported
education.[] facing then the emergence of the "released time"
expedient,[] justice frankfurter characterizes it as a "conscientious
attempt to accommodate the allowable functions of government and the
special concerns of the church within the framework of our
constitution."[] elsewhere in his opinion he states: "of course,
'released time' as a generalized conception, undefined by
[pg ]differentiating particularities, is not an issue for constitutional
adjudication. *** the substantial differences among arrangements
lumped together as 'released time' emphasize the importance of detailed
analysis of the facts to which the constitutional test of separation is
to be applied. how does 'released time' operate in champaign?"[] and
again: "we do not consider, as indeed we could not, school programs not
before us which, though colloquially characterized as 'released time,'
present situations differing in aspects that may well be
constitutionally crucial. different forms which 'released time' has
taken during more than thirty years of growth include programs which,
like that before us, could not withstand the test of the constitution;
others may be found unexceptionable."[] justice jackson added further
reservations of his own as follows: "we should place some bounds on the
demands for interference with local schools that we are empowered or
willing to entertain. *** it is important that we circumscribe our
decision with some care."[]
in a dissenting opinion justice reed took exception to the extended
meaning given to the words "an establishment of religion." "the phrase
'an establishment of religion,'" said he, "may have been intended by
congress to be aimed only at a state church. when the first amendment
was pending in congress in substantially its present form, 'mr. madison
said, he apprehended the meaning of the words to be, that congress
should not establish a religion, and enforce the [pg ]legal observation of
it by law, nor compel men to worship god in any manner contrary to their
conscience.' passing years, however, have brought about the acceptance
of a broader meaning, although never until today, i believe, has this
court widened its interpretation to any such degree as holding that
recognition of the interest of our nation in religion, through the
granting, to qualified representatives of the principal faiths, of
opportunity to present religion as an optional, extracurricular subject
during released school time in public school buildings, was equivalent
to an establishment of religion."[] he further pointed out that "the
congress of the united states has a chaplain for each house who daily
invokes divine blessings and guidance for the proceedings. the armed
forces have commissioned chaplains from early days. they conduct the
public services in accordance with the liturgical requirements of their
respective faiths, ashore and afloat, employing for the purpose property
belonging to the united states and dedicated to the services of
religion. under the servicemen's readjustment act of , eligible
veterans may receive training at government expense for the ministry in
denominational schools. the schools of the district of columbia have
opening exercises which 'include a reading from the bible without note
or comment, and the lord's prayer.'"[]
the zorach case; the mccollum case limited
in a decision handed down july ,  the new york court of appeals,
one judge dissenting, sustained the "released time" program of that
state, distinguishing it from the one condemned in the mccollum case as
follows: "in the new york city program there is neither supervision nor
approval of religious teachers and no solicitation of pupils or
distribution of cards. the religious instruction must be outside the
school building and grounds. there must be no announcement of any kind
in the public schools relative to the program and no comment by any
principal or teacher on the attendance or non-attendance of any pupil
upon religious instruction. all that the school does besides excusing
the pupil is to keep a record—which is not available for any other
purpose—in order to see that the excuses are not taken advantage of and
the school deceived, which is, of course, the same procedure the school
would take in respect of absence for any other reason."[] on appeal
this decision was sustained by the supreme court, six justices to
three.[] said justice douglas, speaking for the majority: "we are a
religious people whose institutions presuppose a supreme being. we
guarantee the freedom to worship as one chooses. we make room for as
wide a variety of beliefs and creeds as the spiritual needs of man deem
necessary. we sponsor an attitude on the part of government that shows
no partiality to any one group and that lets each flourish according to
the zeal of its [pg ]adherents and the appeal of its dogma. when the state
encourages religious instruction or cooperates with religious
authorities by adjusting the schedule of public events to sectarian
needs, it follows the best of our traditions. for it then respects the
religious nature of our people and accommodates the public service to
their spiritual needs. to hold that it may not would be to find in the
constitution a requirement that the government show a callous
indifference to religious groups. that would be preferring those who
believe in no religion over those who do believe. government may not
finance religious groups nor undertake religious instruction nor blend
secular and sectarian education nor use secular institutions to force
one or some religion on any person. but we find no constitutional
requirement which makes it necessary for government to be hostile to
religion and to throw its weight against efforts to widen the effective
scope of religious influence. the government must be neutral when it
comes to competition between sects. it may not thrust any sect on any
person. it may not make a religious observance compulsory. it may not
coerce anyone to attend church, to observe a religious holiday, or to
take religious instruction. but it can close its doors or suspend its
operations as to those who want to repair to their religious sanctuary
for worship or instruction. no more than that is undertaken here."[]
a few weeks earlier, moreover, the court had indicated an intention to
scrutinize more closely the basis of its jurisdiction in this class of
cases. this occurred in a case in which the question involved was the
validity of a new jersey statute which requires the reading at the
opening of each public school day of five verses of the old
testament.[] the court held that appellant's interest as taxpayers was
insufficient to constitute a justiciable case or controversy, while as
to the alleged rights of the child involved the case had become moot
with her graduation from school.[]
in  the court held that an agreement between the district of
columbia and the directors of a hospital chartered by congress for
erection of a building and treatment of poor patients at the expense of
the district was valid despite the fact that the members of the
[pg ]corporation belonged to a monastic order or sisterhood of a particular
church.[] it has also sustained a contract made at the request of
indians to whom money was due as a matter of right, under a treaty, for
the payment of such money by the commissioner of indian affairs for the
support of indian catholic schools.[] in  the use of public funds
to furnish nonsectarian textbooks to pupils in parochial schools of
louisiana was sustained,[] and in , as we have seen, the case of
public funds for the transportation of pupils attending such schools in
new jersey.[] in the former of these cases the court cited the state's
interest in secular education even when conducted in religious schools;
in the latter its concern for the safety of school children on the
highways; and the national school lunch act,[] which aids all school
children attending tax-exempt schools can be similarly justified. the
most notable financial concession to religion, however, is not to be
explained in this way, the universal practice of exempting religious
property from taxation. this unquestionably traces back to the idea
expressed in the northwest ordnance that government has an interest in
religion as such.
the first amendment "was intended to allow every one under the
jurisdiction of the united states to entertain such notions respecting
his relations to his maker and the duties they impose as may be approved
by his judgment and conscience, and to exhibit his sentiments in such
form of worship as he may think proper, not injurious to the equal
rights of others, and to prohibit legislation for the support of any
religious tenets, or the modes of worship of any sect. the oppressive
measures adopted, and the cruelties and punishments inflicted, by the
governments of europe for many ages, to compel parties to conform, in
their religious beliefs and modes of worship, to the views of the most
numerous sect, and the folly of attempting in that way to control the
mental operations of persons, and enforce an outward conformity to a
prescribed standard, led to the adoption of (this) amendment."[] "the
constitutional inhibition of legislation on the subject of religion has
a double aspect. on the one hand, it forestalls compulsion by law of the
acceptance of any creed or the practice of any form of worship. freedom
of conscience and freedom to adhere to such religious organization or
form of worship as the individual may choose cannot be restricted by
law. on the other hand, it safeguards the free exercise of the chosen
form of religion. thus the amendment embraces two concepts,—freedom to
believe and freedom [pg ]to act. the first is absolute, but in the nature of
things, the second cannot be."[]
the society of sisters, an oregon corporation, was empowered by its
charter to care for orphans and to establish and maintain schools and
academies for the education of the youth. systematic instruction and
moral training according to the tenets of the roman catholic church was
given in its establishments along with education in the secular
branches. by an oregon statute, effective september , , it was
required that every parent, or other person having control or charge or
custody of a child between eight and sixteen years send him "to a public
school for the period of time a public school shall be held during the
current year" in the district where the child resides; and failure so to
do was declared a misdemeanor. the district court of the united states
for oregon enjoined the enforcement of the statute and the supreme court
unanimously sustained its action,[] holding that the measure
unreasonably interfered with the liberty of parents and guardians to
direct the upbringing and education of children under their control—a
liberty protected by the fourteenth amendment. while the first amendment
was not mentioned in the court's opinion, the subsequent absorption of
its religious clauses into the fourteenth amendment seems to make the
case relevant to the question of their proper interpretation.
religious belief cannot be pleaded as a justification for an overt act
made criminal by the law of the land. "laws are made for the government
of action, and while they cannot interfere with mere religious belief
and opinions, they may with practices."[] to permit a man to excuse
conduct in violation of law on the ground of religious belief "would be
to make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the law
of the land, and in effect to permit every citizen to become a law unto
himself."[] it does not follow that "because no mode of worship can be
established or religious tenets enforced in this country, therefore any
tenets, however destructive of society, may be held and advocated, if
asserted, to be a part of the religious doctrine of those advocating and
practicing them *** whilst legislation for the establishment of a
religion is forbidden, and its free exercise permitted, it does not
follow that everything which may be so-called can be tolerated. crime is
not the less odious because sanctioned by what any particular sect may
designate as religion."[] accordingly acts of congress directed
against either the practice of [pg ]the advocacy of polygamy by members of a
religious sect which sanctioned the practice, were held valid.[] but
when, in the ballard case,[] decided in , the promoters of a
religious sect, whose founder had at different times identified himself
as saint germain, jesus, george washington, and godfre ray king, were
convicted of using the mails to defraud by obtaining money on the
strength of having supernaturally healed hundreds of persons, they found
the court in a softened frame of mind. although the trial judge,
carefully discriminating between the question of the truth of
defendants' pretensions and that of their good faith in advancing them,
had charged the jury that it could pass on the latter but not the
former, this caution did not avail with the court, which contrived on
another ground ultimately to upset the verdict of "guilty." the late
chief justice stone, speaking for himself and justices roberts and
frankfurter, dissented: "i cannot say that freedom of thought and
worship includes freedom to procure money by making knowingly false
statements about one's religious experiences."[]
the mormon church cases were decided prior to the emergence of the clear
and present danger doctrine dealt with below. in its consideration of
cases stemming from state and local legislation the court has endeavored
at times to take account of this doctrine, with the result that its
decisions have followed a somewhat erratic course. the leading case is
cantwell v. connecticut.[] here three members of the sect calling
itself jehovah's witnesses were convicted under a statute which forbade
the unlicensed soliciting of funds on the representation that they were
for religious or charitable purposes, and also on a general charge of
breach of the peace by accosting in a strongly catholic neighborhood two
communicants of that faith and playing to them a phonograph record which
grossly insulted the christian religion in general and the catholic
church in particular. both convictions were held to violate the
constitutional guarantees of speech and religion, the clear and present
danger rule being invoked in partial justification of the holding,
although it is reasonably inferable from the court's own recital of the
facts that the listeners to the phonograph record exhibited a degree of
self-restraint rather unusual under the circumstances. two weeks later
the court, as if to "compensate" for its zeal in the cantwell case, went
to the other extreme, and urging the maxim that legislative acts must be
presumed to be constitutional, [pg ]sustained the state of pennsylvania in
excluding from its schools children of the jehovah's witnesses, who in
the name of their beliefs refused to salute the flag.[] the subsequent
record of the court's holdings in this field is somewhat variable. a
decision in june, , sustaining the application to vendors of
religious books and pamphlets of a nondiscriminatory license fee[] was
eleven months later vacated and formally reversed;[] shortly
thereafter a like fate overtook the decision in the "flag salute"
case.[] in may, , the court found that an ordinance of the city of
struthers, ohio, which made it unlawful for anyone distributing
literature to ring a doorbell or otherwise summon the dwellers of a
residence to the door to receive such literature, was violative of the
constitution when applied to distributors of leaflets advertising a
religious meeting.[] but eight months later it sustained the
application of massachusetts' child labor laws in the case of a nine
year old girl who was permitted by her legal custodian to engage in
"preaching work" and the sale of religious publications after hours.[]
however, in saia v. new york[] decided in , the court held, by a
vote of five justices to four, that an ordinance of the city of
lockport, new york, which forbade the use of sound amplification devices
except with the permission of the chief of police was unconstitutional
as applied in the case of a jehovah's witness who used sound equipment
to amplify lectures in a public park on sunday, on religious subjects.
but a few months later the same court, again dividing five-to-four,
sustained a trenton, new jersey ordinance which banned from that city's
streets all loud speakers and other devices which emit "loud and raucous
noises."[] the latest state of the doctrine on this particular topic
is represented by three cases, all decided the same day. in one the
conviction of a baptist minister for conducting religious services in
the streets of new york city without first obtaining a permit from the
city police commissioner was overturned,[] a permit having been
refused him on the ground that he had in the past ridiculed other
religious beliefs thereby stirring strife and threatening violence.
justice jackson dissented, quoting mr. bertrand russell to prove that
"too little liberty brings stagnation, and too much brings chaos. the
fever of our times," he suggested, "inclines the court today to favor
chaos."[] in the second, the court upset the conviction of a group of
jehovah's witnesses in maryland for using a public park without first
obtaining a permit.[] the third case,[] which had nothing to do with
religion, affords an interesting foil to the other two. it is dealt with
in another connection.[]
[pg ]
in  the court rejected as too unsound to require more than a mere
statement the argument that the selective service act was repugnant to
the first amendment as establishing or interfering with religion, by
reason of the exemptions granted ministers of religion, theological
students and members of sects whose tenets exclude the moral right to
engage in war.[] the opposite aspect of this problem was presented in
hamilton v. regents.[] there a california statute requiring all male
students at the state university to take a course in military science
and tactics was assailed by students who claimed that military training
was contrary to the precepts of their religion. this act did not require
military service, nor did it peremptorily command submission to military
training. the obligation to take such training was imposed only as a
condition of attendance at the university. in these circumstances, all
members of the court concurred in the judgment sustaining the statute.
no such unanimity of opinion prevailed in in re summers,[] where the
court upheld the action of a state supreme court in denying a license to
practice law to an applicant who entertained conscientious scruples
against participation in war. the license was withheld on the premise
that a conscientious belief in nonviolence to the extent that the
believer would not use force to prevent wrong, no matter how aggravated,
made it impossible for him to swear in good faith to support the state
constitution. the supreme court held that the state's insistence that an
officer charged with the administration of justice take such an oath and
its interpretation of that oath to require a willingness to perform
military service, did not abridge religious freedom. in a dissenting
opinion in which justices douglas, murphy and rutledge concurred,
justice black said, "i cannot agree that a state can lawfully bar from a
semipublic position a well-qualified man of good character solely
because he entertains a religious belief which might prompt him at some
time in the future to violate a law which has not yet been and may never
be enacted."[]
[pg ]
freedom of speech and press
"the liberty of the press," says blackstone, "is indeed essential to the
nature of a free state: but this consists in laying no previous
restraints upon publications, and not in freedom from censure from
criminal matter when published. every freeman has an undoubted right to
lay what sentiments he pleases before the public: to forbid this, is to
destroy the freedom of the press: but if he publishes what is improper,
mischievous, or illegal, he must take the consequence of his own
temerity. to subject the press to the restrictive power of a licenser,
as was formerly done, both before and since the revolution, is to
subject all freedom of sentiment to the prejudices of one man, and make
him the arbitrary and infallible judge of all controverted points in
learning, religion and government. but to punish (as the law does at
present) any dangerous or offensive writings, which, when published,
shall on a fair and impartial trial be adjudged of a pernicious
tendency, is necessary for the preservation of peace and good order, of
government and religion, the only solid foundations of civil liberty.
thus, the will of individuals is still left free: the abuse only of that
free will is the object of legal punishment. neither is any restraint
hereby laid upon freedom of thought or inquiry: liberty of private
sentiment is still left; the disseminating, or making public, of bad
sentiments, destructive to the ends of society, is the crime which
society corrects."[]
blackstone was declaring the common law of his day, and it was no
intention of the framers of amendment i to change that law. "the
historic antecedents of the first amendment preclude the notion that its
purpose was to give unqualified immunity to every expression that
touched on matters within the range of political interest. the
massachusetts constitution of  guaranteed free speech; yet there are
records of at least three convictions for political libels obtained
between  and . the pennsylvania constitution of  and the
delaware constitution of  expressly imposed liability for abuse of
the right of free speech. madison's own state put on its books in  a
statute confining the abusive exercise of the right of utterance. and it
deserves to be noted that in writing to john adams' wife, jefferson did
not rest his condemnation of the sedition act of  on his belief in
unrestrained utterance as to political matter. [pg ]the first amendment, he
argued, reflected a limitation upon federal power, leaving the right to
enforce restrictions on speech to the states.[] *** 'the law is
perfectly well settled,' this court said over fifty years ago, 'that the
first ten amendments to the constitution, commonly known as the bill of
rights, were not intended to lay down any novel principles of
government, but simply to embody certain guaranties and immunities which
we had inherited from our english ancestors, and which had from time
immemorial been subject to certain well-recognized exceptions arising
from the necessities of the case. in incorporating these principles into
the fundamental law there was no intention of disregarding the
exceptions, which continued to be recognized as if they had been
formally expressed.'[] that this represents the authentic view of the
bill of rights and the spirit in which it must be construed has been
recognized again and again in cases that have come here within the last
fifty years."[]
[pg ]
nor was the adoption of amendment xiv thought to alter the above
described situation until a comparatively recent date. said justice
holmes, speaking for the court in : "we leave undecided the question
whether there is to be found in the fourteenth amendment a prohibition
similar to that in the first. but even if we were to assume that freedom
of speech and freedom of the press were protected from abridgment on the
part not only of the united states but also of the states, still we
should be far from the conclusion that the plaintiff in error would have
us reach. in the first place, the main purpose of such constitutional
provisions is 'to prevent all such previous restraints upon
publications as had been practiced by other governments,' and they do
not prevent the subsequent punishment of such as may be deemed contrary
to the public welfare. commonwealth v. blanding,  pick. , ,
; respublica v. oswald,  dallas , . the preliminary freedom
extends as well to the false as to the true; the subsequent punishment
may extend as well to the true as to the false. this was the law of
criminal libel apart from statute in most cases, if not in all.
commonwealth v. blanding, ubi sup.;  bl. comm. ."[] this
appears to be an unqualified endorsement of blackstone. but, as justice
holmes remarks in the same opinion, "there is no constitutional right to
have all general propositions of law once adopted remain unchanged."[]
as late as  justice pitney, speaking for the court, said: "neither
the fourteenth amendment nor any other provision of the constitution of
the united states imposes upon the states any restriction about 'freedom
of speech' or the 'liberty of silence' ***"[]
[pg ]
the rule requires that before an utterance can be penalized by
government it must, ordinarily, have occurred "in such circumstances or
have been of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger" that
it would bring about "substantive evils" within the power of government
to prevent.[] the question whether these conditions exist is one of
law for the courts, and ultimately for the supreme court, in enforcement
of the first and/or the fourteenth amendment;[] and in exercise of its
power of review in these premises the court is entitled to review
broadly findings of facts of lower courts, whether state or federal.[]
in davis v. beason,[] decided in , the question at issue was the
constitutionality of a statute of the territory of idaho, providing that
"no person who is a bigamist or polygamist, or who teaches, advices,
counsels or encourages any person or persons to become bigamists or
polygamists or to commit any other crime defined by law, or to enter
into what is known as plural or celestial marriage, or who is a member
of any order, organization or association which teaches, advises,
counsels or encourages its members or devotees or any other persons to
commit the crime of bigamy or polygamy, or any other crime defined by
law, either as a rite or ceremony of such order, organization or
association, or otherwise, is permitted to vote at any election, or to
hold any position or office of honor, trust or profit within this
territory." a unanimous court held this enactment to be within the
legislative powers which congress had conferred on the territory and not
to be open to any constitutional objection. said justice field for the
court: "bigamy and polygamy are crimes by the laws of all civilized and
christian countries. they are crimes by the laws of the united states,
and they are crimes by the laws of idaho. they tend to destroy the
purity of the marriage relation, to disturb the peace of families, to
degrade woman and to debase man. few crimes are more pernicious to the
best interests of society and receive more general or more deserved
punishment. to extend exemption from punishment for such crimes would be
to shock the moral judgment of the community. to call their advocacy a
tenet of religion is to offend the common sense of mankind. if they are
crimes, then to teach, advise, and counsel their practice is to aid in
their commission, and such teaching and counselling are themselves
criminal and proper subjects of punishment, as aiding and abetting crime
are in all other cases."[] no talk here about the necessity for
[pg ]showing that the prohibited teaching, counselling, advising, etc., must
be shown to have occurred in circumstances creating a clear and present
danger of its being followed.
in fox v. washington,[] decided in , the question at issue was
the constitutionality of a washington statute denouncing "the wilful
printing, circulation, etc., of matter advocating or encouraging the
commission of any crime or breach of the peace or which shall tend to
encourage or advocate disrespect for law or any court or courts of
justice." the state supreme court had assumed that the case was governed
by the guarantees of the united states constitution of freedom of
speech, and especially by the fourteenth amendment, and its decision
sustaining the statute was upheld by the supreme court on the same
assumption, in the case of a person indicted for publishing an article
encouraging and inciting what the jury had found to be a breach of state
laws against indecent exposure. again, one notes the total absence of
any reference to the clear and present danger rule. but not all state
enactments survived judicial review prior to the adoption of the clear
and present danger test. in  the court disallowed a kansas statute
which, as interpreted by the highest state court, made punishable the
joining of an organization teaching the inevitability of "the class
struggle";[] three years later it upset a california statute which
forbade in all circumstances the carrying of a red flag as a symbol of
opposition to government;[] and  years after that it upset a
conviction under an oregon statute for participating in a meeting held
under the auspices of an organization which was charged with advocating
violence as a political method, although the meeting itself was orderly
and did not advocate violence.[] in none of these cases was the clear
and present danger test mentioned.
in schenck v. united states[] appellants had been convicted of
conspiracy to violate the espionage act of june , [] "by causing
and attempting to cause insubordination, etc., in the military and naval
forces of the united states, and to obstruct the recruiting and
enlistment service of the united states, when the united states was at
war with the german empire, to-wit, that the defendants willfully
conspired to have printed and circulated to men who had been called and
accepted for military service under the act of may , , a document
set forth and alleged to be calculated to cause such insubordination and
obstruction." affirming the conviction, the court, speaking by justice
holmes said: "it well may be that the prohibition of laws [pg ]abridging the
freedom of speech is not confined to previous restraints, although to
prevent them may have been the main purpose, as intimated in patterson
v. colorado.[] *** we admit that in many places and in ordinary
times the defendants in saying all that was said in the circular would
have been within their constitutional rights. but the character of every
act depends upon the circumstances in which it is done. *** the most
stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely
shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic. it does not even protect
a man from an injunction against uttering words that have all the effect
of force. *** the question in every case is whether the words used are
used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear
and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that
congress has a right to prevent. it is a question of proximity and
degree."[] one week later two other convictions under the same act
were affirmed, with justice holmes again speaking for the unanimous
court. in frohwerk v. united states[] he said: "with regard to the
argument [on the constitutional question] we think it necessary to add
to what has been said in schenck v. united states, ***, only that
the first amendment while prohibiting legislation against free speech as
such cannot have been, and obviously was not, intended to give immunity
for every possible use of language. robertson v. baldwin,  u.s.
, . we venture to believe that neither hamilton nor madison, nor
any other competent person then or later, ever supposed that to make
criminal the counselling of a murder within the jurisdiction of congress
would be an unconstitutional interference with free speech."[] in debs
v. united states[] he referred to "the natural and intended effect"
and "probable effect"[] of the condemned speech (straight common law).
when, moreover, a case arose in which the dictum in the schenck case
might have influenced the result, the court, seven justices to two,
declined to follow it. this was in abrams v. united states,[] in
which the court affirmed a conviction for spreading propaganda
"obviously intended to provoke and to encourage resistance to the united
states in the war." justices holmes and brandeis dissented on the ground
that the utterances did not create a clear and imminent danger[] of
substantive evils. and the same result was reached in schaefer v.
united states,[] again over the dissent of justices holmes and
brandeis, the court saying that: "the tendency of the articles and their
efficacy were enough for the offense ***."[]
[pg ]
gitlow was convicted under a new york statute making it criminal to
advocate, advise or teach the duty, necessity or propriety of
overturning organized government by force or violence.[] since there
was no evidence as to the effect resulting from the circulation of the
manifesto for which he was convicted and no contention that it created
any immediate threat to the security of the state, the court was obliged
to reach a clear cut choice between the common law test of dangerous
tendency and the clear and present danger test. it adopted the former
and sustained the conviction, saying "by enacting the present statute
the state has determined, through its legislative body, that utterances
advocating the overthrow of organized government by force, violence, and
unlawful means, are so inimical to the general welfare, and involve such
danger of substantive evil, that they may be penalized in the exercise
of its police power. that determination must be given great weight ***
that utterances inciting to the overthrow of organized government by
unlawful means present a sufficient danger of substantive evil to bring
their punishment within the range of legislative discretion is clear.
such utterances, by their very nature, involve danger to the public
peace and to the security of the state. they threaten breaches of the
peace and ultimate revolution. and the immediate danger is none the less
and substantial because the effect of a given utterance cannot be
accurately foreseen. the state cannot reasonably be required to measure
the danger from [pg ]every such utterance in the nice balance of a jeweler's
scale."[] justice sanford distinguished the schenck case by asserting
that its "general statement" was intended to apply only to cases where
the statute "merely prohibits certain acts involving the danger of
substantive evil without any reference to language itself,"[] and has
no application "where the legislative body itself has previously
determined the danger of substantive evil arising from utterances of a
specified character."[]
two years later, in whitney v. california,[] upon evidence which
tended to establish the existence of a conspiracy to commit certain
serious crimes, the conviction was sustained unanimously. in a
concurring opinion in which justice holmes joined, justice brandeis
restated the test of clear and present danger to include the intent to
create such danger: "but, although the rights of free speech and
assembly are fundamental, they are not in their nature absolute. their
exercise is subject to restriction, if the particular restriction
proposed is required in order to protect the state from destruction or
from serious injury, political, economic or moral. that the necessity
which is essential to a valid restriction does not exist unless speech
would produce, or is intended to produce, a clear and imminent danger of
some substantive evil which the state constitutionally may seek to
prevent has been settled. see schenck v. united states,  u.s. ,
. ***, no danger flowing from speech can be deemed clear and
present, unless the incidence of the evil apprehended is so imminent
that it may befall before there is opportunity for full discussion. if
there be time to expose through discussion the falsehood and fallacies,
to avert the evil by the processes of education, the remedy to be
applied is more speech, not enforced silence."[]
[pg ]
ten years later, in herndon v. lowry,[] a narrowly divided court
drew a distinction between the prohibition by law of specific utterances
which the legislators have determined have a "dangerous tendency" to
produce substantive evil and the finding by a jury to that effect, and
on this basis reversed the conviction of a communist organizer under a
state criminal syndicalism statute, with the intimation that where it is
left to a jury to determine whether particular utterances are unlawful,
the test of clear and present danger must be applied.[] finally, in
thornhill v. alabama,[] the court went the full length in
invalidating a state law against picketing because[] "*** no clear
and present danger of destruction of life or property, or invasion of
the right of privacy, or breach of the peace can be thought to be
inherent in the activities of every person who approaches the premises
of an employer and publicizes the facts of a labor dispute involving the
latter." the same term, again invoking the clear and present danger
formula, it reversed a conviction for the common law offense of inciting
a breach of the peace by playing, on a public street, a phonograph
record attacking a religious sect.[]
public order
prior to the court's ratification of the clear and present danger test
it had held that while on the one hand, peaceful and orderly opposition
to government by legal means may not be inhibited, and that the
constitution insures the "maintenance of the opportunity for free
political discussion to the end that government may be responsive to the
will of the people and that changes may be obtained by lawful
means,"[] yet on the other hand, the state may punish those who abuse
their freedom of speech by utterances tending to incite to crime,[]
or to endanger the foundations of organized government or to threaten
its overthrow by unlawful means.[] the impact of the clear and
present danger test upon these principles is well illustrated by a
holding in  by a sharply divided court, that a chicago ordinance
[pg ]which, as judicially interpreted, was held to permit punishment for
breach of the peace for speech which "stirs the public to anger, invites
disputes, (or) brings about a condition of unrest" was an undue and
unlawful restriction on the right of free speech.[] reversing a
conviction under the ordinance, justice douglas wrote: "a function of
free speech under our system of government is to invite dispute. it may
indeed best serve its high purpose when it induces a condition of
unrest, creates dissatisfaction with conditions as they are, or even
stirs people to anger. speech is often provocative and challenging. it
may strike at prejudices and preconceptions and have profound unsettling
effects as it presses for acceptance of an idea. that is why freedom of
speech, though not absolute *** is nevertheless protected against
censorship or punishment, unless shown likely to produce a clear and
present danger of a serious substantive evil that rises far above public
inconvenience, annoyance, or unrest."[] finding that the ordinance as
thus construed was unconstitutional, the majority did not enter into a
consideration of the facts of the particular case. dissenting, justice
jackson dwelt at length upon the evidence which showed that a riot had
actually occurred and that the speech in question had in fact provoked a
hostile mob, incited a friendly one, and threatened violence between the
two. conceding the premises of the majority opinion, he argued
nevertheless that: "because a subject is legally arguable, however, does
not mean that public sentiment will be patient of its advocacy at all
times and in all manners. *** a great number of people do not agree
that introduction to america of communism or fascism is even debatable.
hence many speeches, such as that of terminiello, may be legally
permissible but may nevertheless in some surroundings be a menace to
peace and order. when conditions show the speaker that this is the case,
as it did here, there certainly comes a point beyond which he cannot
indulge in provocations to violence without being answerable to
society."[] early in  the court itself endorsed this position in
feiner v. new york.[] here was sustained the conviction of a
speaker who in addressing a crowd including a number of negroes, through
a public address system set up on the sidewalk, asserted that the
negroes "should rise up in arms and fight for their rights," called a
number of public officials, including the president, "bums," and ignored
two police requests to stop speaking. the court took cognizance of the
findings by the trial court and two reviewing state courts that danger
to public order was clearly threatened.[]
[pg ]
public morals
but the police power extends also to the public morals. in winters v.
new york[] the question at issue was the constitutionality of a state
statute making it an offense "to print, publish, or distribute, or to
possess with intent to distribute, any printed matter principally made
up of criminal views, police reports, or accounts of criminal deeds, or
pictures, or stories of deeds of bloodshed, lust or crime," and
construed by the state courts "as prohibiting such massing of accounts
of deeds of bloodshed and lust as to incite to crimes against the
person." a divided court,  justices to , following the third argument
of the case before it, set the act aside on the ground that, as
construed, it did not define the prohibited acts in such a way as to
exclude those which are a legitimate exercise of the constitutional
freedom of the press; and further, that it failed to set up an
ascertainable standard of guilt.[] a few weeks earlier the court had
vacated a judgment of the supreme court of utah affirming convictions on
a charge of conspiring to "commit acts injurious to public morals" by
counseling, advising and practicing plural marriage.[] four members
of the court thought that the cause should be remanded in order to give
the state supreme court opportunity to construe that statute and a fifth
agreed with this result without opinion. justice rutledge, speaking for
himself and justices douglas and murphy, dissented on the ground that
the utah court had already construed the statute to authorize punishment
for exercising the right of free speech. he said: "the utah statute was
construed to proscribe any agreement to advocate the practice of
polygamy. thus the line was drawn between discussion and advocacy. the
constitution requires that the statute be limited more narrowly. at the
very least the line must be drawn between advocacy and incitement, and
even the state's power to punish incitement may vary with the nature of
the speech, whether persuasive or coercive, the nature of the wrong
induced, whether violent or merely [pg ]offensive to the mores, and the
degree of probability that the substantive evil actually will
result."[]
[pg ]
closely allied to the problem of dangerous utterances is the resort to
picketing as a means of communication and persuasion in labor disputes.
in such cases, the evils feared by the legislature usually arise, not
out of the substance of the communications, but from the manner in which
they are made. applying the test of clear and present danger in
thornhill v. alabama[] and carlson v. california,[] the court
invalidated laws against peaceful picketing, including the carrying of
signs and banners. it held that: "the dissemination of information
concerning the facts of a labor dispute must be regarded as within that
area of free discussion that is guaranteed by the constitution" and may
be abridged only where "the clear danger of substantive evils arises
under circumstances affording no opportunity to test the merits of ideas
by competition for acceptance in the market of public opinion."[]
shortly thereafter a divided court ruled that peaceful picketing may be
enjoined where the labor dispute has been attended by violence on a
serious scale.[] speaking for the majority on this occasion, justice
frankfurter asserted that "utterance in a context of violence can lose
its significance as an appeal to reason and become part of an instrument
of force *** (and) was not meant to be sheltered by the
constitution."[]
for a brief period strangers to the employer were accorded an almost
equal freedom of communication by means of picketing.[] subsequent
cases, however, have recognized that "while picketing has [pg ]an ingredient
of communication it cannot dogmatically be equated with the
constitutionally protected freedom of speech."[] without dissent the
court has held that a state may enjoin picketing designed to coerce the
employer to violate state law by refusing to sell ice to nonunion
peddlers,[] by interfering with the right of his employees to decide
whether or not to join a union,[] or by choosing a specified
proportion of his employees from one race, irrespective of merit.[]
by close divisions, it also sustained the right of a state to forbid the
"conscription of neutrals" by the picketing of a restaurant solely
because the owner had contracted for the erection of a building (not
connected with the restaurant and located some distance away) by a
contractor who employed nonunion men;[] or the picketing of a shop
operated by the owner without employees to induce him to observe certain
closing hours.[] in this last case justice black distinguished
thornhill v. alabama and other prior cases by saying, "no opinions
relied on by petitioners assert a constitutional right in picketers to
take advantage of speech or press to violate valid laws designed to
protect important interests of society *** it has never been deemed an
abridgment of freedom of speech or press to make a course of conduct
illegal merely because the conduct was in part initiated, evidenced, or
carried out by means of language, either spoken, written, or printed.
*** such an expansive interpretation of the constitutional guaranties
of speech and press would make it practically impossible ever to enforce
laws against agreements in restraint of trade as well as many other
agreements and conspiracies deemed injurious to society."[] by the
same token, a state anti-closed shop law does not infringe freedom of
speech, of assembly or of petition;[] neither does a "cease and
desist" order of a state labor relations board directed against work
stoppages caused by the calling of special union meetings during working
hours.[] but, by a vote of five justices to four—the five, however,
being unable to agree altogether among themselves—a state may not
require labor organizers to register,[] although, as justice roberts
pointed out for the dissenters, "other paid organizers, whether for
business or for charity could be required thus to identify
themselves."[]
[pg ]
one area in which the clear and present danger rule has undoubtedly
enlarged freedom of utterance beyond common law limits is that of
discussion of judicial proceedings. in  the supreme court speaking
by justice holmes refused to review the conviction of an editor for
contempt of court in publishing articles and cartoons criticizing the
action of the court in a pending case.[] it took the position that
even if freedom of the press was protected against abridgment by the
state, a publication tending to obstruct the administration of justice
was punishable, irrespective of its truth. in recent years the court not
only has taken jurisdiction of cases of this order but has scrutinized
the facts with great care and has not hesitated to reverse the action of
state courts. bridges v. california[] is the leading case.
enlarging upon the idea that clear and present danger is an appropriate
guide in determining whether comment on pending cases can be punished,
justice black said: "we cannot start with the assumption that
publications of the kind here involved actually do threaten to change
the nature of legal trials, and that to preserve judicial impartiality,
it is necessary for judges to have a contempt power by which they can
close all channels of public expression to all matters which touch upon
pending cases. we must therefore turn to the particular utterances here
in question and the circumstances of their publication to determine to
what extent the substantive evil of unfair administration of justice was
a likely consequence, and whether the degree of likelihood was
sufficient to justify summary punishment."[] speaking on behalf of
four dissenting members, justice frankfurter objected: "a trial is not a
'free trade in ideas,' nor is the best test of truth in a courtroom 'the
power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the
market.' *** we cannot read into the fourteenth amendment the freedom
of speech and of the press protected by the first amendment and at the
same time read out age-old means employed by states for securing the
calm course of justice. the fourteenth amendment does not forbid a state
to continue the historic process of prohibiting expressions calculated
to subvert a specific exercise of judicial power. so to assure the
impartial accomplishment of justice is not an abridgment of freedom of
speech or freedom of the press, as these phases of liberty have
heretofore been conceived even by the stoutest libertarians. in act,
these liberties themselves depend upon an untrammeled judiciary whose
passions are [pg ]not even unconsciously aroused and whose minds are not
distorted by extrajudicial considerations."[] in pennekamp v.
florida,[] a unanimous court held that criticism of judicial action
already taken, although the cases were still pending on other points,
did not create a danger to fair judicial administration of the
"clearness and immediacy necessary to close the doors of permissible
public comment"[] even though the state court held and the supreme
court assumed that "the petitioners deliberately distorted the facts to
abase and destroy the efficiency of the court."[] and in craig v.
harney,[] a divided court held that publication, while a motion for a
new trial was pending, of an unfair report of the facts of a civil case,
accompanied by intemperate criticism of the judge's conduct was
protected by the constitution. said justice douglas, speaking for the
majority: "the vehemence of the language used is not alone the measure
of the power to publish for contempt. the fires which it kindles must
constitute an imminent, and not merely a likely, threat to the
administration of justice. the danger must not be remote or even
probable; it must immediately imperil."[]
notable also is the protection which the court has erected in recent
years for those who desire to use the streets and the public parks as
theatres of discussion, agitation, and propaganda dissemination. in 
the court unanimously sustained an ordinance of the city of boston which
provided that "no person shall, in or upon any of the public grounds,
make any public address," etc., "except in accordance with a permit of
the mayor,"[] quoting with approval the following language from the
decision of the massachusetts supreme judicial court in the same case.
"for the legislature absolutely or conditionally to forbid public
speaking in a highway or public park is no more an infringement of the
rights of a member of the public than for the owner of a private house
to forbid it in the house. when no [pg ]proprietary right interferes the
legislature may end the right of the public to enter upon the public
place by putting an end to the dedication to public uses. so it may take
the less step of limiting the public use to certain purposes."[]
forty-two years later this case was distinguished in hague v.
c.i.o.[] (see p. .) and in  in saia v. new york[] an
ordinance forbidding the use of sound amplification devices by which
sound is cast directly upon the streets and public places, except with
permission of the chief of police, for the exercise of whose discretion
no standards were prescribed, was held unconstitutional as applied to
one seeking leave to amplify religious lectures in a public park. the
decision was a five-to-four holding; and eight months later a majority,
comprising the former dissenters and the chief justice, held it to be a
permissible exercise of legislative discretion to bar sound trucks, with
broadcasts of public interest, amplified to a loud and raucous volume,
from the public ways of a municipality.[] conversely, it was within
the power of the public utilities commission of the district of
columbia, following a hearing and investigation, to issue an order
permitting the capital transit company, despite the protest of some of
its patrons, to receive and amplify on its street cars and buses radio
programs consisting generally of % music, % announcements, and %
commercial advertising. neither operation of the radio service nor the
action of the commission permitting it was precluded by the first and
fifth amendments.[]
[pg ]under still unoverruled decisions an ordinance forbidding any
distribution of circulars, handbills, advertising, or literature of any
kind within the city limits without permission of the city manager is an
unlawful abridgment of freedom of the press.[] so also are ordinances
which forbid, without exception, any distributions of handbills upon the
streets.[] even where such distribution involves a trespass upon
private property in a company owned town,[] or upon government
property in a defense housing development,[] it cannot be stopped.
the passing out of handbills containing commercial advertising may,
however, be prohibited; this is true even where such handbills may
contain some matter which, standing alone would be immune from the
restriction.[] a municipal ordinance forbidding any person to ring
door bells, or otherwise summon to the door the occupants of any
residence, for the purpose of distributing to them circulars or
handbills was held to infringe freedom of speech and of the press as
applied to a person distributing advertisements of a religious
meeting.[] but an ordinance forbidding door to door peddling or
canvassing unless it is invited or requested by the occupant of a
private residence is valid.[]
freedom from previous restraints has never been regarded as absolute.
the principle that words having the quality of verbal acts might be
enjoined by court order was established in gompers v. bucks stove and
range co.;[] and in near v. minnesota[] the court, speaking
through chief justice hughes, even while extending blackstone's
condemnation of censorship to a statute which authorized the enjoining
of publications alleged to be persistently defamatory, criticized it as
being in some respects too sweeping. indeed, the distinction between
prevention and punishment appears to have played little or no part in
determining when picketing may be forbidden in labor disputes.[] in
chaplinsky v. new hampshire[] and board of education v.
barnette,[] the opinions indicated that the power of government is
measured by the same principles in both situations. in the former
justice murphy asserted: "there are certain well-defined and narrowly
limited classes of speech, the prevention and punishment of which have
never been thought to raise any constitutional problem. these include
the lewd and obscene, the profane, the libelous, and the [pg ]insulting or
'fighting' words—those which by their very utterance inflict injury or
tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. it has been well
observed that such are no essential part of any exposition of ideas, and
are of such slight social value as a step to truth that any benefit that
may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by the social interest in
order and morality."[] to like effect, in board of education v.
barnette, justice jackson set it down as "a commonplace that censorship
or suppression of expression of opinion is tolerated by our constitution
only when the expression presents a clear and present danger of action
of a kind the state is empowered to prevent and punish."[]
it is significant that the cases which have sanctioned previous
restraints upon the utterances of particular persons have involved
restraint by judicial, not administrative action. the prime objective of
the ban on previous restraints was to outlaw censorship accomplished by
licensing. "the struggle for the freedom of the press was primarily
directed against the power of the licensor. it was against that power
that john milton directed his assault by his 'appeal for the liberty of
unlicensed printing.' and the liberty of the press became initially a
right to publish 'without a license what formerly could be published
only with one'."[] even today, a licensing requirement will bring
judicial condemnation more surely than any other form of restriction.
except where the authority of the licensing officer is so closely
limited as to leave no room for discrimination against utterances he
does not approve,[] the supreme court has struck down licensing
ordinances, even in respect of a form of communication which may be
prohibited entirely.[] in the case of radio broadcasting, however,
where physical limitations make it impossible for everyone to utilize
the medium of communication, the court has thus far sanctioned a power
of selective licensing;[] while with respect to moving pictures it
has until very recently held the states' power to license, and hence to
censor, films intended for local exhibition to be substantially
unrestricted, this being "a business pure and simple, originated and
conducted for profit," and "not to be regarded, ... as part of the press
of the country or as organs of public opinion."[] this doctrine was
laid down in , but in , in speaking for the court, in united
states v. paramount pictures,[] justice douglas indicated a very
different position, saying: "we have no doubt that moving [pg ]pictures,
like newspapers and radio, are included in the press whose freedom is
guaranteed by the first amendment."[] in the so-called "miracle
case,"[] in which it was held that under the first and fourteenth
amendments, a state may not place a prior restraint on the showing of a
motion picture film on the basis of the censor's finding that it is
"sacrilegious," a word of uncertain connotation, this point of view
becomes the doctrine of the court and the mutual films case is
pronounced "overruled" so far as it is out of harmony with the instant
holding.[]
in the course of decisions enforcing this test of state action with
respect to freedom of speech and press, diversity of opinion has
appeared among the justices upon three closely related topics: first, as
to the restrictive force of the test; second, as to the constitutional
status of freedom of speech and press; third, as to the kind of speech
which the constitution is concerned to protect. on the first point the
following passage from justice black's opinion in bridges v.
california[] is pertinent: "what finally emerges from the 'clear and
present danger' cases is a working principle that the substantive evil
must be extremely serious and the degree of imminence extremely high
before utterances can be punished. those cases do not purport to mark
the furthermost constitutional boundaries of protected expression, nor
do we here. they do no more than recognize a minimum compulsion of the
bill of rights. for the first amendment does not speak equivocally. it
prohibits any law 'abridging the freedom of speech or of the press.' it
must be taken as a command of the broadest scope that explicit language,
read in the context of a liberty-loving society, [pg ]will allow."[] with
this should be compared the following words from justice frankfurter's
concurring opinion in pennekamp v. florida,[] which involved a
closely similar issue to the one dealt with in the bridges case: "'clear
and present danger' was never used by mr. justice holmes to express a
technical legal doctrine or to convey a formula for adjudicating cases.
it was a literary phrase not to be distorted by being taken from its
context. in its setting it served to indicate the importance of freedom
of speech to a free society but also to emphasize that its exercise must
be compatible with the preservation of other freedoms essential to a
democracy and guaranteed by our constitution. when those other
attributes of a democracy are threatened by speech, the constitution
does not deny power to the states to curb it."[]
the second question, in more definite terms, is whether freedom of
speech and press occupies a "preferred position" in the constitutional
hierarchy of values so that legislation restrictive of it is
presumptively unconstitutional. an important contribution to the
affirmative view on this point is the following passage from an opinion
of justice cardozo written in : "one may say that it is the matrix,
the indispensable condition, of nearly every other form of freedom.
*** so it has come about that the domain of liberty, withdrawn by the
fourteenth amendment from encroachment by the states, has been enlarged
by latter-day judgments to include liberty of the mind as well as
liberty of action. the extension became, indeed, a logical imperative
when once it was recognized, as long ago it was, that liberty is
something more than exemption from physical restraint, and that even in
the field of substantive rights and duties the legislative judgment, if
oppressive and arbitrary, may be overridden by the courts."[]
touching on the same subject a few months later, chief justice stone
suggested that: "there may be narrower scope for operation of the
presumption of constitutionality when legislation appears on its face to
be within a specific prohibition of the constitution, such as those of
the first ten amendments, which are deemed equally specific when held to
be embraced within the fourteenth." and again: "it is unnecessary to
consider now whether legislation which restricts those political
processes which can ordinarily be expected to bring about repeal of
undesirable legislation, is to be subjected to more exacting judicial
scrutiny under the general prohibitions of the fourteenth amendment than
are most other types of legislation."[] but the strongest assertion
of this position occurs in justice rutledge's opinion for a sharply
divided court in thomas v. collins.[] he says: "the case confronts
us again with the duty our system places on this [pg ]court to say where the
individual's freedom ends and the state's power begins. choice on that
border, now as always delicate, is perhaps more so where the usual
presumption supporting legislation is balanced by the preferred place
given in our scheme to the great, the indispensable democratic freedoms
secured by the first amendment. *** that priority gives these
liberties a sanctity and a sanction not permitting dubious intrusions.
and it is the character of the right, not of the limitation, which
determines what standard governs the choice. *** for these reasons any
attempt to restrict those liberties must be justified by clear public
interest, threatened not doubtfully or remotely, but by clear and
present danger. the rational connection between the remedy provided and
the evil to be curbed, which in other contexts might support legislation
against attack on due process grounds, will not suffice. these rights
rest on firmer foundation. accordingly, whatever occasion would restrain
orderly discussion and persuasion, at appropriate time and place, must
have clear support in public danger, actual or impending. only the
gravest abuses, endangering paramount interests, give occasion for
permissible limitation. it is therefore in our tradition to allow the
widest room for discussion, the narrowest range for its restriction,
particularly when this right is exercised in conjunction with peaceable
assembly. it was not by accident or coincidence that the rights to
freedom in speech and press were coupled in a single guaranty with the
rights of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition for redress
of grievances. all these, though not identical, are inseparable. they
are cognate rights."[] this was . four years later the
controlling wing of the court, in sustaining a local ordinance, endorsed
a considerably less enthusiastic appraisal of freedom of speech and
press. thus while alluding to "the preferred position of freedom of
speech in a society that cherishes liberty for all," justice reed went
on to say, that this "does not require legislators to be insensible to
claims by citizens to comfort and convenience. to enforce freedom of
speech in disregard of the rights of others would be harsh and arbitrary
in itself."[] and justice frankfurter denied flatly the propriety of
the phrase "preferred position," saying: "this is a phrase that has
uncritically crept into some recent opinions of this court. i deem it a
mischievous phrase, if it carries the thought, which it may subtly
imply, that any law touching communication is infected with presumptive
invalidity. it is not the first time in the history of constitutional
adjudication that such a doctrinaire attitude has disregarded the
admonition most to be observed in exercising the court's reviewing power
over legislation, 'that it is a constitution we are expounding,'
m'culloch v. maryland,  wheat. , . i say the phrase is
mischievous because it radiates a constitutional doctrine without
avowing it. clarity and candor in these matters, so as to avoid gliding
unwittingly into error, make it appropriate to trace the history of the
phrase 'preferred position.'"[] [pg ]which justice frankfurter then
proceeded to do. justice jackson also protested: "we cannot," he said,
"give some constitutional rights a preferred position without relegating
others to a deferred position."[]
the third question concerns the quality and purpose of the speech which
the constitution aims to protect. in , justice douglas speaking for
a divided court returned the following robustious answer to this
question: "*** a function of free speech under our system of
government is to invite dispute. it may indeed best serve its high
purpose when it induces a condition of unrest, creates dissatisfaction
with conditions as they are, or even stirs people to anger. speech is
often provocative and challenging. it may strike at prejudices and
preconceptions and have profound unsettling effects as it presses for
acceptance of an idea. that is why freedom of speech, though not
absolute, chaplinsky v. new hampshire, supra, pp. -, is
nevertheless protected against censorship or punishment, unless shown
likely to produce a clear and present danger of a serious substantive
evil that rises far above public inconvenience, annoyance, or
unrest."[] but early in  justice jackson, in a dissenting
opinion, urges the court to review its entire position in the light of
the proposition that "the purpose of constitutional protection of
freedom of speech is to foster peaceful interchange of all manner of
thoughts, information and ideas," that "its policy is rooted in faith of
the force of reason."[] he considers that the court has been striking
"rather blindly at permit systems which indirectly may affect first
amendment freedom." he says: "cities throughout the country have adopted
the permit requirement to control private activities on public streets
and for other purposes. the universality of this type of regulation
demonstrates a need and indicates widespread opinion in the profession
that it is not necessarily incompatible with our constitutional
freedoms. is everybody out of step but this court? *** it seems
hypercritical to strike down local laws on their faces for want of
standards when we have no standards. and i do not find it required by
existing authority. i think that where speech is outside of
constitutional immunity the local community or the state is left a large
measure of discretion as to the means for dealing with it."[] this
diversity of viewpoint on the court touching the above questions became
of importance when, recently, the court was faced with the problem of
the relation of freedom of speech to the enumerated powers [pg ]of the
national government, in contrast to the indefinite residual powers of
the states.
the supreme court, citing the fact that the american revolution "really
began when *** that government (of england) sent stamps for newspaper
duties to the american colonies" has been alert to the possible uses of
taxation as a method of suppressing objectionable publications.[]
persons engaged in the dissemination of ideas are, to be sure, subject
to ordinary forms of taxation in like manner as other persons.[] with
respect to license or privilege taxes, however, they stand on a
different footing. their privilege is granted by the constitution and
cannot be withheld by either state or federal government. hence a
license tax measured by gross receipts for the privilege of engaging in
the business of publishing advertising in any newspaper or other
publication was held invalid[] and flat license fees levied and
collected as a pre-condition to the sale of religious books and
pamphlets have also been set side.[]
regulations of business and labor activities
the application to newspapers of the anti-trust laws,[] the national
labor relations act,[] or the fair labor standards act,[] does not
abridge the freedom of the press. in gompers v. bucks stove and range
co.,[] the supreme court unanimously held that a court of equity may
enjoin continuance of a boycott, despite the fact that spoken or written
speech was used as an instrumentality by which the boycott was made
effective. "in the case of an unlawful conspiracy, the agreement to act
in concert when the signal is published [pg ]gives the words 'unfair,' 'we
don't patronize,' or similar expressions, a force not inhering in the
words themselves, and therefore exceeding any possible right of speech
which a single individual might have. under such circumstances they
become what have been called 'verbal acts,' and as much subject to
injunction as the use of any other force whereby property is unlawfully
damaged."[] a cognate test has been applied in determining when
communications by an employer constitute an unfair labor practice which
may be forbidden or penalized under the national labor relations act
without infringing freedom of speech. in labor board v. virginia power
co.,[] the court held that the sanctions of the act might be imposed
upon an employer for the protection of his employees, where his conduct
"though evidenced in part by speech, *** (amounted) to coercion within
the meaning of the act."[] in the opinion of the court, justice
murphy stated, "the mere fact that language merges into a course of
conduct does not put that whole course without the range of otherwise
applicable administrative power. in determining whether the company
actually interfered with, restrained, and coerced its employees, the
board has a right to look at what the company has said, as well as what
it has done."[] but the constitutionality of legislation prohibiting
the publication by corporations and unions in the regular course of
conducting their affairs of periodicals advising their members,
stockholders or customers of danger or advantage to their interest from
the adoption of measures or the election to office of men espousing such
measures has been declared by the court to be open to gravest
doubt.[]
the leading case touching this subject is ex parte curtis, decided
seventy years ago.[] here was sustained an act of congress which
prohibited, under penalties, certain categories of officers of the
united states from requesting, giving to, or receiving from, any other
officer, money or property or other thing of value for political
purposes.[] [pg ]two generations later was enacted the so-called hatch
act[] which, while making some concessions to freedom of expression
on matters political by employees of the government, forbids their
active participation in political management and political campaigns.
the act was sustained against objections based on the bill of
rights;[] while an amendment to it the effect of which is to diminish
the amount of a federal grant-in-aid of the construction of highways in
a state which fails to remove from office "one found by the united
states civil service commission to have taken active part in political
management or in political campaigns while a member of the state highway
commission," was held not to violate amendment x.[]
the federal government may punish utterances which obstruct its
recruiting or enlistment service, cause insubordination in the armed
forces, encourage resistance to government in the prosecution of war, or
impede the production of munitions and other essential war
material.[] the only issue which has divided the court with regard to
such speech has been the degree of danger which must exist before it may
be punished. the recent decision in dennis v. united states
diminishes, if it does not eliminate, this issue.[]
"section (h) of the labor management relations act requires, as a
condition of a union's utilizing the opportunities afforded by the act,
each of its officers to file an affidavit with the national labor
relations board () that he is not a member of the communist party or
affiliated with such party, and () that he does not believe in, and is
not a member of or supports any organization that believes in or teaches
the overthrow of the united states government by force or by any illegal
or unconstitutional methods." the statute also makes it a criminal
offense to make willfully or knowingly any false statement in such an
affidavit.[] in american communications association, c.i.o. et al.
v. douds[] five of the six justices participating sustained the
requirement () and three justices sustained the requirement ()
[pg ]against the objection that the act exceeded congress's power over
interstate commerce and infringed freedom of speech and the rights of
petition and assembly; and in osman v. douds[] the same result was
reached by a court in which only justice clark did not participate. in
the end only justice black condemned requirement (), while the court
was evenly divided as to requirement (). in the course of his opinion
for the controlling wing of the court, chief justice vinson said: "the
attempt to apply the term, 'clear and present danger,' as a mechanical
test in every case touching first amendment freedoms, without regard to
the context of its application, mistakes the form in which an idea was
cast for the substance of the idea *** the question with which we are
here faced is not the same one that justices holmes and brandeis found
convenient to consider in terms of clear and present danger.
government's interest here is not in preventing the dissemination of
communist doctrine or the holding of particular beliefs because it is
feared that unlawful action will result therefrom if free speech is
practiced. its interest is in protecting the free flow of commerce from
what congress considers to be substantial evils of conduct that are not
the products of speech at all. *** the contention of petitioner ***
that this court must find that political strikes create a clear and
present danger to the security of the nation or of widespread industrial
strife in order to sustain §(h) similarly misconceives the purpose
that phrase was intended to serve. in that view, not the relative
certainty that evil conduct will result from speech in the immediate
future, but the extent and gravity of the substantive evil must be
measured by the 'test' laid down in the schenck case."[] in thus
balancing the gravity of the interest protected by legislation from
harmful speech against the demands of the clear and present danger rule
the court paved the way for its decision a year later in dennis v.
united states.
dennis v. united states[] involves the following legislation:
"section . (a) it shall be unlawful for any person—
"() to knowingly or willfully advocate, abet, advise, or teach the
duty, necessity, desirability, or propriety of overthrowing or
destroying any government in the united states by force or violence, or
by the assassination of any officer of any such government;
[pg ]"() with the intent to cause the overthrow or destruction of any
government in the united states, to print, publish, edit, issue,
circulate, sell, distribute, or publicly display any written or printed
matter advocating, advising, or teaching the duty, necessity,
desirability, or propriety of overthrowing or destroying any government
in the united states by force or violence;
"() to organize or help to organize any society, group, or assembly of
persons who teach, advocate, or encourage the overthrow or destruction
of any government in the united states by force or violence; or to be or
become a member of, or affiliate with, any such society, group, or
assembly of persons, knowing the purposes thereof.
"(b) for the purposes of this section, the term 'government in the
united states' means the government of the united states, the government
of any state, territory, or possession of the united states, the
government of the district of columbia, or the government of any
political subdivision of any of them."[]
the trial court had ruled that clause () of the act qualified both the
other clauses; and this construction was endorsed by the supreme court.
the judgment of the court sustaining the convictions against objections
raised under amendment i was supported by three different opinions.
chief justice vinson, speaking also for justices reed, burton and minton
emphasized the substantial character of the government's interest in
preventing its own overthrow by force. "indeed," said he, "this is the
ultimate value of any society, for if a society cannot protect its very
structure from armed internal attack, it must follow that no subordinate
value can be protected."[] the opinion continues: "if, then, this
interest may be protected, the literal problem which is presented is
what has been meant by the use of the phrase 'clear and present danger'
of the utterances bringing about the evil within the power of congress
to punish. obviously, the words cannot mean that before the government
may act, it must wait until the putsch is about to be executed, the
plans have been laid and the signal is awaited. if government is aware
that a group aiming at its overthrow is attempting to indoctrinate its
members and to commit them to a course whereby they will strike when the
leaders feel the circumstances permit, action by the government is
required. the argument that there is no need for government to concern
itself, for government is strong, it possesses ample powers to put down
a rebellion, it may defeat the revolution with ease needs no answer. for
that is not the question. certainly an attempt to overthrow the
government by force, even though doomed from the outset because of
inadequate numbers or power of the revolutionists, is a sufficient evil
for congress to prevent. the damage which such attempts create both
[pg ]physically and politically to a nation makes it impossible to measure
the validity in terms of the probability of success or the immediacy of
a successful attempt."[] the chief justice concluded this part of his
opinion by quoting from chief judge learned hand's opinion for the
circuit court of appeals in the same case, as follows: "'in each case
[courts] must ask whether the gravity of the evil, discounted by its
improbability, justifies such invasion of free speech as is necessary to
avoid the danger.'"[] in short, if the evil legislated against is
serious enough, advocacy of it in order to be punishable does not have
to be attended by a clear and present danger of success.
but at this point the chief justice appears to recoil from this abrupt
dismissal of the clear and present danger formula for the more serious
cases, and he makes a last moment effort to rescue the babe that he has
tossed out with the bathwater. he says: "as articulated by chief judge
hand, it is as succinct and inclusive as any other we might devise at
this time. it takes into consideration those factors which we deem
relevant, and relates their significances. more we cannot expect from
words. likewise, we are in accord with the court below, which affirmed
the trial court's finding that the requisite danger existed. the mere
fact that from the period  to  petitioners' activities did not
result in an attempt to overthrow the government by force and violence
is of course no answer to the fact that there was a group that was ready
to make the attempt. the formation by petitioners of such a highly
organized conspiracy, with rigidly disciplined members subject to call
when the leaders, these petitioners, felt that the time had come for
action, coupled with the inflammable nature of world conditions, similar
uprisings in other countries, and the touch-and-go nature of our
relations with countries with whom petitioners were in the very least
ideologically attuned, convince us that their convictions were justified
on this score. and this analysis disposes of the contention that a
conspiracy to advocate, as distinguished from the advocacy itself,
cannot be constitutionally restrained, because it comprises only the
preparation. it is the existence of the conspiracy which creates the
danger."[] his final position seems to be that, after all, the
question is one for judicial discretion. "when facts are found that
establish the violation of a statute, the protection against conviction
afforded by the first amendment is a matter of law. the doctrine that
there must be a clear and present danger of a substantive evil that
congress has a right to prevent is a judicial rule to be applied as a
matter of law by the courts."[]
[pg ]justice frankfurter's lengthy concurring opinion premises "the right of
a government to maintain its existence—self preservation." this, he
says, is "the most pervasive aspect of sovereignty," citing the
federalist no. , and certain cases.[] a little later he raises the
question, "but how are competing interests to be assessed?" and answers:
"full responsibility for the choice cannot be given to the courts.
courts are not representative bodies. they are not designed to be a good
reflex of a democratic society. their judgment is best informed, and
therefore most dependable, within narrow limits. their essential quality
is detachment, founded on independence. history teaches that the
independence of the judiciary is jeopardized when courts become
embroiled in the passions of the day and assume primary responsibility
in choosing between competing political, economic and social pressures.
primary responsibility for adjusting the interests which compete in the
situation before us of necessity belongs to the congress. the nature of
the power to be exercised by this court has been delineated in decisions
not charged with the emotional appeal of situations such as that now
before us. we are to set aside the judgment of those whose duty it is to
legislate only if there is no reasonable basis for it."[] but a
difficulty exists, to wit, in the clear and present danger doctrine. he
says: "in all fairness, the argument [of defendants] cannot be met by
reinterpreting the court's frequent use of 'clear' and 'present' to mean
an entertainable 'probability.' in giving this meaning to the phrase
'clear and present danger,' the court of appeals was fastidiously
confining the rhetoric of opinions to the exact scope of what was
decided by them. we have greater responsibility for having given
constitutional support, over repeated protests, to uncritical
libertarian generalities. nor is the argument of the defendants
adequately met by citing isolated cases. *** the case for the
defendants requires that their conviction be tested against the entire
body of our relevant decisions."[]
turning then to the cases justice frankfurter exclaims at last: "i must
leave to others the ungrateful task of trying to reconcile all these
decisions."[] the nearest precedent was gitlow v. new york.[]
here "we put our respect for the legislative judgment in terms which, if
they were accepted here, would make decision easy. *** but it would be
disingenuous to deny that the dissent in gitlow has been treated with
the respect usually accorded a decision."[] but the case at bar was a
horse of a different color. "in contrast, there is ample justification
for a legislative judgment that the conspiracy now before us is a
substantial threat to national order and security,"[] which seems to
be in essential agreement with the position of the chief justice and his
three associates. justice frankfurter concludes with a homily [pg ]on the
limitations which the nature of judicial power imposes, on the power of
judicial review. he says: "can we then say that the judgment congress
exercised was denied it by the constitution? can we establish a
constitutional doctrine which forbids the elected representatives of the
people to make this choice? can we hold that the first amendment
deprives congress of what it deemed necessary for the government's
protection? to make validity of legislation depend on judicial reading
of events still in the womb of time—a forecast, that is, of the outcome
of forces at best appreciated only with knowledge of the topmost secrets
of nations—is to charge the judiciary with duties beyond its equipment.
we do not expect courts to pronounce historic verdicts on bygone events.
even historians have conflicting views to this day on the origin and
conduct of the french revolution. it is as absurd to be confident that
we can measure the present clash of forces and their outcome as to ask
us to read history still enveloped in clouds of controversy. *** the
distinction which the founders drew between the court's duty to pass on
the power of congress and its complementary duty not to enter directly
the domain of policy is fundamental. but in its actual operation it is
rather subtle, certainly to the common understanding. our duty to
abstain from confounding policy with constitutionality demands
preceptive humility as well as self-restraint in not declaring
unconstitutional what in a judge's private judgment is unwise and even
dangerous."[]
justice jackson's opinion emphasizes the conspiratorial element of the
case, and is flatfooted in rejecting the 'clear and present danger' test
for this type of case. he writes: "the 'clear and present danger' test
was an innovation by mr. justice holmes in the schenck case,
reiterated and refined by him and mr. justice brandeis in later cases,
all arising before the era of world war ii revealed the subtlety and
efficacy of modernized revolutionary techniques used by totalitarian
parties. in those cases, they were faced with convictions under
so-called criminal syndicalism statutes aimed at anarchists but which,
loosely construed, had been applied to punish socialism, pacifism, and
left-wing ideologies, the charges often resting on far-fetched
inferences which, if true, would establish only technical or trivial
violations. they proposed 'clear and present danger' as a test for the
sufficiency of evidence in particular cases. i would save it,
unmodified, for application as a 'rule of reason' in the kind of case
for which it was devised. when the issue is criminality of a hot-headed
speech on a street corner, or circulation of a few incendiary pamphlets
or parading by some zealots behind a red flag, or refusal of a handful
of school children [pg ]to salute our flag, it is not beyond the capacity of
the judicial process to gather, comprehend, and weigh the necessary
materials for decision whether it is a clear and present danger of
substantive evil or a harmless letting off of steam. it is not a
prophecy, for the danger in such cases has matured by the time of trial
or it was never present. the test applies and had meaning where a
conviction is sought to be based on a speech or writing which does not
directly or explicitly advocate a crime but to which such tendency is
sought to be attributed by construction or by implication from external
circumstances. the formula in such cases favors freedoms that are vital
to our society, and, even if sometimes applied too generously, the
consequences cannot be grave. but its recent expansion has extended, in
particular to communists, unprecedented immunities. unless we are to
hold our government captive in a judge-made verbal trap, we must
approach the problem of a well-organized, nation-wide conspiracy, such
as i have described, as realistically as our predecessors faced the
trivialities that were being prosecuted until they were checked with a
rule of reason. i think reason is lacking for applying that test to this
case."[] and again, "what really is under review here is a conviction
of conspiracy, after a trial for conspiracy, on an indictment charging
conspiracy, brought under a statute outlawing conspiracy. with due
respect to my colleagues, they seem to me to discuss anything under the
sun except the law of conspiracy. one of the dissenting opinions even
appears to chide me for 'invoking the law of conspiracy.' as that is the
case before us, it may be more amazing that its reversal can be proposed
without even considering the law of conspiracy. the constitution does
not make conspiracy a civil right. the court has never before done so
and i think it should not do so now. conspiracies of labor unions, trade
associations, and news agencies have been condemned, although
accomplished, evidenced and carried out, like the conspiracy here,
chiefly by letter-writing, meetings, speeches and organization. indeed,
this court seems, particularly in cases where the conspiracy has
economic ends, to be applying its doctrines with increasing severity.
while i consider criminal conspiracy a dragnet device capable of
perversion into an instrument of injustice in the hands of a partisan or
complacent judiciary, it has an established place in our system of law,
and no reason appears for applying it only to concerted action claimed
to disturb interstate commerce and withholding it from those claimed to
undermine our whole government. ***"[]
the dissenters were justices black and douglas. the former reiterated
his position in bridges v. california; the latter italicized justice
brandeis' dictum in the whitney case: "if there be time to [pg ]expose
through discussion the falsehood and fallacies, to avert the evil by the
processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more speech, not
enforced silence."[] the answer would seem to be that education had
not in fact prevented the formation of the conspiracy for entering into
which the eleven defendants were convicted. if that be deemed a danger
at all, it was certainly a clear and present one. both dissenters, in
fact, ignore the conspiracy element.
in a series of cases[] in which certain organizations sued the
attorney general for declaratory or injunctive relief looking to the
deletion of their names from a list of organizations designated by him
to be subversive, the court reversed holdings of the courts below which
had denied relief. two justices thought the order not within the
president's executive order no. , which lays down a procedure for
the determination of the loyalty of federal employees or
would-be-employees. justice black thought the attorney general had
violated amendment i and that the president's order constituted a bill
of attainder. he and justices frankfurter and jackson also held that the
attorney general had violated due process of law in having failed to
give the petitioners notice and hearing. justice reed, with the
concurrence of the chief justice and justice minton, dissented,
asserting that the action of the court constituted an interference with
the discretion of the executive in the premises.
loyalty tests
the decision in dennis v. united states,[] taken in conjunction
with those in the two douds[] cases, put the clear and present danger
rule on the defensive in the field of federal legislation. substantially
contemporaneous holdings in the field of state action may reflect a
similar trend. in garner v. los angeles board,[] the court
sustained the right of a municipality to bar from employment persons who
advise, advocate, or teach the violent overthrow of the government, or
who are members of, or become affiliated with any group doing so, and to
exact a loyalty oath of its employees. in adler v. board of
education[] the court sustained the civil service law of new york as
implemented by the so-called feinberg law of .[] the former makes
ineligible in any public school any member of an organization advocating
the overthrow of government by force, violence, or any unlawful means.
the feinberg law requires the board of regents of the state () to adopt
and enforce rules for the removal of ineligible persons; () to
promulgate a list of banned [pg ]organizations; () to make membership in
any such organization prima facie evidence of disqualification for
employment in the public schools. referring to the garner case above,
justice minton, for the court, said: "we adhere to that case. a teacher
works in a sensitive area in the schoolroom. there he shapes the
attitude of young minds towards the society in which they live. in this,
the state has a vital concern. it must preserve the integrity of the
schools. that the school authorities have the right and the duty to
screen the officials, teachers, and employees as to their fitness to
maintain the integrity of the schools as a part of ordered society,
cannot be doubted. one's associates, past and present, as well as one's
conduct, may properly be considered in determining fitness and loyalty.
from time immemorial, one's reputation has been determined in part by
the company he keeps. in the employment of officials and teachers of the
school system, the state may very properly inquire into the company they
keep, and we know of no rule, constitutional or otherwise, that prevents
the state, when determining the fitness and loyalty of such persons,
from considering the organizations and persons with whom they
associate."[]
group libel
in  in beauharnais v. illinois[] the court sustained an
illinois statute which makes it a crime to exhibit in a public place any
publication which "portrays depravity, criminality, unchastity, or lack
of virtue of a class of citizens, of any race, color, creed or religion"
or which "exposes the citizens of any race, color, creed or religion to
contempt, derision, or obloquy." the act was treated by the state
[pg ]supreme court as a form of criminal libel, with the result that defense
by truth of the utterance was not under illinois law available unless
the publication was also shown to have been made "with good motives and
with justifiable ends." so construed, the court held, the act did not
violate liberty of speech and press as guaranteed to the states by
amendment xiv. said justice frankfurter:
"if an utterance directed at an individual may be the object of criminal
sanctions, we cannot deny to a state power to punish the same utterance
directed at a defined group, unless we can say that this is a wilful and
purposeless restriction unrelated to the peace and well-being of the
state."[] pointing then to illinois' bad record in the matter of race
riots, he continued: "in the face of this history and its frequent
obligato of extreme racial and religious propaganda, we would deny
experience to say that the illinois legislature was without reason in
seeking ways to curb false or malicious defamation of racial and
religious groups, made in public places and by means calculated to have
a powerful emotional impact on those to whom it was presented. 'there
are limits to the exercise of these liberties [of speech and of the
press]. the danger in these times from the coercive activities of those
who in the delusion of racial or religious conceit would incite violence
and breaches of the peace in order to deprive others of their equal
right to the exercise of their liberties, is emphasized by events
familiar to all. these and other transgressions of those limits the
states appropriately may punish.' *** it is not within our competence
to confirm or deny claims of social scientists as to the dependence of
the individual on the position of his racial or religious group in the
community. it would, however, be arrant dogmatism, quite outside the
scope of our authority in passing on the powers of a state, for us to
deny that the illinois legislature may warrantably believe that a man's
job and his educational opportunities and the dignity accorded him may
depend as much on the reputation of the racial and religious group to
which he willy-nilly belongs, as on his own merits. this being so, we
are precluded from saying that speech concededly punishable when
immediately directed at individuals cannot be outlawed if directed at
groups with whose position and esteem in society the affiliated
individual may be inextricably involved."[]
[pg ]
by legislation adopted in  and  congress has specified certain
conditions upon which a publication shall be admitted to the valuable
second-class mailing privilege, one of which provides as follows: except
as otherwise provided by law, the conditions upon which a publication
shall be admitted to the second-class are as follows: "*** fourth.
it must be originated and published for the dissemination of information
of a public character, or devoted to literature, the sciences, arts, or
some special industry, and having a legitimate list of subscribers;
*** nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to admit to the
second-class rate regular publications designed primarily for
advertising purposes, or for free circulation, or for circulation at
nominal rates."[] in hannegan v. esquire, inc.,[] the court
sustained an injunction against an order of the postmaster general which
suspended a permit to esquire magazine on the ground that it did not
"contribute to the public good and the public welfare." said justice
douglas for the court: "*** a requirement that literature or art
conform to some norm prescribed by an official smacks of an ideology
foreign to our system. the basic values implicit in the requirements of
the fourth condition can be served only by uncensored distribution of
literature. from the multitude of competing offerings the public will
pick and choose. what seems to one to be trash may have for others
fleeting or even enduring values. but to withdraw the second-class rate
from this publication today because its contents seemed to one official
not good for the public [pg ]would sanction withdrawal of the second-class
rate tomorrow from another periodical whose social or economic views
seemed harmful to another official. the validity of the obscenity laws
is recognized that the mails may not be used to satisfy all tastes, no
matter how perverted. but congress has left the postmaster general with
no power to prescribe standards for the literature or the art which a
mailable periodical disseminates."[] in donaldson v. read
magazine,[] however, the court sustained a court order forbidding the
delivery of mail and money orders to a magazine conducting a puzzle
contest which the postmaster-general had found to be fraudulent. freedom
of the press, said the court, does not include the right to raise money
by deception of the public.
the rights of assembly and petition
the right of petition took its rise from the modest provision made for
it in chapter  of magna carta ().[] to this meagre beginning
parliament itself and its procedures in the enactment of legislation,
the equity jurisdiction of the lord chancellor, and proceedings against
the crown by "petition of right" are all in some measure traceable.
thus, while the king summoned parliament for the purpose of supply, the
latter—but especially the house of commons—petitioned the king for a
redress of grievances as its price for meeting the financial needs of
the monarch; and as it increased in importance it came to claim the
right to dictate the form of the king's reply, until in  commons
boldly declared themselves to be "as well assenters as petitioners." two
hundred and fifty years later, in , commons further resolved that
every commoner in england possessed "the inherent right to prepare and
present petitions" to it "in case of grievance," and of commons "to
receive the same" and to judge whether they were "fit" to be received.
finally chapter  of the bill of rights of  asserted the right of
the subjects to petition the king and "all commitments and prosecutions
for such petitioning to be illegal."[]
[pg ]historically, therefore, the right of petition is the primary right, the
right peaceably to assemble a subordinate and instrumental right, as if
amendment i read; "the right of the people peaceably to assemble" in
order to "petition the government."[] today, however, the right of
peaceable assembly is, in the language of the court, "cognate to those
of free speech and free press and is equally fundamental *** [it] is
one that cannot be denied without violating those fundamental principles
of liberty and justice which lie at the base of all civil and political
institutions,—principles which the fourteenth amendment embodies in the
general terms of its due process clause. *** the holding of meetings
for peaceable political action cannot be proscribed. those who assist in
the conduct of such meetings cannot be branded as criminals on that
score. the question *** is not as to the auspices under which the
meeting is held but as to its purposes; not as to the relation of the
speakers, but whether their utterances transcend the bounds of the
freedom of speech which the constitution protects."[] furthermore,
the right of petition has expanded. it is no longer confined to demands
for "a redress of grievances," in any accurate meaning of these words,
but comprehends demands for an exercise by the government of its powers
in furtherance of the interests and prosperity of the petitioners, and
of their views on politically contentious matters.
the right of petition recognized by amendment i first came into
prominence in the early 's, when petitions against slavery in the
district of columbia began flowing into congress in a constantly
increasing stream, which reached its climax in the winter of .
finally on january , , the house adopted as a standing rule: "that
no petition, memorial, resolution, or other paper praying the abolition
of slavery in the district of columbia, or any state or territories of
the united states in which it now exists, shall be received by this
house, or entertained in any way whatever." thanks to the efforts of
john quincy adams this rule was repealed five years later, after adams'
death.[] for many years now the rules of the house of representatives
have provided that members having petitions to present may deliver them
to the clerk and the petitions, except such as, in the judgment of the
speaker, are of an obscene or insulting character, shall be entered on
the journal and the clerk shall furnish [pg ]a transcript of such record to
the official reporters of debates for publication in the record.[]
even so petitions for the repeal of the espionage and sedition laws and
against military measures for recruiting resulted, in world war i, in
imprisonment.[] processions for the presentation of petitions in the
united states have not been particularly successful. in  general
coxey of ohio organized armies of unemployed to march on washington and
present petitions, only to see their leaders arrested for unlawfully
walking on the grass of the capitol. the march of the veterans on
washington in  demanding bonus legislation was defended as an
exercise of the right of petition. the administration, however, regarded
it as a threat against the constitution and called out the army to expel
the bonus marchers and burn their camps. for legal regulation of
lobbying activities, see below.
the right of assembly was first passed upon by the supreme court in 
in the famous case of united states v. cruikshank et al.[] the case
arose on indictments under section  of the so-called enforcement act of
may , ,[] which read as follows: "that if two or more persons
shall band or conspire together, or go in disguise upon the public
highway, or upon the premises of another, with intent to violate any
provision of this act, or to injure, oppress, threaten, or intimidate
any citizen, with intent to prevent or hinder his free exercise and
enjoyment of any right or privilege granted or secured to him by the
constitution or laws of the united states, or because of his having
exercised the same, such persons shall be held guilty of felony, etc."
the indictments charged the defendants with having deprived certain
citizens of their right to assemble together peaceably with other
citizens "for a peaceful and lawful purpose." the court held that this
language was insufficient inasmuch as it did not specify that the
attempted assembly was for a purpose connected with the national
government. as to the right of assembly the court, speaking by chief
justice waite, went on to declare: "the right of the people peaceably to
assemble for the purpose of petitioning congress for a redress of
grievances, or for anything else connected with the powers or the duties
of the national government, is an attribute of national citizenship,
and, as such, under the protection of, and guaranteed by, the united
states. the very idea of a government, republican in form, implies a
right on the part of its citizens to meet peaceably for [pg ]consultation in
respect to public affairs and to petition for a redress of grievances.
if it had been alleged in these counts that the object of the defendants
was to prevent a meeting for such a purpose, the case would have been
within the statute, and within the scope of the sovereignty of the
united states. such, however, is not the case. the offence, as stated in
the indictment, will be made out, if it be shown that the object of the
conspiracy was to prevent a meeting for any lawful purpose
whatever."[]
hague v. committee of industrial organization
in this case[] the question at issue was the validity of a jersey
city ordinance requiring the obtaining of a permit for a public assembly
in or upon the public streets, highways, public parks, or public
buildings of the city and authorizing the director of public safety, for
the purpose of preventing riots, disturbances, or disorderly assemblage,
to refuse to issue a permit when after investigation of all the facts
and circumstances pertinent to the application he believes it to be
proper to refuse to issue a permit. two justices held that in the
circumstances of the case the ordinance violated the right of certain
citizens of the united states to assemble to discuss certain privileges
which they enjoyed as such, to wit, their rights and privileges under
the national labor relations act.[] said justice roberts, expressing
this point of view: "the privilege of a citizen of the united states to
use the streets and parks for communication of views on national
questions may be regulated in the interest of all; it is not absolute,
but relative, and must be exercised in subordination to the general
comfort and convenience, and in consonance with peace and good order;
but it must not, in the guise of regulation, be abridged or denied. we
think the court below was right in holding the ordinance quoted in note
 void upon its face. it does not make comfort or convenience in the use
of streets or parks the standard of official action. it enables the
director of safety to refuse a permit on his mere opinion that such
refusal will prevent 'riots, disturbances or [pg ]disorderly assemblage.' it
can thus, as the record discloses, be made the instrument of arbitrary
suppression of free expression of views on national affairs for the
prohibition of all speaking will undoubtedly 'prevent' such
eventualities. but uncontrolled official suppression of the privilege
cannot be made a substitute for the duty to maintain order in connection
with the exercise of the right."[] two other justices invoked also
the due process clause of amendment xiv, thereby claiming the right of
assembly for aliens as well as citizens. said justice stone, who
expressed this view: "i think respondents' right to maintain it does not
depend on their citizenship and cannot rightly be made to turn on the
existence or non-existence of a purpose to disseminate information about
the national labor relations act. it is enough that petitioners have
prevented respondents from holding meetings and disseminating
information whether for the organization of labor unions or for any
other lawful purpose."[] both justices were in agreement that freedom
of speech and freedom of assembly were claimable only by natural
persons, and not by corporations.[] two justices dissented on the
basis of davis v. massachusetts.[]
in bridges v. california[] it was held that a telegram addressed to
the secretary of labor strongly criticizing the action of a state court
in a pending case was privileged under this amendment as an exercise of
the right of petition. in thomas v. collins[] a statute requiring
registration before solicitation of union membership was found to
violate the right of peaceable assembly. but a closely divided court
subsequently sustained an order of a state employment relations board
forbidding work stoppages by the calling of special union meetings
during working hours.[] finally, a divided court held june , ,
that a combination to break up by force and threats of force of a
meeting called for the purpose of adopting a resolution against the
marshall plan did not afford a right of action against the conspirators
under the ku klux act of april , .[] while the complaint
alleged that the conspiracy was entered into for the purpose of
depriving the plaintiffs as citizens of the united states of their right
"peaceably to assemble for the purpose of discussing and communicating
upon national public issues," the ku klux act was found not to [pg ]extend
to violations of that right except by state acts depriving persons of
their rights under the fourteenth amendment. but the court, perhaps
significantly, left open the question whether congress can protect such
rights against private action. "it is not for this court," remarked
justice jackson sententiously, "to compete with congress or attempt to
replace it as the nation's law-making body."[]
today lobbying is frequently regarded as the most important expression
of the right of petition. during the last half century lobbying has
reached tremendous proportions; and there have been four congressional
investigations of such activities, the latest by a committee of the
house of representatives. meantime, in  congress passed the federal
regulation of lobbying act, under which more than , lobbyists have
registered and  organizations report lobbying contributions and
expenditures.[] recently doubts have been cast upon the
constitutionality of this statute by two decisions of lower federal
courts sitting in the district of columbia. according to the district
court therein, to subject a person, whose "principal purpose *** is to
aid" in the defeat or passage of legislation and who violates this act
by failing to file a detailed accounting, to a penalty entailing a
three-year prohibition from lobbying is to deprive such person of his
constitutional rights of freedom of speech and petition.[] insofar as
congress legitimately may regulate lobbying, its powers in relation
thereto have been declared not to extend to "indirect lobbying by the
pressure of public opinion on the congress." the latter was deemed to be
"the healthy essence of the democratic process."[]
notes
[] ibid. .
[] fiske v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] cantwell v. connecticut,  u.s.  ().
[] near v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] de jonge v. oregon,  u.s.  ().
[] annals of congress,  (-).
[] records of the united states senate, sept. , , united
states archives, cited in appellees brief in mccollum v. board of
education,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid.
[] ibid.
[] joseph story, commentaries on the constitution, §
[] ibid. §.
[] principles of constitutional law, -, d ed. ().
[] saul k. padover, the complete jefferson, - ().
[] ibid. . in his d inaugural address jefferson expressed
a very different, and presumably more carefully considered, opinion upon
the purpose of amendment i: "in matters of religion, i have considered
that its free exercise is placed by the constitution independent of the
powers of of the general government." this was said three years after
the danbury letter.  messages and papers of the presidents, 
(richardson ed. ).
[] everson v. board of education,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] mccollum v. board of education,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -. justice frankfurter's principal figure in
the fight against sectarianism is horace mann, who was secretary of the
massachusetts board of education, -. mann, however, strongly
resented the charge that he was opposed to religious instruction in the
public schools. "it is true that mr. mann stood strongly for a 'type of
school with instruction adapted to democratic and national ends.' but it
is not quite just to him to contrast this type of school with the school
adapted to religious ends, without defining terms. horace mann was
opposed to sectarian doctrinal instruction in the schools, but he
repeatedly urged the teaching of the elements of religion common to all
of the christian sects. he took a firm stand against the idea of a
purely secular education, and on one occasion said he was in favor of
religious instruction 'to the extremest verge to which it can be carried
without invading those rights of conscience which are established by the
laws of god, and guaranteed to us by the constitution of the state.' at
another time he said that he regarded hostility to religion in the
schools as the greatest crime he could commit. lest his name should go
down in history as that of one who had attempted to drive religious
instruction from the schools, he devoted several pages in his final
report—the twelfth—to a statement in which he denied the charges of
his enemies." raymond b. culver, horace mann on religion in the
massachusetts public schools,  ().
[]  u.s. , ff. ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid., , .
[] zorach v. clauson,  n.y. , -;  n.e. d
[] zorach v. clauson,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid., pp. -. justices black, frankfurter, and
jackson dissented.
[] doremus v. board of education,  u.s.  ().
[] three dissenters, speaking through justice douglas, argued
that, since the new jersey supreme court had taken the case and decided
it on its merits, the united states supreme court was bound to do the
same. ibid. -.
[] bradfield v. roberts,  u.s.  ().
[] quick bear v. leupp,  u.s.  ().
[] cochran v. louisiana state board of education,  u.s.
[] everson v. board of education,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.c.a. §§-;  stat.  ().
[] davis v. benson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cantwell v. connecticut,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] pierce v. society of sisters of holy names,  u.s. 
[] reynolds v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] davis v. beason,  u.s. ,  ().
[] reynolds v. united states  u.s.  (); davis v.
beason,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] minersville school dist. v. gobitis,  u.s. 
[] jones v. opelika,  u.s.  ().
[] jones v. opelika,  u.s.  (); murdock v.
pennsylvania,  u.s.  ().
[] board of education v. barnette,  u.s.  (). on
the same day the court held that a state may not forbid the distribution
of literature urging and advising, on religious grounds, that citizens
refrain from saluting the flag. taylor v. mississippi,  u.s. 
[] martin v. struthers,  u.s.  ().
[] prince v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ().
[] kovacs v. cooper,  u.s.  ().
[] kunz v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] niemotko v. maryland,  u.s.  ().
[] feiner v. new york,  u.s.  ().
see p. . [transcriber's note: there is
no mention of the feiner case on p. .]
[] arver v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). cf. girouard v. united states,
 u.s.  () holding "an alien who is willing to take the oath of
allegiance and to serve in the army as a non-combatant but who, because
of religious scruples, is unwilling to bear arms in defense of this
country may be admitted to citizenship ***", overruling united states
v. schwimmer,  u.s.  () and united states v. macintosh,
[] commentaries, vol. iv, -.
[] justice frankfurter in dennis v. united states,  u.s.
[] ibid. ; citing robertson v. baldwin,  u.s. ,
[] ibid. ; citing gompers v. united states,  u.s.
"while the courts have from an early date taken a hand in crystallizing
american conceptions of freedom of speech and press into law, it is
scarcely in the manner or to the extent which they are frequently
assumed to have done. the great initial problem in this realm of
constitutional liberty was to get rid of the common law of 'seditious
libel' which operated to put persons in authority beyond the reach of
public criticism. the first step in this direction was taken in the
famous, or infamous, sedition act of , which admitted the defense of
truth in prosecution brought under it, and submitted the general issue
of defendant's guilt to the jury. but the substantive doctrine of
'seditious libel' the act of  still retained, a circumstance which
put several critics of president adams in jail, and thereby considerably
aided jefferson's election as president in . once in office,
nevertheless, jefferson himself appealed to the discredited principle
against partisan critics. writing his friend governor mckean of
pennsylvania in  anent such critics, jefferson said: 'the
federalists having failed in destroying freedom of the press by their
gag-law, seem to have attacked in an opposite direction; that is by
pushing its licentiousness and its lying to such a degree of
prostitution as to deprive it of all credit. *** this is a dangerous
state of things, and the press ought to be restored to its credibility
if possible. the restraints provided by the laws of the states are
sufficient for this, if applied. and i have, therefore, long thought
that a few prosecutions of the most prominent offenders would have a
wholesome effect in restoring the integrity of the presses. not a
general prosecution, for that would look like persecution; but a
selected one.' works (ford ed., ), ix -.
"in the memorial edition of jefferson's works this letter is not
included; nor apparently was it known to the honorable josephus daniels,
whose enthusiastic introduction to one of these volumes makes jefferson
out to have been the father of freedom of speech and press in this
country, if not throughout the world. the sober truth is that it was
that archenemy of jefferson and of democracy, alexander hamilton, who
made the greatest single contribution toward rescuing this particular
freedom as a political weapon from the coils and toils of the common
law, and that in connection with one of jefferson's 'selected
prosecutions.' i refer to hamilton's many-times quoted formula in the
croswell case in : 'the liberty of the press is the right to publish
with impunity, truth, with good motives, for justifiable ends though
reflecting on government, magistracy, or individuals.' people v.
croswell,  johns (ny) . equipped with this brocard our state courts
working in co-operation with juries, whose attitude usually reflected
the robustiousness of american political discussion before the civil
war, gradually wrote into the common law of the states the principle of
'qualified privilege,' which is a notification to plaintiffs in libel
suits that if they are unlucky enough to be officeholders or office
seekers, they must be prepared to shoulder the almost impossible burden
of showing defendant's 'special malice.' cooley, constitutional
limitations, chap. xii: samuel a. dawson, freedom of the press, a
study of the doctrine of 'qualified privilege' (columbia univ. press,
)." edward s. corwin, liberty against government. - fn.
(l.s.u. press, ).
[] patterson v. colorado,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. 
[] prudential ins. co. v. cheek,  u.s. ,  ().
[] schenck v. united states,  u.s.  (); and see
below.
[] see justice brandeis concurring opinion in whitney v.
california,  u.s.  (); and cases reviewed below.
[] fiske v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] fiske v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] stromberg v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] de jonge v. oregon,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. . it should be noted that justice holmes couples
with his invocation of the clear and present danger test in his dissent
in this case the contention that rightly construed the act of congress
involved (the espionage act of may , ;  stat. ) required that
defendant's intent be specifically proved. he wrote: "i am aware of
course that the word intent as vaguely used in ordinary legal discussion
means no more than knowledge at the time of the act that the
consequences said to be intended will ensue. even less than that will
satisfy the general principle of civil and criminal liability. a man may
have to pay damages, may be sent to prison, at common law might be
hanged, if at the time of his act he knew facts from which common
experience showed that the consequences would follow, whether he
individually could foresee them or not. but, when words are used
exactly, a deed is not done with intent to produce a consequence unless
that consequence is the aim of the deed. it may be obvious, and obvious
to the actor, that the consequence will follow, and he may be liable for
it even if he regrets it, but he does not do the act with intent to
produce it unless to aim to produce it is the proximate motive of the
specific act, although there may be some deeper motive behind. it seems
to me that this statute must be taken to use its words in a strict and
accurate sense."  u.s. at -. in the holmes-pollock letters this
is the main point discussed by the two correspondents regarding the
abrams case; the clear and present danger doctrine is not mentioned. 
holmes-pollock letters, , , , , -, , .
[] ibid. . see also to the same effect: pierce v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . justice holmes presented a dissenting opinion
for himself and justice brandeis which contains a curious note of
fatalism. he said: "if what i think the correct test is applied, it is
manifest that there was no present danger of an attempt to overthrow the
government by force on the part of the admittedly small minority who
shared the defendant's views. it is said that this manifesto was more
than a theory, that it was an incitement. every idea is an incitement.
it offers itself for belief, and, if believed, it is acted on unless
some other belief outweighs it, or some failure of energy stifles the
movement at its birth. the only difference between the expression of an
opinion and an incitement in the narrower sense is the speaker's
enthusiasm for the result. eloquence may set fire to reason. but
whatever may be thought of the redundant discourse before us, it had no
chance of starting a present conflagration. if, in the long run, the
beliefs expressed in proletarian dictatorship are destined to be
accepted by the dominant forces of the community, the only meaning of
free speech is that they should be given their chance and have their
way." ibid. .
[] ibid. , . apparently this means that the ultimate
test of the constitutionality of legislation restricting freedom of
utterance is whether there is still sufficient time to educate the
utterers out of their mistaken frame of mind, and the final say on this
necessarily recondite matter rests with the supreme court! justice
brandeis also asserts ( u.s. at ) that there is a distinction
between "advocacy" and "incitement," but fails to adduce any supporting
authority.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] cantwell v. connecticut,  u.s. ,  ().
[] stromberg v. california,  u.s. ,  ().
[] fox v. washington,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gitlow v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] terminiello v. chicago,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. . dissenting opinions were written by chief
justice vinson, justice frankfurter (with whom justices jackson and
burton concurred) and justice jackson, (with whom justice burton
agreed).
[] ibid. -. anent this finding, justice douglas, in
his dissent, declared that: "public assemblies and public speech occupy
an important role in american life. one high function of the police is
to protect these lawful gatherings so that the speakers may exercise
their constitutional rights. when unpopular causes are sponsored from
the public platform, there will commonly be mutterings and unrest and
heckling from the crowd. *** but those extravagances ***, do not
justify penalizing the speaker by depriving him of the platform or by
punishing him for his conduct. *** if *** the police throw their
weight on the side of those who would break up the meetings, the police
become the new censors of speech. police censorship has all the vices of
the censorship from city halls which we have repeatedy [sic] struck
down."—ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[] musser v. utah,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . this dissent probably marks the climax of the
clear and present danger doctrine.
"on march , , members of the vice squad of the philadelphia police
department, at the direction of inspector craig ellis, head of the vice
squad, commenced a series of mass raids upon book stores and booksellers
in philadelphia. inspector ellis gave his men a list of books that in
his opinion were obscene, and directed them to seize the books wherever
found. fifty-four booksellers were raided, and nearly twelve hundred
copies of the books were confiscated.
"these raids were remarkable not only because of the scale on which they
were conducted, but in several other respects. first, they were directed
in major part against books written by authors in the forefront of
american literature and published by some of the leading publishers in
america. second, the raids were conducted and the books were confiscated
without warrants of search or seizure or court order of any kind. third,
the list of books to be seized was compiled by inspector ellis and a
patrolman in his office, without consultation with the district
attorney's office or the obtaining of any legal opinion as to whether
the books were obscene under the pennsylvania statute.
"for once the publishers took the offensive. houghton mifflin company,
publisher of raintree county, alfred a. knopf, inc., publisher of
never love a stranger, and the vanguard press, inc., publisher of
books by james t. farrell and calder willingham among those seized,
commenced actions in the federal district court in philadelphia to
restrain further police seizures of these books and to recover damages
from the police officers for their unlawful acts. in these two actions
the authors harold robbins and james t. farrell, as well as charles
praissman, a courageous bookseller whose stores had been raided, joined
the publishers as parties plaintiff. the district attorney of
philadelphia countered by commencing criminal proceedings against five
of the booksellers whose stores had been raided, and on june , 
the grand jury, upon presentation of the district attorney, indicted the
booksellers on a charge of having violated the pennsylvania statute
prohibiting the sale of obscene books.
"in the meantime the federal court cases brought by the publishers has
come to trial before judge guy k. bard, and at the conclusion of the
trials judge bard had enjoined further seizures of the plaintiff's
books, as well as police invasion of praissman's stores or seizure of
his books without a warrant. at the time of this writing, the federal
court cases have not been finally decided.
"on january ,  the criminal cases came on for trial before judge
curtis bok of the pennsylvania court of quarter sessions. the defendants
pleaded not guilty and waived trial by jury. they stipulated that at the
times and places mentioned in the indictments they had had possession of
the books for the purpose of offering them for sale to the public. the
books were then placed in evidence, and the prosecution rested its case.
the defendants 'demurred to the evidence,' the effect of which was to
raise the issue of whether the court, in the light of the constitutional
guaranty of freedom of the press, could hold, beyond a reasonable doubt,
that the books before it were obscene within the meaning of the
pennsylvania obscenity statute." introductory note to a republication by
alfred knopf inc. of judge bok's opinion in commonwealth v. gordon et
al.,  d & c (pa.)  ().
on march ,  judge bok sustained the demurrers and entered judgment
in favor of the defendants. the opinion which accompanies his judgment
pivots in part on the clear and present danger rule. it reads: "the only
clear and present danger to be prevented by section  that will
satisfy both the constitution and the current customs of our era is the
imminence of the commission of criminal behavior resulting from the
reading of a book. publication alone can have no such automatic effect."
this obviously overlooks the primary purpose of governmental
interference with the distribution of "obscene literature," namely to
protect immature minds from contamination. dealing with this point judge
bok protests against putting "the entire reading public at the mercy of
the adolescent mind." should, on the other hand, the adolescent mind be
put at the mercy of the uninhibited reading tastes of an elderly federal
judge?
[] thornhill v. alabama,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] drivers union v. meadowmoor co.,  u.s.  ();
see also hotel and restaurant employees' alliance v. board,  u.s.
[] drivers union v. meadowmoor co.,  u.s. , 
[] american federation of labor v. swing,  u.s. 
(); bakery and pastry drivers v. wohl,  u.s.  ();
cafeteria employees union v. gus angelos,  u.s.  ().
[] teamsters union v. hanke,  u.s. ,  ().
[] giboney v. empire storage co.,  u.s.  ().
[] building service union v. gazzam,  u.s.  ().
[] hughes v. superior court,  u.s.  ().
[] carpenters union v. ritter's cafe,  u.s. , 
[] giboney v. empire storage co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , , citing fox v. washington,  u.s. ,
, which predates any suggestion of the clear and present danger
formula. see above.
[] lincoln union v. northwestern co.,  u.s.  ();
a.f. of l. v. american sash co., ibid., .
[] auto workers v. wis. board,  u.s.  (). in
teamsters union v. hanke,  u.s.  (), injunctions by state
courts against picketing of a self-employer's place of business to
compel him to adopt a union shop were sustained.
[] thomas v. collins,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] patterson v. colorado,  u.s.  (). cf.
toledo newspaper co. v. united states,  u.s.  () in which
the court affirmed a judgment imposing a fine for contempt of court on
an editor who had criticized the action of a federal judge in a pending
case. the majority held that such conviction did not violate the first
amendment. justices holmes and brandeis dissented on the ground that the
proceedings did not come within the applicable federal statute, but did
not discuss the constitutional issue. this decision was overruled in nye
v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] davis v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] kovacs v. cooper,  u.s.  ().
[] public utilities commission v. pollak,  u.s. 
(). the decision overruled the united states court of appeals for
the district of columbia. here judge edgerton, speaking for himself and
two associates, said: "exploitation of this audience through assault on
the unavertible sense of hearing is a new phenomenon. it raises 'issues
that were not implied in the means of communication known or
contemplated by franklin and jefferson and madison.' but the bill of
rights, as appellants say in their brief, can keep up with anything an
advertising man or an electronics engineer can think of. ***
"if transit obliged its passengers to read what it liked or get off the
car, invasion of their freedom would be obvious. transit obliges them to
hear what it likes or get off the car. freedom of attention, which
forced listening destroys, is a part of liberty essential to individuals
and to society. the supreme court has said that the constitutional
guarantee of liberty 'embraces not only the right of a person to be free
from physical restraint, but the right to be free in the enjoyment of
all his faculties ***.' one who is subjected to forced listening is
not free in the enjoyment of all his faculties." he quoted with approval
justice reed's statement in kovacs v. cooper, "the right of free
speech is guaranteed every citizen that he may reach the minds of
willing listeners."— f. d ,  ().
[] lovell v. griffin,  u.s.  (); schneider v.
state,  u.s.  (); largent v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[] schneider v. state,  u.s.  (); jamison v.
texas,  u.s.  ().
[] marsh v. alabama,  u.s.  ().
[] tucker v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[] valentine v. chrestensen,  u.s.  ().
[] martin v. struthers,  u.s.  ().
[] breard v. alexandria,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. ,  (). see below.
[] near v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] drivers union v. meadowmoor co.,  u.s.  ();
carpenters union v. ritter's cafe,  u.s.  ().
[] lovell v. griffin,  u.s. ,  ().
[] chaplinsky v. new hampshire,  u.s.  (); cox
v. new hampshire,  u.s.  ().
[] lovell v. griffin,  u.s.  (); hague v.
c.i.o.,  u.s. ,  (); schneider v. state,  u.s. 
(); cantwell v. connecticut,  u.s.  (); largent v.
texas,  u.s.  (); thomas v. collins,  u.s. , 
(); saia v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] radio comm'n v. nelson bros. co.,  u.s.  ();
communications comm'n. v. n.b.c.,  u.s.  ().
[] mutual film corp. v. ohio indus'l comm.,  u.s. ,
[] ibid. .
[] joseph burstyn, inc. v. wilson,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . justice frankfurter, concurring for himself
and justices jackson and burton, elaborates upon the vagueness of
connotation of the new york court's use of the word "sacrilegious."
see appendix to his opinion, ibid. -. justice reed, in his
concurring opinion, suggests that the court will now have the duty of
examining "the facts of the refusal of a license in each case to
determine whether the principles of the first amendment have been
honored." ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] palko v. connecticut,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. carolene products co.,  u.s. ,
, fn.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] kovacs v. cooper,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] brinegar v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] terminiello v. chicago,  u.s. ,  ().
[] kunz v. new york,  u.s. , .
[] ibid. . in a footnote justice jackson points to the
peculiarly protected position of the court today, thanks to ch. ,
public law , st congress, approved august , . this makes it
unlawful to "make any harangue or oration, or utter loud, threatening,
or abusive language in the supreme court building or grounds." §. it
also forbids display of any "flag, banner, or device designed or adapted
to bring into public notice any party, organization, or movement." §.
moreover, it authorizes the marshal to "prescribe such regulations
approved by the chief justice of the united states, as may be deemed
necessary for the adequate protection of the supreme court building and
grounds and of persons and property therein, and for the maintenance of
suitable grounds." §. violation of these provisions or regulations is
an offense punishable by fine and imprisonment.
[] grosjean v. american press co.,  u.s. , 
[] ibid. .
[] ibid.
[] murdock v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  (); jones
v. opelika,  u.s.  (); follett v. mccormick,  u.s. 
[] associated press v. united states,  u.s.  (). a
newspaper publisher who enjoyed a substantial monopoly of mass
distribution of news was enjoined from refusing advertising from persons
advertising over a competing radio station. the court sustained the
injunction against the objection that it violated freedom of the press,
holding that appellant was guilty of attempting to monopolize interstate
commerce. lorain journal v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] associated press v. labor board,  u.s. , 
[] okla. press pub. co. v. walling,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid: .
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. c.i.o.,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  § ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] united public workers v. mitchell,  u.s.  ().
[] oklahoma v. united states civil serv. comm.,  u.s.
[] schenck v. united states,  u.s.  (); frohwerk
v. united states,  u.s.  (); debs v. united states, 
u.s.  (); abrams v. united states,  u.s.  ();
schaefer v. united states,  u.s.  (); pierce v. united
states,  u.s.  (); cf. gilbert v. minnesota  u.s. 
(); hartzel v.. united states,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat. ,  (); "taft-hartley act."
[]  u.s.  (). answering in  the objection of a
pensioner to the terms of an act under which he received his pension
from the government, the court answered: "pensions are the bounties of
the government, which congress has the right to give, withhold,
distribute or recall, at its discretion." united states v. teller, 
u.s. , . can it be doubted that congress has power to repeal at any
time the protection which present legislation affords organized labor?
[] dennis v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. ; citing  f. (d) at .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s. , ; citing  u.s. , -.
[] anti-fascist committee v. mcgrath,  u.s.  ()
heads the list.
[]  u.s. ; ibid.  ().
[] new york laws, , c. .
[]  u.s. , . justice frankfurter dissented on
jurisdictional grounds. justices black and douglas attacked the merits
of the decision. said the latter: "what happens under this law is
typical of what happens in a police state. teachers are under constant
surveillance; their pasts are combed for signs of disloyalty; their
utterances are watched for clues to dangerous thoughts. a pall is cast
over the classrooms. there can be no real academic freedom in that
environment. where suspicion fills the air and holds scholars in line
for fear of their jobs, there can be no exercise of the free intellect.
supineness and dogmatism take the place of inquiry. a 'party line'—as
dangerous as the 'party line' of the communists—lays hold. it is the
'party line' of the orthodox view, of the conventional thought, of the
accepted approach. a problem can no longer be pursued with impunity to
its edges. fear stalks the classroom. the teacher is no longer a
stimulant to adventurous thinking; she becomes instead a pipe line for
safe and sound information. a deadening dogma takes the place of free
inquiry. instruction tends to become sterile; pursuit of knowledge is
discouraged; discussion often leaves off where it should begin." ibid.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid, - passim. justice douglas, dissenting,
urged the "absolute" character of freedom of speech and deplored recent
cases in which, he asserted, the court "has engrafted the right of
regulation onto the first amendment by placing in the hands of the
legislative branch the right to regulate 'within reasonable length' the
right of free speech. this to me is an ominous and alarming trend."
ibid. . justices black, reed and jackson also dissented. justice
jackson's dissenting opinion is characteristically paradoxical: "an
illinois act, construed by its supreme court to be a 'group libel'
statute, has been used to punish criminally the author and distributor
of an obnoxious leaflet attacking the negro race. he answers that, as
applied, the act denies a liberty secured to him by the due process
clause of the fourteenth amendment. what is the liberty which that
clause underwrites? the spectrum of views expressed by my seniors shows
that disagreement as to the scope and effect of this amendment underlies
this, as it has many another, division of the court. all agree that the
fourteenth amendment does confine the power of the state to make printed
words criminal. whence we are to derive metes and bounds of the state
power is a subject to the confusion of which, i regret to say, i have
contributed—comforted in the acknowledgment, however, by recalling that
this amendment is so enigmatic and abstruse that judges more experienced
than i have had to reverse themselves as to its effect on state power.
the thesis now tendered in dissent is that the 'liberty' which the due
process clause of the fourteenth amendment protects against denial by
the states is the literal and identical 'freedom of speech or of the
press' which the first amendment forbids only congress to abridge. the
history of criminal libel in america convinces me that the fourteenth
amendment did not 'incorporate' the first, that the powers of congress
and of the states over this subject are not of the same dimensions, and
that because congress probably could not enact this law it does not
follow that the states may not." ibid. -. proceeding from this
position, justice jackson is able, none the less, to dissent from the
court's judgment. cf. chief justice stone's position in united states
v. carolene products co.,  u.s. , at -, note  ().
[]  stat. ,  ();  stat.  ().
[] ibid. . justice frankfurter, while concurring,
apparently thought that the question of congress's power in the premises
was not involved. ibid. -. on this broader question, see p. .
(the postal clause).
[]  u.s.  (); public clearing house v. coyne,
[] here it is recited in part: "that if we, our justiciary,
our bailiffs, or any of our officers, shall in any circumstances have
failed in the performance of them toward any person, or shall have
broken through any of these articles of peace and security, and the
offence be notified to four barons chosen out of the five-and-twenty
before mentioned, the said four barons shall repair to us, or our
justiciary, if we are out of the realm, and laying open the grievance,
shall petition to have it redressed without delay."
[]  encyclopedia of the social sciences, ff, "petition,
right of" (new york, ).
[] united states v. cruikshank,  u.s. ,  ()
reflects this older view.
[] de jonge v. oregon,  u.s. , ,  (). see
also herndon v. lowry,  u.s.  ().
[] for the details of adams' famous fight on "the gag rule,"
see andrew c. mclaughlin, a constitutional history of the united
states, pp. -, appleton-century-crofts, inc., new york ().
[] rules and manual united states house of representatives
(), eighty-first congress, by lewis deschler, parliamentarian,
united states government printing office, washington (), pp.
[] united states v. baltzer, report of the attorney
general, , p. .
[]  stat.  ().
[]  u.s. , - (). at a later point in its
opinion the court used the following language: "every republican
government is in duty bound to protect all its citizens in the enjoyment
of an equality of right. that duty was originally assumed by the states;
and it still remains there. the only obligation resting upon the united
states is to see that the states do not deny the right. this the
amendment guarantees, but no more. the power of the national government
is limited to the enforcement of this guaranty." ibid. . these words
have reference, quite clearly, to counts of the indictment alleging acts
of the conspirators denying "equal protection of the laws" "to persons
of color," congress's power to protect which is derived from amendment
xiv and is confined as the court says, to protection against state acts.
the above quoted words have, however, caused confusion. see pp.
[] hague v. c.i.o.,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] "as to the american civil liberties union, which is a
corporation, it cannot be said to be deprived of the civil rights of
freedom of speech and of assembly, for the liberty guaranteed by the due
process clause is the liberty of natural, not artificial, persons.
northwestern nat. l. ins. co. v. riggs,  u.s. , ; western
turf asso. v. greenberg,  u.s. , ;"  u.s. ,  ().
see also ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). this case was treated above, at p.
[] auto workers v. wis. board,  u.s.  ().
[] collins v. hardyman,  u.s.  ();  stat. ,
[]  u.s.c. §§-. see also: general interim report
of the house select committee on lobbying activities, eighty-first
congress, second session, created pursuant to h. res. , october ,
, united states government printing office, washington (): see
also  encyclopedia of the social sciences , "lobbying."
[] national association of manufacturers v. mcgrath, 
f. supp.  (). upon review, the supreme court vacated this
judgment as moot.— u.s. , .
[] rumely v. united states,  f. d , -
[pg ]
[pg ]
amendment 
a well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free
state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be
infringed.
the protection afforded by this amendment prevents infringement by
congress of the right to bear arms for a lawful purpose, but does not
apply to such infringement by private citizens. for this reason an
indictment under the enforcement act of ,[] charging a conspiracy
to prevent negroes from bearing arms for lawful purposes was held
defective.[] a state statute which forbids bodies of men to associate
together as military organizations, or to drill or parade with arms in
cities and towns unless authorized by law, does not abridge the right of
the people to keep and bear arms.[] in the absence of evidence tending
to show that possession or use of a shotgun having a barrel of less than
 inches in length has some reasonable relationship to the preservation
or efficiency of a well regulated militia, the court refused to hold
invalid a provision in the national firearms act[] against the
transportation of unregistered shotguns in interstate commerce.[]
notes
[]  stat.  ().
[] united states v. cruikshank,  u.s. ,  ().
[] presser v. illinois,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] united states v. miller,  u.s.  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
amendment 
no soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without
the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.
"this amendment seems to have been thought necessary. it does not appear
to have been the subject of judicial exposition; and it is so thoroughly
in accord with all our ideas, that further comment is unnecessary."[]
notes
[] miller, samuel f., the constitution (), page .
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
coverage of the amendment 
necessity, sufficiency and effect of warrants 
records, reports and subpoenas 
search and seizure incidental to arrest 
search of vehicles 
use of evidence 
[pg ]
amendment 
the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers,
and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause,
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
coverage of the amendment
this amendment denounces only such searches and seizures as are
"unreasonable," and is to be construed in the light of what was deemed
an unreasonable search and seizure when it was adopted and in a manner
to conserve public interests as well as the rights of individuals.[] it
applies only to governmental action, not to the unlawful acts of
individuals in which the government has no part.[] it has no reference
to civil proceedings for the recovery of debts; consequently, a distress
warrant issued by the solicitor of the treasury under an act of congress
is not forbidden, though issued without support of an oath or
affirmation.[] but the amendment is applicable to search warrants
issued under any statute, including revenue and tariff laws.[]
security "in their persons, houses, papers and effects" is assured to
the people by this article. not only the search of a dwelling, but also
of a place of business,[] a garage,[] or a vehicle,[] is limited by
its provisions. but open fields are not covered by the term "house";
they may be searched without a warrant.[] a sealed letter deposited in
the mails may not be opened by the postal authorities without the
sanction of a magistrate.[] the subpoena of private papers is subject
to its test of reasonableness.[] retention for use as evidence of a
letter voluntarily written by a prisoner, which, without threat or
coercion, came into the possession of prison officials under the
practice and discipline of the institution, is not prohibited.[] where
officers [pg ]demand admission to private premises in the name of the law,
their subsequent explorations are searches within the meaning of the
constitution, even though the occupant opens the door to admit them.[]
a peremptory demand by federal officers that a person suspected of crime
open a locked room and hand over ration coupons kept there was held not
to amount to a seizure in view of the fact that the coupons were
government property which the custodian was under a duty to
surrender.[] neither wiretapping,[] nor the use of a detectaphone to
listen to a conversation in an adjoining room,[] nor interrogation
under oath by a government official of a person lawfully in
confinement[] is within the purview of this article. nor does it apply
to statements made by an accused on his own premises to an "undercover
agent" whose identity was not suspected and who had on his person a
radio transmitter which communicated the statements to another agent
outside the building.[] said justice jackson for the court:
"petitioner relies on cases relating to the more common and clearly
distinguishable problems raised where tangible property is unlawfully
seized. such unlawful seizure may violate the fourth amendment, even
though the entry itself was by subterfuge or fraud rather than force.
but such decisions are inapposite in the field of mechanical or
electronic devices designed to overhear or intercept conversation, at
least where access to the listening post was not obtained by illegal
methods."[] but narcotics seized in a hotel room during absence of the
owner, in the course of a search without warrant for either search or
arrest, were not adducible as evidence against the owner, who, however,
was not entitled to have them returned since they were legal
contraband.[]
[pg ]
necessity, sufficiency and effect of warrants
a warrant of commitment by a justice of the peace must state a good
cause certain and be supported by oath.[] a notary public is not
authorized to administer oaths in federal criminal proceedings; hence a
warrant based on affidavits verified before a notary is invalid.[] a
warrant of the senate for attachment of a person who ignored a subpoena
from a senate committee is supported by oath within the requirement of
this amendment when based upon the committee's report of the facts of
the contumacy, made on the committee's own knowledge and having the
sanction of the oath of office of its members.[]
a belief, however well founded, that an article sought is concealed in a
dwelling house furnishes no justification for a search without a
warrant.[] a warrant issued upon an information stating only that
"affiant has good reason to believe and does believe" that defendant has
contraband materials in his possession is clearly bad under the fourth
amendment.[] it is enough, however, if the apparent facts set out in
the affidavit are such that a reasonably discreet and prudent man would
be led to believe that the offense charged had been committed.[]
the requirement of the fourth amendment that warrants shall particularly
describe the things to be seized makes general searches under them
impossible and prevents the seizure of one thing under a warrant
describing another. as to what is to be taken nothing is left to the
discretion of the officer executing the warrant.[] private papers of
no pecuniary value, in which the sole interest of the federal government
is their value as evidence against the owner in a contemplated criminal
prosecution, may not be taken from the owner's house or office under a
search warrant.[]
records, reports and subpoenas
since the common law did not countenance compulsory self incrimination,
many years passed before the supreme court was called upon to interpret
the constitutional provisions bearing upon the privilege against such
testimonial compulsion. not until boyd v. united states[] did it
have to meet the issue; there, pursuant to an act of congress, a court
had issued an order in a proceeding for the forfeiture of goods for
fraudulent nonpayment of customs duties, requiring the claimant to
produce in court his invoices covering the [pg ]goods, on pain of having the
allegation taken as confessed against him. the order and the statute
which authorized it were held unconstitutional in a notable opinion by
justice bradley, as follows: "breaking into a house and opening boxes
and drawers are circumstances of aggravation; but any forcible and
compulsory extortion of a man's own testimony or of his private papers
to be used as evidence to convict him of crime or to forfeit his goods,
is [forbidden] *** in this regard the fourth and fifth amendments run
almost into each other."[] thus the case established three
propositions of far-reaching significance: () that a compulsory
production of the private papers of the owner in such a suit was a
search and seizure within the meaning of the fourth amendment;[] ()
that in substance such seizure compelled him to be a witness against
himself in violation of amendment v,[] and () that, because it was a
violation of the fifth amendment, it was also an unreasonable search
and seizure under the fourth.[]
only natural persons can resist the subpoena of private papers on the
ground of self incrimination.[] even an individual cannot refuse to
produce records which are in his custody on the plea that they might
incriminate the owner or himself where the documents belong to a
corporation,[] or to a labor union.[] a bankrupt can be compelled to
turn over records which are part of his estate.[] papers already in
the custody of a united states court in consequence of their having been
used by the owner himself as evidence on another proceeding may be used
before a grand jury as a basis for an indictment for perjury.[] a
corporation may challenge an order for the production of records if it
is unreasonable on grounds other than self incrimination, i.e., if it is
too sweeping,[] if the information sought is not relevant to any
lawful inquiry,[] or if it represents "a fishing expedition" in quest
of evidence of crime.[] in oklahoma press pub. co. v. walling,[]
the question of the protection afforded by the constitution against the
subpoena of corporate records was thoroughly reviewed. justice rutledge
summarized the court's views in the following words: "*** the fifth
amendment affords no protection by virtue of the self incrimination
provision, whether for the corporation or for its officers; and the
fourth, if applicable, at the most guards against abuse only by way of
too much indefiniteness or breadth in the things required to be
'particularly described,' if also the inquiry is one the demanding
agency is authorized by law to make and the materials specified are
relevant. the gist of the protection is in the requirement, expressed in
terms, that the disclosure sought shall not be [pg ]unreasonable. *** it
is not necessary, as in the case of a warrant, that a specific charge or
complaint of violation of law be pending or that the order be made
pursuant to one. it is enough that the investigation be for a lawfully
authorized purpose, within the power of congress to command. *** the
requirement of 'probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation,'
literally applicable in the case of a warrant is satisfied, in that of
an order for production, by the court's determination that the
investigation is authorized by congress, is for a purpose congress can
order, and the documents sought are relevant to the inquiry. beyond this
the requirement of reasonableness, including particularity in
'describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be
seized,' also literally applicable to warrant, comes down to
specification of the documents to be produced adequate, but not
excessive, for the purposes of the relevant inquiry."[]
as a means of enforcing a valid statute, the government may require any
person subject thereto "to keep a record showing whether he has in fact
complied with it,"[] and to submit that record to inspection by
government officers.[] it may also compel the filing of returns
disclosing the amount of tax liability,[] and of reports under oath
showing instances where employees have worked in excess of hours of
labor permitted by law.[] without violating either the fourth or fifth
amendments, a judicial decree enjoining illegal practices under the
antitrust act may provide that the department of justice shall be given
access to all records and documents of the corporation relating to the
matter covered by the decree.[] the supreme court has intimated,
however, that record keeping requirements must be limited to data which
are relevant to the effective administration of the law.[]
[pg ]
search and seizure incidental to arrest
the right to search the person upon arrest has long been recognized[]
but authority to search the premises upon which the arrest is made has
been approved only in recent years. in agnello v. united states,[]
the supreme court asserted that: "the right without a search warrant
contemporaneously to search persons lawfully arrested while committing
crime and to search the place where the arrest is made in order to find
and seize things connected with the crime as its fruits or as the means
by which it was committed, as well as weapons and other things to effect
an escape from custody, is not to be doubted."[] books and papers used
to carry on a criminal enterprise, which are in the immediate possession
and control of a person arrested for commission of an offense in the
presence of the officers may be seized when discovered in plain view
during a search of the premises following the arrest.[] the lawful
arrest of persons at their place of business does not justify a search
of desks and files in the offices where the arrest is made and seizure
of private papers found thereon.[] a search which is unlawfully
undertaken is not made valid by the evidence of crime which it brings to
light.[]
by a five to four decision in harris v. united states[] the court
sustained, as an incident to a lawful arrest, a five hour search by four
federal officers of every nook and cranny of a four-room apartment. it
also upheld the seizure of papers unrelated to the crime for which the
arrest was made, namely, selective service registration cards which were
discovered in a sealed envelope in the bottom of a bureau drawer. in
justification of this conclusion, chief justice vinson wrote: "here the
agents entered the apartment under the authority of lawful warrants of
arrest. neither was the entry tortious nor was the arrest which followed
in any sense illegal. *** the search was not a general exploration but
was specifically directed to the means and instrumentalities by which
the crimes charged had been committed, particularly the two canceled
checks of the mudge oil company. *** if entry upon the premises be
authorized and the search which follows be valid, there is nothing in
the fourth amendment [pg ]which inhibits the seizure by law-enforcement
agents of government property the possession of which is a crime, even
though the officers are not aware that such property is on the premises
when the search is initiated."[] in a dissenting opinion in which
justices murphy and rutledge concurred, justice frankfurter challenged
the major premises announced by the court. "to derive from the common
law right to search the person as an incident of his arrest the right of
indiscriminate search of all his belongings, is to disregard the fact
that the constitution protects [against] both unauthorized arrest and
unauthorized search. authority to arrest does not dispense with the
requirement of authority to search. *** but even if the search was
reasonable, it does not follow that the seizure was lawful. if the
agents had obtained a warrant to look for the canceled checks, they
would not be entitled to seize other items discovered in the process.
*** the court's decision achieves the novel and startling result of
making the scope of search without warrant broader than an authorized
search."[] a more limited search in connection with an arrest was held
valid in united states v. rabinowitz.[] in that case, government
officers, armed with a valid warrant for arrest, had arrested respondent
in his one-room office which was open to the public. thereupon, over his
objection, they searched the desk, safe and file cabinets in the office
for about an hour and a half and seized  forged and altered stamps.
justice minton assigned five reasons for holding that the search and
seizure was reasonable: "() the search and seizure were incident to a
valid arrest; () the place of the search was a business room to which
the public, including the officers, was invited; () the room was small
and under the immediate and complete control of respondent; () the
search did not extend beyond the room used for unlawful purposes; ()
the possession of the forged and altered stamps was a crime, just as it
is a crime to possess burglars' tools, lottery tickets or counterfeit
money."[] this decision also overruled an intermediate case, trupiano
v. united states,[] whereby the practical effect of the harris
decision had been circumscribed by a ruling that even where a valid
arrest is made, a search without a warrant is not permissible if the
circumstances make it feasible to procure a warrant in advance.
[pg ]
search of vehicles
the fourth amendment has been construed "***, as recognizing a
necessary difference between a search of a store, dwelling house, or
other structure in respect of which a proper official warrant readily
may be obtained, and a search of a ship, motor boat, wagon, or
automobile for contraband goods, where is it not practicable to secure a
warrant because the vehicle can be quickly moved out of the locality or
jurisdiction in which the warrant must be sought. *** the measure of
legality of such a seizure is, therefore, that the seizing officer shall
have reasonable or probable cause for believing that the automobile
which he stops and seizes has contraband liquor therein which is being
illegally transported."[] where officers have reasonable grounds for
searching an automobile which they are following, a search of the
vehicle immediately after it has been driven into an open garage is
valid.[] the existence of reasonable cause for searching an automobile
does not, however, warrant the search of an occupant thereof, although
the contraband sought is of a character which might be concealed on the
person.[]
use of evidence
to remove the temptation to ignore constitutional restraints on search
and seizure, evidence obtained in violation thereof is made inadmissible
against an accused in federal courts.[] this is contrary to the
practice prevailing in the majority of states and has been severely
criticized as a matter of principle.[] the court has intimated
recently that the federal exclusionary rule is not a command of the
fourth amendment, but merely a judicially created rule of evidence which
congress could overrule. in wolf v. colorado,[] it ruled that while
that amendment is binding on the states, it does not prevent state
courts from admitting evidence obtained by illegal search. with respect
to the federal rule, justice frankfurter said: "*** though we have
interpreted the fourth amendment to forbid the admission of such
evidence, a different question would be presented if congress, under its
legislative powers, were to pass a statute purporting to negate the
weeks doctrine. we would then be faced with the problem of the respect
to be accorded the legislative judgment on an issue as to which, in
default of that judgment, we have been forced to depend upon our
own."[] this rule does not prevent the use of evidence unlawfully
obtained by individuals,[] or by state officers,[] unless federal
agents had a part in the unlawful acquisition,[] or unless the arrest
and search were made for an offense punishable only by federal law.[]
a search is deemed to be "a search by a federal official [pg ]if he had a
hand in it; *** [but not] if evidence secured by state authorities is
turned over to the federal authorities on a silver platter. the decisive
factor *** is the actuality of a share by a federal official in the
total enterprise of securing and selecting evidence by other than
sanctioned means. it is immaterial whether a federal agent originated
the idea or joined in it while the search was in progress. so long as he
was in it before the object of the search was completely accomplished,
he must be deemed to have participated in it."[] samples of illicit
goods constituting part of a quantity seized by federal officials under
a valid search warrant may be used as evidence, whether or not the
officers become civilly liable as trespassers ab initio, by reason of
the fact that they unlawfully destroyed the remainder of the goods at
the time the seizure was made.[]
in silver thorne lumber co. v.. united states,[] the court refused
to permit the government to subpoena corporate records of which it had
obtained knowledge by an unlawful search. to permit "knowledge gained by
the government's own wrong" to be so used would do violence to the bill
of rights.[] but a defendant in a civil antitrust suit may be required
to produce records which had been previously subpoenaed before a grand
jury, despite the fact that the grand jury was illegally constituted
because women were excluded from the panel.[] where government agents
lawfully obtained knowledge of the contents of a cancelled check during
examination of the records of a government contractor, the admission of
such check in evidence was held not to be an abuse of discretion even if
the seizure of the check itself was deemed illegal.[] the seizure of
papers under a writ of replevin issued in a civil suit between private
persons does not violate the fourth and fifth amendments.[]
notes
[] carroll v. united states,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] burdeau v. mcdowell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] den ex dem. murray v. hoboken land & improv. co.,  how.
[] nathanson v. united states,  u.s. ,  ()
[] gouled v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] taylor v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] carroll v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] hester v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte jackson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] boyd v. united states,  u.s.  (); hale v.
henkel,  u.s.  ().
[] stroud v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] amos v. united states,  u.s.  (); johnson v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] davis v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] olmstead v. united states,  u.s.  (). cf.
nardone v. united states,  u.s.  ();  u.s.  ().
[] goldman v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] bilokumsky v. tod,  u.s. ,  ().
[] on lee v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . four justices dissented, relying in the main on
the dissent in the olmstead case, which came later to be adopted by
congress. see note  above.
[] united states v. jeffers,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte burford,  cr.  ().
[] albrecht v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] mcgrain v. daugherty,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] agnello v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] byars v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] steele v. united states, no. ,  u.s. , , 
(); dumbra v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] marron v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gouled v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] hale v. henkel,  u.s. ,  (); essgee co. v.
united states,  u.s.  (). cf. interstate commerce commission
v. baird,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wilson v. united states,  u.s.  (). see also
wheeler v. united states,  u.s.  (); grant v. united
states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. white,  u.s.  ().
[] re fuller,  u.s.  (). see also mccarthy v.
arndstein,  u.s. ,  ().
[] perlman v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] hale v. henkel,  u.s. ,  ().
[] oklahoma press pub. co. v. walling,  u.s. , 
[] federal trade commission v. american tobacco co. 
[] ibid. -.
[] united states v. darby,  u.s. ,  ().
[] shapiro v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] flint v. stone tracy co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] baltimore & o.r. co. v. interstate commerce comm'n., 
[] united states v. bausch & l. optical co.,  u.s. ,
 (). cf. united states v. morton salt co.,  u.s. 
[] shapiro v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
oklahoma press pub. co. v. walling,  u.s. ,  ().
[] weeks v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] marron v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] go-bart importing co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(); united states v. lefkowitz,  u.s.  ().
[] byars v. united states,  u.s.  (); johnson v.
united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. . separate dissenting opinions were written by
justices murphy and jackson.
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (); mcdonald v. united states,  u.s.
 () is also overruled in effect, although it was not mentioned in
the court's opinion.
[] carroll v. united states,  u.s. , - ().
husty v. united states,  u.s.  (); brinegar v. united
states,  u.s.  ().
[] scher v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. di re,  u.s.  ().
[] weeks v. united states,  u.s.  (). this case
was a virtual repudiation of adams v. new york,  u.s. , 
(). there the supreme court had ruled that in criminal proceedings
in a state court the use of private papers obtained by unlawful search
and seizure "was no violation of the constitutional guaranty of
privilege from unlawful search or seizure." it added: "nor do we think
the accused was compelled to incriminate himself."
[] wolf v. colorado,  u.s. , ,  ();  wigmore
on evidence (d ed.) § ().
[] ibid. .
[] burdeau v. mcdowell,  u.s.  ().
[] byars v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. ; lustig v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] gambino v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] lustig v. united states,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] mcguire v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. wallace & tiernan co.,  u.s. 
[] zap v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] american tobacco co. v. werckmeister,  u.s. , 
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
rights of accused persons 
the grand jury clause 
double jeopardy 
self-incrimination 
source of the clause 
due process of law 
source and evolution of the meaning of the term 
scope of the guaranty 
procedural due process 
general 
criminal prosecutions 
notice and hearing 
evidence and presumption in judicial proceedings 
administrative proceedings 
fair hearing 
judicial review 
aliens 
deportation 
substantive due process 
discrimination 
deprivation of liberty 
deprivation of property 
retroactive legislation sustained 
retroactive legislation disallowed 
bankruptcy legislation 
right to sue the government 
congressional police measures 
the postal service 
regulation of public utilities 
regulation of railroads 
taxation 
retroactive taxes 
governance of the indians 
the national eminent domain power 
scope of power 
alien property 
public use 
rights for which compensation must be made 
when property is taken 
navigable waters 
just compensation 
interest 
enforcement of right to compensation 
[pg ]
amendment 
no person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous
crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in
cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in
actual service in time of war or public danger; nor shall any person be
subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or
limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness
against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use,
without just compensation.
rights of accused persons
within the meaning of this article a crime is made "infamous" by the
quality of the punishment which may be imposed.[] the court has
recognized that: "what punishments shall be considered as infamous may
be affected by the changes of public opinion from one age to
another."[] imprisonment in a state prison or penitentiary, with or
without hard labor,[] or imprisonment at hard labor in the workhouse of
the district of columbia,[] falls within this category. the pivotal
question is whether the offense is one for which the court is authorized
to award such punishment; the sentence actually imposed is immaterial.
when an accused is in danger of being subjected to an infamous
punishment if convicted, he has the right to insist that he shall not be
put upon his trial, except on the accusation of a grand jury.[] thus,
an act which authorizes imprisonment at hard labor for one year, as well
as deportation, of chinese aliens found to be unlawfully within the
united states, creates an offense which can be tried only upon
indictment.[] counterfeiting,[] fraudulent alteration of poll
books,[] fraudulent voting,[] and embezzlement[] have been declared
to be infamous crimes. it is immaterial how congress has classified the
offense.[] an act punishable by a fine of not more than $, or
imprisonment for not more than six months is a [pg ]misdemeanor, which can
be tried without indictment, even though the punishment exceeds that
specified in the statutory definition of "petty offenses."[]
a person can be tried only upon the indictment as found by the grand
jury, and especially upon its language found in the charging part of the
instrument. a change in the indictment deprives the court of the power
to try the accused.[] there is no constitutional requirement that an
indictment be presented by a grand jury in a body; an indictment
delivered by the foreman in the absence of the other grand jurors is
valid.[]
the words "when in actual service in time of war or public danger" apply
to the militia only. all persons in the regular army or navy are subject
to court martial rather than indictment or trial by jury, at all
times.[] the exception of "cases arising in the land or naval forces"
was not aimed at trials of offenses against the laws of war. its
objective was to authorize trial by court martial of the members of the
armed forces for all that class of crimes which under the fifth and
sixth amendments might otherwise have been deemed triable in the civil
court. either citizen or alien enemy belligerents may be tried by a
military commission for offenses against the laws of war.[]
by the common law not only was a second punishment for the same offense
prohibited, but a second trial was forbidden whether or not the accused
had suffered punishment, or had been acquitted or convicted.[] this
clause embraces all cases wherein a second prosecution is attempted for
the same violation of law, whether felony or misdemeanor.[]
seventy-five years ago a closely divided court held that the protection
against double jeopardy prevented an appeal by the government after a
verdict of acquittal.[] a judgment of acquittal on the ground of the
[pg ]bar of the statute of limitations is a protection against a second
trial,[] as is also a general verdict of acquittal upon an issue of
not guilty to an indictment which was not challenged as insufficient
before the verdict.[] where a court inadvertently imposed both a fine
and imprisonment for a crime for which the law authorized either
punishment, but not both, it could not, after the fine had been paid,
during the same term of court, change its judgment by sentencing the
defendant to imprisonment.[] but where a statute carried a minimum
mandatory sentence of both a fine and imprisonment, the imposition of
the minimum fine five hours after the court had erroneously sentenced
the defendant to imprisonment only did not amount to double
jeopardy.[] whether or not the discontinuance of a trial without a
verdict bars a second trial depends upon the circumstances of each
case.[] discharge of a jury because it is unable to reach an
agreement[] or because of the disqualification of a juror[] does not
preclude a second trial. where, after a demurrer to the indictment was
overruled, a jury was impaneled and witnesses sworn, the discharge of
the jury to permit the defendant to be arraigned did not bar a trial
before a new jury.[] the withdrawal of charges after a trial by a
general court martial had begun, because the tactical situation brought
about by the rapid advance of the army made continuance of the trial
impracticable, did not bar a trial before a second court martial.[] an
accused is not put in jeopardy by preliminary examination and discharged
by the examining magistrate,[] by an indictment which is quashed,[]
nor by arraignment and pleading to the indictment.[] in order to bar
prosecution, a former conviction must be pleaded.[]
[pg ]a plea of former jeopardy must be upon a prosecution for the same
identical offense.[] the test of identity of offenses is whether the
same evidence is required to sustain them; if not, the fact that both
charges relate to one transaction does not make a single offense where
two are defined by the statutes.[] where a person is convicted of a
crime which includes several incidents, a second trial for one of those
incidents puts him twice in jeopardy.[] congress may impose both
criminal and civil sanctions with respect to the same act or
omission,[] and may separate a conspiracy to commit a substantive
offense from the commission of the offense and affix to each a different
penalty.[] a conviction for the conspiracy may be had though the
subsequent offense was not completed.[] separate convictions under
different counts charging a monopolization and a conspiracy to
monopolize trade, in an indictment under the sherman antitrust act, do
not amount to double jeopardy.[] in united states v. national
association of real estate boards,[] the court held that an acquittal
in a criminal suit charging violation of the sherman act does not
prevent the issuance of an injunction against future violations. it
distinguished but did not overrule an early case which held that where
an issue as to the existence of a fact or act had been tried in a
criminal proceeding instituted by the united states, a judgment of
acquittal, was conclusive in a subsequent proceeding in rem involving
the same matter.[]
a civil action to recover taxes which were in fact penalties for
violation of another statute was held to be punitive in character and
barred by a prior conviction of the defendant for a criminal offense
involving the same transaction.[] in contrast, the additional income
tax imposed when a fraudulent return is filed, was found to be a civil
sanction designed to protect the revenue, which might be assessed after
acquittal of the defendant for the same fraud.[] a forfeiture
proceeding for defrauding the government of a tax on alcohol diverted to
beverage uses is a proceeding in rem, rather than a punishment for a
criminal offense, and may be prosecuted after a conviction of conspiracy
to violate the statute imposing the tax.[]
[pg ]in an early case, the court asserted that since robbery on the high seas
is considered an offense within the criminal jurisdiction of all
nations, the plea of autre fois acquit would be good in any civilized
state, though resting on a prosecution instituted in the courts of any
other civilized state.[] it has held, however, that where the same act
is an offense against both the state and federal governments, its
prosecution and punishment by both governments is not double
jeopardy.[] a contumacious witness is not twice subjected to jeopardy
for refusing to testify before a committee of the united states senate,
by being punished for contempt of the senate and also indicted for a
misdemeanor for such refusal.[]
self-incrimination
"nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against
himself." the source of this clause was the maxim that "no man is bound
to accuse himself (nemo tenetur prodere—or accusare seipsum),"
which was brought forward in england late in the sixteenth century in
protest against the inquisitorial methods of the ecclesiastical courts.
at that time the common law itself permitted accused defendants to be
questioned. what the advocates of the maxim meant was merely that a
person ought not to be put on trial and compelled to answer questions to
his detriment unless he had first been properly accused, i.e., by the
grand jury. but the idea once set going gained headway rapidly,
especially after , when it came to have attached to it most of its
present-day corollaries.[]
under the clause a witness in any proceeding whatsoever in which
testimony is legally required may refuse to answer any question, his
answer to which might be used against him in a future criminal
proceeding, or which might uncover further evidence against him.[] the
witness must explicitly claim his constitutional immunity or he will be
considered to have waived it;[] but he is not the final judge of the
validity of his claim.[] the privilege exists solely for the
protection of the witness himself, and may not be claimed for the
benefit of third parties.[] the clause does not impair the obligation
of a witness to testify if a prosecution against him is barred by lapse
of time, by [pg ]statutory enactment, or by a pardon;[] but the effect of
a mere tender of pardon by the president remains uncertain.[] a
witness may not refuse to answer questions on the ground that he would
thereby expose himself to prosecution by a state.[] conversely, the
admission against a defendant in a federal court of testimony given by
him in a state court under a statute of immunity is valid.[] if an
accused takes the stand in his own behalf, he must submit to
cross-examination;[] while if he does not, it is by no means certain
that the trial judge in a federal court may not, without violation of
the clause, draw the jury's attention to the fact.[] neither does the
amendment preclude the admission in evidence against an accused of a
confession made while in the custody of officers, if the confession was
made freely, voluntarily, and without compulsion or inducement of any
sort.[] but in mcnabb v. united states the court[] reversed a
conviction in a federal court, based on a confession obtained by
questioning the defendants for prolonged periods in the absence of
friends and counsel and without their being brought before a
commissioner or judicial officer, as required by law. without purporting
to decide the constitutional issue, justice frankfurter's opinion urged
the duty of the court, in supervising the conduct of the lower federal
courts, to establish and maintain "civilized standards of procedure and
evidence."[] an individual who has acquired income by illicit means is
not excused from making out an income tax return because he might
thereby expose himself to a criminal prosecution by the united states.
"he could not draw a conjurer's circle around the whole matter," said
justice holmes, "by his own declaration that to write any word upon the
government blank would bring him into danger of the law."[] but a
witness called to testify before a federal grand jury as to his
relations with the communist party cannot, in view of existing
legislation touching the subject, be compelled to answer.[]he clause
does not require the exclusion of the body of an accused as evidence of
his identity;[] but the introduction into evidence against one who was
being prosecuted by a state for illegal possession of morphine of two
capsules which he had swallowed and had then been forced by the police
to disgorge, was held to violate due process of law.[]
[pg ]a bankrupt is not deprived of his constitutional right not to testify
against himself by an order requiring him to surrender his books to a
duly authorized receiver.[] he may not object to the use of his books
and papers as incriminating evidence against him while they are in the
custody of the bankruptcy court;[] nor may he condition their delivery
by requiring a guaranty that they will not be used as incriminating
evidence.[] the filing of schedules by a bankrupt does not waive his
right to refuse to answer questions pertaining to them when to do so may
incriminate him.[] a disclosure, not amounting to an actual admission
of guilt or of incriminating facts, does not deprive him of the
privilege of stopping short in his testimony whenever it may fairly tend
to incriminate him.[] the rule against self-incrimination may be
invoked by a bankrupt (in the absence of any statute affording him
complete immunity) when being examined concerning his estate.[]
the privilege of witnesses, being a purely personal one, may not be
claimed by an agent or officer of a corporation either in its behalf or
in his own behalf as regards books and papers of the corporation;[]
and the same rule holds in the case of the custodian of the records of a
labor union;[] nor does the communist party enjoy any immunity as to
its books and records.[] finally, this amendment, in connection with
the interdiction of the fourth amendment against unreasonable [pg ]searches
and seizures, protects an individual from the compulsory production of
private papers which would incriminate him.[] the scope of this latter
privilege was, however, greatly narrowed by the decision in shapiro v.
united states.[] there, by a five-to-four majority, the court held
that the privilege against self incrimination does not extend to books
and records which an individual is required to keep to evidence his
compliance with lawful regulations. a conviction for violation of opa
regulations was affirmed, as against the contention that the prosecution
was barred because the accused had been compelled over claim of
constitutional immunity to produce records he was required to keep under
applicable opa orders. after construing the statutory immunity as
inapplicable to the case, chief justice vinson disposed of the
constitutional objections by asserting that "the privilege which exists
as to private papers cannot be maintained in relation to 'records
required by law to be kept in order that there may be suitable
information of transactions which are the appropriate subjects of
governmental regulation and the enforcement of restrictions validly
established.'"[]
due process of law
the phrase "due process of law" comes from chapter  of  edw. iii
(), which reads: "no man of what state or condition he be, shall be
put out of his lands or tenements nor taken, nor disinherited, nor put
to death, without he be brought to answer by due process of law." this
statute, in turn, harks back to the famous chapter  of [pg ]magna carta
(issue of ), where the king promises that "no free man (nullus
liber homo) shall be taken or imprisoned or deprived of his freehold or
his liberties or free customs, or outlawed or exiled, or in any manner
destroyed, nor shall we come upon him or send against him, except by a
legal judgment of his peers or by the law of the land (per legem
terrae)." coke in part ii of his institutes, which was the source from
which the founders of the american constitutional system derived their
understanding of the matter, equates the term "by law of the land" with
"by due process of law," which he in turn defines as "by due process of
the common law," that is "by the indictment or presentment of good and
lawful men *** or by writ original of the common law."[] the
significance of both terms was therefore purely procedural; the term
"writ original of the common law" referring to the writs on which civil
actions were brought into the king's courts; and this is the
significance they clearly have in the state constitutions. in the
earlier of such instruments the term "law of the land" was the form
preferred, but following the adoption of amendment v "due process of
law" became the vogue with constitution draftsmen. some state
constitutions even today employ both terms. whichever phraseology is
used always occurs in close association with other safeguards of accused
persons, just as does the clause here under discussion in amendment v.
as a limitation, therefore, on legislative power the due process clause
originally operated simply to place certain procedures, and especially
the grand jury-petit jury process, beyond its reach, but this did not
remain its sole importance or its principal importance.[]
today the due process clause in amendment v, in amendment xiv, and in
the state constitutions is important chiefly, not as consecrating
certain procedures, but as limiting the substantive content of
legislation. thus one of the grounds on which chief justice taney, in
his opinion in the dred scott case, stigmatized the missouri compromise
as unconstitutional was that an act of congress which deprived "a
citizen of his liberty or property merely because he came himself or
brought his property into a particular territory of the united states,
and who had committed no offence against the laws, could hardly be
dignified with the name of due process of law";[] and sixty-six years
later the court held the district of columbia minimum wage act for women
and minors to be void under the due process clause of amendment v, not
on account of any objection to the methods by which it was to be
enforced but because of the content of the [pg ]act—its substantive
requirements.[] and it is because of this extension of the term "due
process of law" beyond the procedural field that the court has been
asked to pass upon literally hundreds of state enactments since about
 on the representation that they invaded the "liberty" or property
rights of certain persons "unreasonably." in short, this development of
the meaning of "due process of law" came in time to furnish one of the
principal bases of judicial review, and indeed it still remains such so
far as state legislation is concerned. see pp. -.
this clause is a restraint on congress as well as on the executive and
judicial powers of the national government; it cannot be so construed as
to leave congress free to make any process it chooses "due process of
law."[] all persons within the territory of the united states are
entitled to its protection, including corporations,[] aliens,[] and
presumptively citizens seeking readmission to the united states.[] it
is effective in the district of columbia[] and in territories which
are part of the united states,[] but it does not apply of its own
force to unincorporated territories.[] nor does it reach enemy alien
belligerents tried by military tribunals outside the territorial
jurisdiction of the united states.[]
procedural due process
the words "due process of law" do not necessarily imply a proceeding in
a court of justice,[] or a plenary suit and trial by jury in every
case where personal or property rights are involved. "in all cases, that
kind of procedure is due process of law which is suitable and proper to
the nature of the case, and sanctioned by the established [pg ]customs and
usages of the courts."[] proceedings for contempt of court[] or to
disbar an attorney[] may be determined by a court without a jury
trial. for persons in the military or naval services of the united
states,[] trial by military tribunals is due process. this principle
extends to persons who commit offenses while undergoing punishment
inflicted by court martial; as military prisoners they are still subject
to military law.[]
the due process clause supplements the specific procedural guaranties
enumerated in the sixth amendment and in preceding clauses of the fifth
amendment for the protection of persons accused of crime. the court has
relied upon this provision in holding that an accused shall plead, or be
ordered to plead, or a plea of not guilty be entered for him before his
trial proceeds;[] and in ruling that if the accused is in custody he
must be personally present at every stage of the trial where his
substantial rights may be affected by the proceedings against him.[]
it is not within the power of the accused or his attorney to waive such
right. inasmuch as proceedings for criminal contempt do not constitute a
criminal prosecution, it is immaterial if proceedings are held in the
absence of the defendant; the requirement of due process of law is
satisfied by suitable notice and opportunity to be heard.[]
due process of law signifies a right to be heard. a decree pro
confesso entered against a defendant after striking his answer from the
files for contempt of court is void.[] a man may, however, consent to
be bound by a judgment in a case in which he has no right to
participate.[] accordingly, due process of law was held not to be
denied to a surety on an undertaking for the release of attached
property when the undertaking required the parties to submit to the
jurisdiction of the court and to agree to abide by the judgment in
relation to the property attached.[] where, in a suit for specific
performance of a contract, evidence admitted without objection at the
trial established [pg ]all the facts necessary for application of the
formula specified by the contract, the appellate court which rejected
the trial court's interpretation of the contract did not infringe the
right to a hearing by entering judgment without remanding the case for a
new trial.[] after a state court, in proceedings designed inter
alia to invalidate certain releases, rendered judgment without a
special finding on the exact point, a federal court did not deny due
process in a subsequent proceeding by treating such judgment as
conclusive on the validity of the releases.[] since proceedings in
bankruptcy are in the nature of proceedings in rem, personal notice to
creditors is not required; creditors are bound by the proceedings in
distribution on notice by publication and mail.[] where a statute
providing for a public improvement levied an assessment against abutting
property it was held to be "conclusive alike of the question of the
necessity of the work and of the benefits as against abutting
property."[] notice to the property owner is not necessary to sustain
the assessment. on the other hand, when the legislature submits these
questions to a commission or other officers the inquiry becomes judicial
and the property owner is entitled to notice or an opportunity to be
heard. notice by publication is sufficient.[]
error in the admission of evidence or the entry of an erroneous judgment
after a full hearing does not constitute a denial of due process.[] a
statute authorizing cancellation of naturalization certificates for
fraud and providing that the taking up of permanent residence abroad
within five years after naturalization shall be prima facie evidence
of lack of intention to become a permanent resident of the united states
at the time of applying for citizenship was found not to be so
unreasonable as to deny due process of law.[] likewise, it was held
reasonable for congress to enact that a defendant who was discovered to
be in possession of opium should be required to assume the burden of
proving that he had not obtained it through illegal importation.[]
but a presumption that a firearm or ammunition in the possession of a
person convicted of a crime of violence was transported or received in
violation of law was held invalid because there was no rational
connections between the facts proved and that presumed.[]
[pg ]
with respect to action taken by administrative agencies the court has
held that the demands of due process do not require a hearing at the
initial stage, or at any particular point in the proceeding so long as a
hearing is held before the final order becomes effective.[] in bowles
v. willingham,[] it sustained orders fixing maximum rents issued
without a hearing at any stage, saying "*** where congress has
provided for judicial review after the regulations or orders have been
made effective it has all that due process under the war emergency
requires."[] but where, after consideration of charges brought
against an employer by a complaining union, the national labor relations
board undertook to void an agreement between an employer and another
independent union, the latter was entitled to notice and an opportunity
to participate in the proceedings.[] although a taxpayer must be
afforded a fair opportunity for hearing in connection with the
collection of taxes,[] collection by distraint of personal property
is lawful if the taxpayer is allowed a hearing thereafter.[]
when the constitution requires a hearing it requires a fair one, held
before a tribunal which at least meets currently prevailing standards of
impartiality.[] an opportunity must be given not only to present
evidence, but also to know the claims of the opposing party and to meet
them. those who are brought into contest with the government in a
quasi-judicial proceeding aimed at control of their activities are
entitled to be fairly advised of what the government proposes and to be
heard upon the proposal before the final command is issued.[] but a
variance between the charges and findings will not invalidate
administrative proceedings where the record shows that at no time during
the hearing was there any misunderstanding as to the basis of the
complaint.[] the mere admission of evidence which would be
inadmissible in judicial [pg ]proceedings does not vitiate the order of an
administrative agency.[] a provision that such a body shall not be
controlled by rules of evidence does not, however, justify orders
without a foundation in evidence having rational probative force. mere
uncorroborated hearsay does not constitute the substantial evidence
requisite to support the findings of the agency.[] while the court
has recognized that in some circumstances a "fair hearing" implies a
right to oral argument,[] it refuses to lay down a general rule that
would cover all cases.[] it says: "certainly the constitution does
not require oral argument in all cases where only insubstantial or
frivolous questions of law, or indeed even substantial ones, are raised.
equally certainly it has left wide discretion to congress in creating
the procedures to be followed in both administrative and judicial
proceedings, as well as in their conjunction."[]
to the extent that constitutional rights are involved, due process of
law imports a judicial review of the action of administrative or
executive officers. this proposition is undisputed so far as questions
of law are concerned, but the extent to which the courts should and will
go in reviewing determinations of fact has been a highly controversial
issue. in st. joseph stock yards co. v. united states,[] the
supreme court held that upon review of an order of the secretary of
agriculture establishing maximum rates for services rendered by a stock
yard company, due process required that the court exercise its
independent judgment upon the facts to determine whether the rates were
confiscatory.[] subsequent cases sustaining rate orders of the
federal power commission have not dealt explicitly with this point.[]
the court has said simply that a person assailing such an order "carries
the heavy burden of making a convincing showing that it is invalid
because it is unjust and unreasonable in its consequences."[]
[pg ]there has been a division of opinion in the supreme court as to what
extent, if at all, the proceedings before military tribunals should be
reviewed by the courts for the purpose of determining compliance with
the due process clause. in in re yamashita[] the majority denied a
petition for certiorari and petitions for writs of habeas corpus to
review the conviction of a japanese war criminal by a military
commission sitting in the philippine islands. it held that since the
military commission, in admitting evidence to which objection was made,
had not violated any act of congress, a treaty or a military command
defining its authority, its ruling on evidence and on the mode of
conducting the proceedings were not reviewable by the courts. without
dissent, the supreme court in hiatt v. brown[] reversed the
judgment of a lower court which had discharged a prisoner serving a
sentence imposed by a court-martial, because of errors whereby the
respondent had been deprived of due process of law. the supreme court
held that the court below had erred in extending its review, for the
purpose of determining compliance with the due process clause, to such
matters as the propositions of law set forth in the staff judge
advocate's report, the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain
respondent's conviction, the adequacy of the pre-trial investigation,
and the competence of the law member and defense counsel. in summary,
justice clark wrote: "in this case the court-martial had jurisdiction of
the person accused and the offense charged, and acted within its lawful
powers. the correction of any errors it may have committed is for the
military authorities which are alone authorized to review its
decision."[] again in johnson v. eisentrager[] the supreme court
overruled a lower court decision, which, in reliance upon the dissenting
opinion in the yamashita case, had held that the due process clause
required that the legality of the conviction of enemy alien belligerents
by military tribunals should be tested by the writ of habeas corpus.
to aliens who have never been naturalized or acquired any domicile or
residence in the united states, the decision of an executive or
administrative officer, acting within powers expressly conferred by
[pg ]congress, as to whether or not they shall be permitted to enter the
country, is due process of law.[] the complete authority of congress
in the matter of admission of aliens justifies delegation of power to
executive officers to enforce the exclusion of aliens afflicted with
contagious diseases by imposing upon the owner of the vessel bringing
any such alien into the country, a money penalty, collectible before and
as a condition of the grant of clearance.[] if the person seeking
admission claims american citizenship, the decision of the secretary of
labor may be made final, but it must be made after a fair hearing,
however summary, and must find adequate support in the evidence. a
decision based upon a record from which relevant and probative evidence
has been omitted is not a fair hearing.[] where the statute made the
decision of an immigration inspector final unless an appeal was taken to
the secretary of the treasury, a person who failed to take such an
appeal did not, by an allegation of citizenship, acquire a right to a
judicial hearing on habeas corpus.[]
deportation proceedings are not criminal prosecutions within the meaning
of the bill of rights. the authority to deport is drawn from the power
of congress to regulate the entrance of aliens and impose conditions
upon the performance of which their continued liberty to reside within
the united states may be made to depend. findings of fact reached by
executive officers after a fair, though summary deportation hearing may
be made conclusive.[] in wong yang sung v. mcgrath,[] however,
the court intimated that a hearing before a tribunal which did not meet
the standards of impartiality embodied in the administrative procedure
act[] might not satisfy the requirements of due process of law. to
avoid such constitutional doubts, the court construed the law to
disqualify immigration inspectors as presiding officers in deportation
proceedings. except in time of war, deportation without a fair hearing
or on charges unsupported by any evidence is a denial of due process
which may be corrected on habeas corpus.[] in contrast with the
decision in united states v. ju toy[] that a person seeking
entrance to the united states was not entitled to a judicial hearing on
his claim of citizenship, a person arrested and held for deportation is
entitled to a day in court if he denies that he is an alien.[] a
closely divided court has ruled that in time of war the deportation of
an enemy alien may be ordered summarily by [pg ]executive action; due
process of law does not require the courts to determine the sufficiency
of any hearing which is gratuitously afforded to the alien.[]
substantive due process
almost all legislation involves some degree of classification whereby
its operation is directed to particular categories of persons, things,
or events; and it is partly in recognition of this fact that amendment
fourteen forbids the states to deny to persons within their jurisdiction
"equal protection of the laws." but this restriction does not rule out
classifications that are "reasonable"; and the due process of law clause
of amendment five is at least as tolerant of legislative
classifications, which would have to be arbitrarily and unreasonably
discriminatory to incur its condemnation.[] in fact, it does not
appear that the court has up to this time ever held an act of congress
unconstitutional on this ground. thus it has sustained a law imposing
greater punishment for an offense involving rights and property of the
united states than for a like offense involving the rights of property
of a private person.[] likewise, a requirement that improved property
in the district of columbia be connected with the city sewage system,
with different sanctions for residents and nonresidents was upheld over
the argument that the classification was arbitrary.[] the allowance
to injured seamen of a choice between several measures of redress
without any corresponding right in their employer was held not to deny
due process of law.[] differences of treatment accorded marketing
cooperatives in milk marketing orders issued by the secretary of
agriculture[] and the selection of a limited number of tobacco
markets for compulsory grading of tobacco[] have also been sustained.
the priority of a federal tax lien against property passing at death,
may, without offending the due process clause, be different from that
which attaches to property transferred inter vivos in contemplation of
death.[]
[pg ]there are indications, however, that the court may be prepared to go
further than it has in the past in condemning discrimination as a denial
of due process of law. relying upon public policy and its supervisory
authority over federal courts, it has reached results similar to those
arrived at under the equal protection clause of the fourteenth
amendment, in refusing to enforce restrictive covenants in the district
of columbia,[] and in reversing a judgment of a federal district
court because of the exclusion of day laborers from the jury panel;[]
and in steele v. louisville & n.r. co.[] the railway labor act was
construed to require a collective bargaining representative to act for
the benefit of all members of the craft without discrimination on
account of race. chief justice stone indicated that any other
construction would raise grave constitutional doubts,[] while in a
concurring opinion, justice murphy asserted unequivocally that the act
would be inconsistent with the fifth amendment if the bargaining agent,
acting under color of federal authority, were permitted to discriminate
against any of the persons he was authorized to represent.[]
in consequence of the explicit assurances of individual liberty
contained in other articles of the bill of rights, the clause in the
fifth amendment forbidding the deprivation of "liberty" without due
process of law has been invoked chiefly in resistance to measures
alleged to abridge liberty of contract. the two leading cases which held
legislation unconstitutional on this ground have, however, both been
overturned in recent years. adair v. united states,[] which
invalidated an act of congress prohibiting any interstate carrier from
threatening an employee with loss of employment if he joined a labor
union, was overruled in substance by phelps dodge corp. v. national
labor relations board.[] adkins v. children's hospital,[] in
which a minimum wage law for the district of columbia was found to be an
unwarranted abridgment of the liberty of contract, was expressly
repudiated [pg ]by west coast hotel co. v. parrish.[] numerous other
statutes—antitrust laws,[] acts limiting hours of labor,[]
prohibiting advance of wages to seamen,[] making carriers liable for
injuries suffered by employees irrespective of previous contractual
arrangements,[] requiring employers to bargain collectively with
employees[] and fixing prices of commodities[] have been sustained
against attack on this ground.
interpreting statutes which made the guaranty of due process of law
applicable to hawaii and the philippine islands, the court enjoined
enforcement of an act of the territory of hawaii which prohibited
maintenance of foreign-language schools except upon written permit and
payment of a fee based upon attendance,[] and held unconstitutional a
philippine statute which prohibited chinese merchants from keeping any
accounts in chinese.[]
retroactive legislation sustained
federal regulation of future action, based upon rights previously
acquired by the person regulated, is not prohibited by the constitution.
so long as the constitution authorizes the subsequently enacted
legislation, the fact that its provisions limit or interfere with
previously acquired rights does not condemn it. accordingly, rent
regulations were sustained as applied to prevent execution of a judgment
of eviction rendered by a state court before the enabling legislation
was passed.[] an order by an area rent director reducing an
unapproved rental and requiring the landlord to refund the excess
previously collected, was held, with one dissenting vote, not to be the
type of retroactivity which is condemned by law.[] the retroactive
effect of [pg ]a new principle announced by a decision of an administrative
tribunal has been likened to the effect of judicial decisions in cases
of first impression. in securities comm'n. v. chenery corp.,[] the
supreme court sustained a decision of the commission which refused to
approve a plan of reorganization for a public utility holding company so
long as the preferred stock purchased by the management was treated on a
parity with other preferred stock even though the purchase of such
stock, when made, did not conflict with any law or rule of the
commission. in the exercise of its comprehensive powers over revenue,
finance and currency, congress may make treasury notes legal tender in
payment of debts previously contracted[] and may invalidate
provisions in private contracts calling for payment in gold coin.[]
an award of additional compensation under the longshoremen's and harbor
workers' compensation act,[] made pursuant to a private act of
congress passed after expiration of the period for review of the
original award, directing the commission to review the case and issue a
new order, was held valid against the employer and insurer.[] the
application of a statute providing for tobacco marketing quotas, to a
crop planted prior to its enactment, was held not to deprive the
producers of property without due process of law since it operated, not
upon production, but upon the marketing of the product after the act was
passed.[]
the validation by statute of a prior mortgage of personal property
invalid because improperly recorded, did not deny due process of law to
a judgment creditor seeking to levy an attachment on the mortgaged
property.[] nor was property taken without due process of law by a
statute of new mexico territory, permitting disseisin of real property
to ripen into title after ten years.[] an order of the military
governor of porto rico reducing the period during which the possession
of real estate must continue, to permit an ex parte conversion of an
entry of possessory title into record ownership was construed to apply
only where there still remained a reasonable opportunity for the true
owners to contest the claim. the court said that any other construction
would permit a taking of property without due process of law.[]
[pg ]rights created by statute are subject to qualification by congress;
benefits conferred gratuitously may be redistributed or withdrawn at any
time.[] where congress provided, in granting lands to a railroad,
that such land could be resold only to actual settlers, at a price not
exceeding $. per acre, it could constitutionally, for breach of
performance, resume title to the lands while assuring the railroad the
equivalent of its interest.[] an act making an appropriation for a
private claim which restricted the attorney's fees payable therefrom to
twenty per cent was valid although inconsistent with a prior contract
with the claimant allowing a larger fee.[] statutory restrictions on
compensation for services in connection with veterans' pensions or
insurance have been upheld.[] an increase in the penalty for
production of wheat in excess of quota was not invalid as applied
retroactively to wheat already planted, where congress concurrently
authorized a substantial increase in the amount of the loan which might
be made to cooperating farmers upon stored "farm marketing excess
wheat."[]
retroactive legislation disallowed
the due process clause has been successfully invoked to defeat
retroactive invasion or destruction of property rights in a few cases. a
revocation by the secretary of the interior of previous approval of
plats and papers showing that a railroad was entitled to land under a
grant was held void as an attempt to deprive the company of its property
without due process of law.[] the exception of the period of federal
control from the time limit set by law upon claims against carriers for
damages caused by misrouting of goods, was read as prospective only
because the limitation was an integral part of the liability, not merely
a matter of remedy, and would violate the fifth amendment if
retroactive.[] rights against the united states arising out of
contract are protected by the fifth amendment; hence a statute
abrogating contracts of war risk insurance was held unconstitutional as
applied to outstanding policies.[]
bankruptcy legislation
the bankruptcy power of congress is subject to the fifth amendment. a
statute which authorized a court to stay proceedings for the foreclosure
of a mortgage for five years, the debtor to remain in possession at a
reasonable rental, with the option of purchasing the [pg ]property at its
appraised value at the end of the stay, was held unconstitutional
because it deprived the creditor of substantial property rights acquired
prior to the passage of the act.[] a modified law, under which the
stay was subject to termination by the court, and which continued the
right of the creditor to have the property sold to pay the debt was
sustained.[] without violation of the due process clause, the sale of
collateral under the terms of a contract may be enjoined, if such sale
would hinder the preparation or consummation of a proposed railroad
reorganization, provided the injunction does no more than delay the
enforcement of the contract.[] a provision that claims resulting from
rejection of an unexpired lease should be treated as on a parity with
provable debts, but limited to an amount equal to three years rent, was
held not to amount to a taking of property without due process of law,
since it provided a new and more certain remedy for a limited amount, in
lieu of an existing remedy inefficient and uncertain in result.[] a
right of redemption allowed by state law upon foreclosure of a mortgage
was unavailing to defeat a plan for reorganization of a debt or
corporation where the trial court found that the claims of junior
lienholders had no value.[]
right to sue the government
a right to sue the government on a contract is a privilege, not a
property right protected by the constitution.[] the right to sue for
recovery of taxes paid may be conditioned upon an appeal to the
commissioner and his refusal to refund.[] there was no denial of due
process when congress took away the right to sue for recovery of taxes,
where the claim for recovery was without substantial equity, having
arisen from the mistake of administrative officials in allowing the
statute of limitations to run before collecting the tax.[] the denial
to taxpayers of the right to sue for refund of processing and floor
taxes collected under a law subsequently held unconstitutional, and the
substitution of a new administrative procedure for the recovery of such
sums, was held valid.[] congress may cut off the right to recover
taxes illegally collected by ratifying the imposition and collection
thereof, where it could lawfully have authorized such exactions prior to
their collection.[]
[pg ]
numerous regulations of a police nature, imposed under powers
specifically granted to the federal government, have been sustained over
objections based on the due process clause. congress may require the
owner of a vessel on which alien seamen suffering from specified
diseases are brought into the country to bear the expense of caring for
such persons.[] it may prohibit the transportation in interstate
commerce of filled milk,[] or the importation of convict made goods
into any state where their receipt, possession or sale is a violation of
local law.[] it may require employers to bargain collectively with
representatives of their employees chosen in a manner prescribed by
statute, to reinstate employees discharged in violation of law,[] and
to permit use of a company owned hall for union meetings.[] it may
enforce continuance of the relationship of employer and employee in the
event of a strike as a consequence of, or in connection with, a current
labor dispute.[] the fact that property subject to rent control in
time of war suffers a decrease in value does not make such restriction
offensive to the due process clause.[]
the postal service
in its complete control over the postal service congress may exclude
lottery advertisements or any other matter objectionable on grounds of
public policy.[] an order requiring return to the senders of all
letters addressed to a concern engaged in a fraudulent enterprise, or to
its officers as such was held reasonable and valid because an order
limited to matter obviously connected with the enterprise would be a
practical nullity.[] such an order may be issued by the postmaster
general "upon evidence satisfactory to him,"[] but if issued under a
"mistake of law" as to what facts may properly be deemed to constitute
fraud, it will be enjoined by the courts.[] a hearing upon revocation
of second-class mailing privileges by an assistant postmaster general
upon notice, at which relator was heard and evidence received was due
process.[]
[pg ]
congressional regulation of public utilities
inasmuch as congress, in giving federal agencies jurisdiction over
various public utilities, usually has prescribed standards substantially
identical with those by which the supreme court has tested the validity
of state action, the review of their orders seldom has turned on
constitutional issues. in two cases, however, maximum rates for
stockyard companies prescribed by the secretary of agriculture were
sustained only after detailed consideration of numerous items excluded
from the rate base or from operating expenses, apparently on the
assumption that error with respect to any such item would render the
rates confiscatory and void.[] a few years later, in federal power
commission v. hope natural gas co.,[] the court adopted an entirely
different approach. it took the position that the validity of the
commission's order depended upon whether the impact or total effect of
the order is just and reasonable, rather than upon the method of
computing the rate base. rates which enable a company to operate
successfully, to maintain its financial integrity, to attract capital,
and to compensate its investors for the risks assumed cannot be
condemned as unjust and unreasonable even though they might produce only
a meager return in a rate base computed by the "present fair value"
method.[]
orders prescribing the form and contents of accounts kept by public
utility companies,[] and statutes requiring a private carrier to
furnish information for valuing its property to the interstate commerce
commission[] have been sustained against the objection that they were
arbitrary and invalid. an order of the secretary of commerce directed to
a single common carrier by water requiring it to file a summary of its
books and records pertaining to its rates was held not to violate the
fifth amendment.[]
[pg ]
congressional regulation of railroads
legislation or administrative orders pertaining to railroads have been
challenged repeatedly under the due process clause but seldom with
success. orders of the interstate commerce commission establishing
through routes and joint rates have been sustained,[] as has its
division of joint rates to give a weaker group of carriers a greater
share of such rates where the proportion allotted to the stronger group
was adequate to avoid confiscation.[] the recapture of one half of
the earnings of railroads in excess of a fair net operating income, such
recaptured earnings to be available as a revolving fund for loans to
weaker roads, was held valid on the ground that any carrier earning an
excess held it as trustee.[] an order enjoining certain steam
railroads from discriminating against an electric railroad by denying it
reciprocal switching privileges did not violate the fifth amendment even
though its practical effect was to admit the electric road to a part of
the business being adequately handled by the steam roads.[]
similarly, the fact that a rule concerning the allotment of coal cars
operated to restrict the use of private cars did not amount to a taking
of property.[] railroad companies were not denied due process of law
by a statute forbidding them to transport in interstate commerce
commodities which have been manufactured, mined or produced by
them.[] an order approving a lease of one railroad by another, upon
condition that displaced employees of the lessor should receive partial
compensation for the loss suffered by reason of the lease[] is
consonant with due process of law. a law prohibiting the issuance of
free passes was held constitutional even as applied to abolish rights
created by a prior agreement whereby the carrier bound itself to issue
such passes annually for life, in settlement of a claim for personal
injuries.[]
occasionally, however, regulatory action has been held invalid under the
due process clause. an order issued by the interstate commerce
commission relieving short line railroads from the obligation to pay the
usual fixed sum per day rental for cars used on foreign roads, for a
space of two days was arbitrary and invalid.[] a retirement act which
made eligible for pensions all persons who had been in [pg ]the service of
any railroad within one year prior to the adoption of the law, counted
past unconnected service of an employee toward the requirement for a
pension without any contribution therefor, and treated all carriers as a
single employer and pooled their assets, without regard to their
individual obligations, was held unconstitutional.[]
in laying taxes, the federal government is less narrowly restricted by
the fifth amendment than are the states by the fourteenth. it may tax
property belonging to its citizens, even if such property is never
situated within the jurisdiction of the united states,[] or the
income of a citizen resident abroad, which is derived from property
located at his residence.[] the difference is explained by the fact
that the protection of the federal government follows the citizen
wherever he goes, whereas the benefits of state government accrue only
to persons and property within the state's borders. the supreme court
has said that, in the absence of an equal protection clause, "a claim of
unreasonable classification or inequality in the incidence or
application of a tax raises no question under the fifth amendment,
***"[] it has sustained, over charges of unfair differentiation
between persons, a graduated income tax;[] a higher tax on
oleomargarine than on butter;[] an excise tax on "puts" but not on
"calls";[] a tax on the income of businesses operated by corporations
but not on similar enterprises carried on by individuals;[] an income
tax on foreign corporations, based on their income from sources within
the united states, while domestic corporations are taxed on income from
all sources;[] a tax on foreign-built but not upon domestic
yachts;[] a tax on employers of eight or more persons, with
exemptions for agricultural labor and domestic service;[] a gift tax
law embodying a plan of graduations and exemptions under which donors of
the same amount might be liable for different sums;[] an alaska
statute imposing license taxes only on nonresident fisherman;[] an
act which taxed the manufacture of oil and fertilizer from herring at a
higher rate than similar processing of other fish or fish offal;[] an
excess profits tax which defined "invested capital" with reference to
the original cost of the property rather than to its present value;[]
and an undistributed profits tax in the computation of which special
credits were allowed to certain taxpayers;[] an estate tax upon the
estate of a deceased spouse in respect of the moiety of the surviving
spouse where the effect of the dissolution of the community is to
enhance the value of the survivor's moiety.[]
[pg ]
retroactive taxes
a gift tax cannot be imposed on gifts consummated before the taxing
statute was adopted.[] a conclusive presumption that gifts made
within two years of death were made in contemplation of death was
condemned as arbitrary and capricious even with respect to subsequent
transfers.[] a tax may be made retroactive for a short period to
include profits made while it was in process of enactment. a special
income tax on profits realized by the sale of silver, retroactive for 
days, which was approximately the period during which the silver
purchase bill was before congress, was held valid.[] an income tax
law, made retroactive to the beginning of the calendar year in which it
was adopted, was found constitutional as applied to the gain from the
sale, shortly before its enactment, of property received as a gift
during the year.[] retroactive assessment of penalties for fraud or
negligence,[] or of an additional tax on the income of a corporation
used to avoid a surtax on its shareholders,[] does not deprive the
taxpayer of property without due process of law.
an additional excise tax imposed upon property still held for sale,
after one excise tax had been paid by a previous owner, does not violate
the due process clause.[] a transfer tax measured in part by the
value of property held jointly by a husband and wife, including that
which comes to the joint tenancy as a gift from the decedent spouse, is
valid,[] as is the inclusion in the gross income of the settler [pg ]of
income accruing to a revocable trust during any period when he had power
to revoke or modify it.[]
the power of congress in virtue of its wardship over indians extends to
a restriction on alienation of indian lands even after a particular
indian has been granted citizenship.[] but rights of tax exemption
accruing to indian allotments under an act of congress, which have
become vested, are protected by this amendment against repeal.[] one
who was duly enrolled as a member of the chickasaw nation acquired
valuable rights which the secretary of the interior could not strike
down without notice and hearing.[] an act authorizing suit against
allottees of indian property as a class, for the value of services in
securing the allotments, which provided for notice upon the governor of
the tribe and designated the attorney general to defend the suit, was
consonant with due process.[] where the statute which created a
tribal council for the osage indians, to be elected by the tribe, at the
same time vested the secretary of the interior with discretion to remove
a member without notice or hearing, there was no denial of due process
of law since the right to elect was united in its creation with the
right of removal.[] a statute of the choctaw nation providing for the
forfeiture and sale of buildings erected on their lands, was held to be
unenforceable without giving the builder an opportunity to be
heard.[]
the national eminent domain power
being an incident of sovereignty, the right of eminent domain requires
no constitutional recognition. the requirement of just compensation is
merely a limitation upon the exercise of a preexisting power[] to
which all private property is subject.[] this prerogative of the
national government can neither be enlarged nor diminished by a
state.[] whenever lands in a state are needed for a public [pg ]purpose,
congress may authorize that they be taken, either by proceedings in the
courts of the state, with its consent, or by proceedings in the courts
of the united states, with or without any consent or concurrent act of
the state.[] the facts that land included in a federal reservoir
project is owned by a state, or that its taking may impair the tax
revenue of the state, that the reservoir will obliterate part of the
state's boundary and interfere with the state's own project for water
development and conservation, constitute no barrier to the condemnation
of the land by the united states under its superior power of eminent
domain.[]
there is no constitutional prohibition against confiscation of enemy
property.[] congress may authorize seizure and sequestration through
executive channels of property believed to be enemy owned if adequate
provision is made for return in case of mistake.[] an alien friend is
entitled to the protection of the fifth amendment against a taking of
property for public use without just compensation.[] the fact that
property of our citizens may be confiscated in that alien's country does
not subject the alien friend's property to confiscation here.[]
the extent to which private property shall be taken for public use rests
wholly in the legislative discretion.[] whether the courts have power
to review a determination of the lawmakers that a particular use is a
public use was left in doubt by the decision in united states ex rel.
t.v.a. v. welch.[] speaking for the majority, justice black
declared: "we think that it is the function of congress to decide what
type of taking is for a public use ***"[] in a concurring opinion
in which chief justice stone joined, justice reed took exception to that
portion of the opinion, insisting that whether or not a taking is [pg ]for a
public purpose is a judicial question.[] justice frankfurter
interpreted the controlling opinion as recognizing the doctrine that
"whether a taking is for a public purpose is not a question beyond
judicial competence."[] all agreed that the condemnation of property
which had been isolated by the flooding of a highway, to avoid the
expense of constructing a new highway, was a lawful public purpose.
previous cases have held that the preservation for memorial purposes of
the line of battle at gettysburg was a public use for which private
property could be taken by condemnation;[] that where establishment
of a reservoir involved flooding part of a town, the united states might
take nearby property for a new townsite and the fact that there might be
some surplus lots to be sold did not deprive the transaction of its
character as taking for public use.[]
the franchise of a private corporation is property which cannot be taken
for public use without compensation. upon condemnation of a lock and dam
belonging to a navigation company, the government was required to pay
for the franchise to take tolls as well as for the tangible
property.[] letters patent for a new invention or discovery in the
arts confer upon the patentee an exclusive property for which
compensation must be made when the government uses the patent.[] the
frustration of a private contract by the requisitioning of the entire
output of a steel manufacturer is not a taking for which compensation is
required.[] where, however, the government requisitioned from a power
company all of the electric power which could be produced by use of the
water diverted through its intake canal, thereby cutting off the supply
of a lessee which had a right, amounting to a corporeal hereditament
under state law, to draw a portion of that water, the latter was awarded
compensation for the rights taken.[] an order requiring the removal
or alteration of a bridge over a navigable river, to abate the
obstruction to navigation, is not a taking of property within the
meaning of the constitution.[] the exclusion, from the amount to be
paid to the owners of condemned property, of the value of improvements
made by the government under a lease, was held constitutional.[] an
undertaking to reduce the menace from flood damages which was inevitable
but for the government's work does not constitute the government a taker
of all lands not fully protected; [pg ]the government does not owe
compensation under the fifth amendment to every landowner whom it fails
to or cannot protect.[]
when property is taken
according to the legal tender cases,[] the requirement of just
compensation for property taken for public use refers only to direct
appropriation and not to consequential injuries resulting from the
exercise of lawful power. this formula leaves open the question as to
whether injuries are "consequential" merely. recent doctrine embodies a
more definite test. in united states v. dickinson,[] the supreme
court held that property is "taken" within the meaning of the
constitution "when inroads are made upon the owner's use of it to an
extent that, as between private parties, a servitude has been acquired
either by an agreement or in course of time."[] where the noise and
glaring lights of planes landing at or leaving an airport leased to the
united states, flying below the navigable air space as defined by
congress, interfere with the normal use of a neighboring farm as a
chicken farm, there is such a taking as to give the owner a
constitutional right to compensation.[] that the government had
imposed a servitude on land adjoining its fort so as to constitute a
taking within the law of eminent domain may be found from the facts that
it had repeatedly fired the guns of the fort across the land and had
established a fire control service there.[] a corporation chartered
by congress to construct a tunnel and operate railway trains therein was
held liable for damages in the suit by an individual whose property was
so injured by smoke and gas forced from the tunnel as to amount to a
taking of private property.[]
navigable waters
riparian ownership is subject to the power of congress to regulate
commerce. when damage results consequentially from an improvement of a
navigable river, it is not a taking of property, but merely the exercise
of a servitude to which the property is always [pg ]subject.[] what
constitutes a navigable river within the purview of the commerce clause
often involves sharply disputed issues of fact and of law. in the
leading case of the daniel ball[] the court laid down the rule that:
"those rivers must be regarded as public navigable rivers in law which
are navigable in fact. and they are navigable in fact when they are
used, or are susceptible of being used, as highways for commerce, over
which trade and travel are or may be conducted in the customary modes of
trade and travel on water."[] in , over the dissent of two
justices, the court held that the phrase "natural and ordinary
condition" refers to volume of water, the gradients and the regularity
of the flow. it further held that in determining the navigable character
of a river it is proper to consider "the feasibility of interstate use
after reasonable improvements which might be made."[] a few months
later it decided unanimously that congress may exercise the power of
eminent domain in connection with the construction of a dam and
reservoir on the nonnavigable stretches of a river in order to preserve
or promote commerce on the navigable portions.[]
the government does not have to compensate a riparian owner for cutting
off his access to navigable waters by changing the course of the stream
in order to improve navigation.[] where submerged land under
navigable waters of a bay are planted with oysters, the action of the
government in dredging a channel across the bay in such a way as to
destroy the oyster bed is not a "taking" of property in the
constitutional sense.[] the determination by congress that the whole
flow of a stream should be devoted to navigation does not take any
private property rights of a water power company which holds a revocable
permit to erect dams and dykes for the purpose of controlling the
current and using the power for commercial purposes.[] the interest
of a riparian owner in keeping the level of a navigable stream low
enough to maintain a power head for his use was not one for which he was
entitled to be compensated when the government raised the level by
erecting a dam to improve navigation.[] inasmuch as a riparian owner
has no private property in the flow of the stream, a license to maintain
a hydroelectric dam, may, without offending the fifth amendment, contain
a provision giving the united states an option to acquire the property
at a value assumed to be less than its fair value at the time of
taking.[]
[pg ]where the government erects dams and other obstructions across a river,
causing an overflow of water which renders the property affected unfit
for agricultural use and deprives it of all value, there is taking of
property for which the government is under an implied contract to make
just compensation.[] the construction of locks and for "canalizing" a
river, which cause recurrent overflows, impairing but not destroying the
value of the land amounts to a partial taking of property within the
meaning of the fifth amendment;—the fee remains in the owner, subject
to an easement in the united states to overflow it as often as may
necessarily result from the operation of the lock and dam for purposes
of navigation.[] compensation has been awarded for the erosion of
land by waters impounded by a government dam,[] and for the
destruction of the agricultural value of land located on a nonnavigable
tributary of the mississippi river, which as a result of the continuous
maintenance of the river's level at high water mark, was permanently
invaded by the percolation of the waters, and its drainage
obstructed.[] when the construction of locks and dams raised the
water in a nonnavigable creek to about one foot below the crest of an
upper milldam, thus preventing the drop in the current necessary to run
the mill, there was a taking of property in the constitutional
sense.[] a contrary conclusion was reached with respect to the
destruction of property of the owner of a lake through the raising of
the lake level as a consequence of an irrigation project, where the
result to the lake owner's property could not have been foreseen.[]
if only a portion of a single tract is taken, the owner's compensation
includes any element of value arising out of the relation of the part
taken to the entire tract.[] thus, where the taking of a strip of
land across a farm closed a private right of way, an allowance was
properly made for value of the easement.[] on the other hand, if the
taking has in fact benefited the owner, the benefit may be set off
against the value of the land condemned.[] but there may not be taken
into account any supposed benefit which the owner may receive in common
with all from the public use to which the property is appropriated.[]
where congress condemned certain lands for park [pg ]purposes, setting off
resulting benefits against the value of property taken, and by
subsequent act directed the erection of a fire-station house therein, it
was held that property was not thereby taken without just
compensation.[] the constitution does not require payment of
consequential damages to other property of the owner consisting of
separate tracts adjoining that affected by the taking.[]
just compensation means the full and perfect equivalent, in money, of
the property taken.[] the owner's loss, not the taker's gain is the
measure of such compensation.[] where the property has a determinable
market value, that is the normal measure of recovery.[] market value
is "what a willing buyer would pay in cash to a willing seller."[] it
may reflect not only the use to which the property is presently devoted
but also that to which it may be readily converted.[] but the value
of the property to the government for its particular use is not a
criterion.[] in two recent cases the court held that the owners of
cured pork[] and black pepper[] which was requisitioned by the
government during the war could recover only the o.p.a. ceiling price
for those commodities, despite findings of the court of claims that the
replacement cost of the meat exceeded its ceiling price, and that the
pepper had a "retention value" in excess of that price. by a
five-to-four decision it ruled that the government was not obliged to
pay the market value of a tug where such value had been enhanced as a
consequence of the government's urgent war time needs.[]
[pg ]consequential damages such as destruction of a business,[] the
expense of moving fixtures and personal property from the premises, or
the loss of goodwill which inheres in the location of the land, are not
recoverable when property is taken in fee.[] but a different
principle obtains where only a temporary occupancy is assumed. if a
portion of a long term lease is taken, damage to fixtures is allowed in
addition to the value of the occupancy, and the expenses of moving,
storage charges, and the cost of preparing the space for occupancy by
the government are proper elements to be considered in determining the
fair rental value of the premises for the period taken.[] these
elements are not taken into account in fixing compensation for
condemnation of leaseholds for the remainder of their term.[] in
kimball laundry co. v. united states,[] the court by a close
division held that when the united states condemned a laundry plant for
temporary occupancy, evidence should have been received concerning the
diminution in the value of its business due to destruction of its trade
routes, and compensation allowed for any demonstrable loss of
going-concern value. in united states v. pewee coal co.,[]
involving another temporary seizure by the government, a similarly
divided court sustained the court of claims in awarding the company
compensation for losses attributable to increased wage payments by the
government. four justices thought no such loss had been shown.
interest
ordinarily property is taken under a condemnation suit upon the payment
of the money award by the condemner and no interest accrues.[] if,
however, the property is taken in fact before payment is made, just
compensation includes an increment which, to avoid use of the term
"interest," the court has called "an amount sufficient to produce the
full equivalent of that value paid contemporaneously with the
taking."[] if the owner and the government enter into a contract
which stipulates the purchase price for lands to be taken, with no
provision for interest, the fifth amendment is inapplicable and the
landowner cannot recover interest even though payment of the purchase
price is delayed.[] where property of a citizen has been mistakenly
seized by the government, converted into money and invested, the owner
is entitled, in recovering compensation, to an allowance for the use of
his property.[]
[pg ]
enforcement of right to compensation
when a taking of private property has been ordered, the question of just
compensation is judicial.[] the compensation to be paid may be
ascertained by any appropriate tribunal capable of estimating the value
of the property. whether the tribunal shall be created directly by
congress or one already established by the state shall be adopted for
the occasion, is a matter of legislative discretion.[] the estimate
of just compensation is not required to be made by a jury, but may be
entrusted to commissioners appointed by a court or by the executive, or
to an inquest consisting of more or fewer men than an ordinary
jury.[] the federal courts may take jurisdiction of an action in
ejectment by a citizen against officers of the government, to recover
property of which he has been deprived by force and which has been
converted to the use of the government without lawful authority and
without just compensation.[] where property is taken by the united
states in the exercise of the power of eminent domain, but without
condemnation proceedings, the owner may, under the tucker act, bring
suit for just compensation in the court of claims or in a district court
sitting as a court of claims.[]
the fifth amendment does not require that compensation shall actually be
paid in advance of the taking[] but the owner is entitled to
reasonable, certain, and adequate provision for obtaining compensation
before his occupancy is disturbed.[] in time of war or immediate
public danger private property may be impressed into public service
without the consent of the owner, but such taking raises an implied
promise on the part of the united states to reimburse the owner.[] an
objection that an act of congress providing for condemnation of land for
a public purpose limited the aggregate amount to be expended was
rejected, since the limitation did not affect the right of property
holders in the event of condemnation.[]
notes
[] ex parte wilson,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] mackin v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. moreland,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte wilson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wong wing v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte wilson,  u.s.  ().
[] mackin v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] parkinson v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. dewalt,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte wilson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] duke v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte bain,  u.s. ,  ().
[] breese v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] johnson v. sayre,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte quirin,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] ex parte lange,  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] kepner v. united states,  u.s.  (). this case
arose under the act of congress of july ,  ( stat. ) for the
temporary civil government of the philippine islands. to the same effect
are united states v. sanges,  u.s. ,  (), and united
states v. evans,  u.s.  (), both cases arising within the
united states.
[] united states v. oppenheimer,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. ball,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte lange,  wall.  ().
[] bozza v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] wade v. hunter,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. perez,  wheat.  (); logan v.
united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] simmons v. united states,  u.s.  (); thompson
v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] lovato v. new mexico,  u.s.  ().
[] wade v. hunter,  u.s.  ().
[] collins v. loisel,  u.s.  ().
[] taylor v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bassing v. cady,  u.s. , - ().
[] united states v. wilson,  pet. ,  ().
[] burton v. united states,  u.s.  (); united
states v. randenbush,  pet. ,  ().
[] morgan v. devine,  u.s.  (). see also carter
v. mcclaughry,  u.s.  (); albrecht v. united states, 
[] ex parte nielsen,  u.s. ,  ().
[] helvering v. mitchell,  u.s.  ().
[] pinkerton v. united states,  u.s.  (); united
states v. bayer,  u.s.  ().
[] pinkerton v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] american tobacco co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] coffey v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. la franca,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. mitchell,  u.s.  ().
[] waterloo distilling corp. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] united states v. furlong,  wheat. ,  ().
[] united states v. lanza,  u.s.  (); jerome v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] in re chapman,  u.s. ,  ().
[] see generally j.h. wigmore,  evidence in trials at common
law, § (nd ed., ); also edward s. corwin, the supreme court's
construction of the self-incrimination clause,  michigan law review,
[] mccarthy v. arndstein,  u.s. ,  (). see
also boyd v. united states,  u.s.  (); counselman v.
hitchcock,  u.s.  (); brown v. walker,  u.s.  ().
[] rogers v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
united states v. monia,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hoffman v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
mason v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] rogers v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
united states v. murdock,  u.s. ,  ().
[] brown v. walker,  u.s. , - ().
[] cf. burdick v. united states,  u.s.  (); and
biddle v. perovich,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. murdock,  u.s. ,  ().
[] feldman v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] brown v. walker,  u.s.  (); johnson v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] cf. twining v. new jersey,  u.s.  ().
however, a defendant in a prosecution by the united states enjoys a
statutory right to have the jury instructed that his failure to testify
creates no presumption against him.  u.s.c. ; bruno v. u.s., 
u.s.  (). see also  u.s. at .
[] pierce v. united states,  u.s.  (); wilson
v. united states,  u.s.  (); united states v. mitchell,
[] ibid., . in upshaw v. united states,  u.s. 
(), a sharply divided court found the mcnabb case inapplicable to a
case in which respondent, while under arrest for assault with intent to
rape, was brought, by extended questioning, to confess having previously
committed murder in an attempt to rape.
[] sullivan v. united states,  u.s. ,  
[] blau v. united states,  u.s.  (). see also
blau v. united states,  u.s.  (); rogers v. united states,
 u.s.  (); dennis v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] holt v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] rochin v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] re harris,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dier v. banton,  u.s.  ().
[] re fuller,  u.s.  ().
[] arndstein v. mccarthy,  u.s.  ().
[] mccarthy v. arndstein,  u.s.  ().
[] mccarthy v. arndstein,  u.s.  ().
[] hale v. henkel,  u.s.  (); wilson v. united
states,  u.s.  (); oklahoma press pub. co. v. walling, 
[] united states v. white,  u.s.  ().
[] rogers v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] see pp. - ante.
[] ibid. . in a dissenting opinion justice frankfurter
argued: "the underlying assumption of the court's opinion is that all
records which congress in the exercise of its constitutional powers may
require individuals to keep in the conduct of their affairs, because
those affairs also have aspects of public interest, become 'public'
records in the sense that they fall outside the constitutional
protection of the fifth amendment. the validity of such a doctrine lies
in the scope of its implications. the claim touches records that may be
required to be kept by federal regulatory laws, revenue measures, labor
and census legislation in the conduct of business which the
understanding and feeling of our people still treat as private
enterprise, even though its relations to the public may call for
governmental regulation, including the duty to keep designated
records.... if congress by the easy device of requiring a man to keep
the private papers that he has customarily kept can render such papers
'public' and nonprivileged, there is little left to either the right of
privacy or the constitutional privilege." ibid. .
[] the institutes, part , - ().
[] on the above see especially justice harlan's dissenting
opinion in hurtado v. california,  u.s. ,  (); also den
ex dem. murray v. hoboken land & improvement co.,  how. , 
(); twining v. new jersey,  u.s.  (); also corwin,
liberty against government (louisiana state university press), chap.
[] scott v. sandford,  how. ,  ().
[] adkins v. children's hospital,  u.s.  (). see
also adair v. united states,  u.s.  (); and lochner v.
new york,  u.s.  ().
[] den ex dem. murray v. hoboken land & improvement co., 
how. ,  ().
[] union p.r. co. v. united states (sinking fund cases), 
[] wong wing v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. ju toy,  u.s. ,  (); cf.
quon quon poy v. johnson,  u.s.  ().
[] wight v. davidson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lovato v. new mexico,  u.s. ,  ().
[] public utility comrs. v. ynchausti & co.,  u.s. ,
[] johnson v. eisentrager,  u.s.  (); cf. in re
yamashita,  u.s.  (). both decisions were reached by a divided
court. in the yamashita case, justices rutledge and murphy dissented on
the ground that the due process clause applies to every human being,
including enemy belligerents.
[] davidson v. new orleans,  u.s. ,  (). public
clearing house v. coyne,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte wall,  u.s. ,  ().
[] interstate commerce commission v. brimson,  u.s. ,
 (); cooke v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ex parte wall,  u.s.  ().
[] reaves v. ainsworth,  u.s. ,  (). see
also ex parte reed,  u.s.  (); johnson v. sayre,  u.s.
 (); mullan v. united states,  u.s.  (); united
states ex rel. creary v. weeks,  u.s.  ().
[] kahn v. anderson,  u.s.  ().
[] crain v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hopt v. utah,  u.s. ,  ().
[] blackmer v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hovey v. elliott,  u.s. ,  ().
[] beall v. new mexico ex rel. griffin,  wall. 
[] united surety co. v. american fruit product co., 
[] helis v. ward,  u.s.  ().
[] fayerweather v. ritch,  u.s.  ().
[] hanover nat. bank v. moyses,  u.s. ,  ().
[] parsons v. district of columbia,  u.s.  ().
[] wright v. davidson,  u.s.  ().
[] jones v. buffalo creek coal & coke co.,  u.s. 
[] luria v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] yee hem v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] tot v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] opp cotton mills v. administrator,  u.s. , ,
[] ibid. .
[] consolidated edison co. v. national labor relations
board,  u.s.  ().
[] central of georgia r. co. v. wright,  u.s. , ,
,  (); lipke v. lederer,  u.s. ,  ().
[] phillips v. comr. of internal revenue,  u.s. 
(). cf. springer v. united states,  u.s. ,  (); and
passavant v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] wong yang sung v. mcgrath,  u.s. ,  ().
[] morgan v. united states,  u.s. , - ().
[] national labor relations board v. mackay co.,  u.s.
[] western paper makers' chemical co. v. united states,
 u.s.  (). see also united states v. abilene & s.r. co.,
[] consolidated edison co. v. national labor relations
board,  u.s. , - ().
[] londoner v. denver,  u.s.  ().
[] federal communications commission v. wjr,  u.s. ,
[] ibid. . "the requirements imposed by the guaranty [of
due process of law] are not technical, nor is any particular form of
procedure necessary." inland empire council v. millis,  u.s. ,
 (). see administrative procedure act,  stat.  (); 
[] ibid. -. justices brandeis, stone and cardozo, while
concurring in the result, took exception to this proposition.
[] federal power commission v. natural gas pipeline co.,
 u.s. ,  (); federal power commission v. hope natural gas
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] federal power commission v. hope natural gas co., 
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). justices black, douglas and burton
dissented.
[] united states v. ju toy,  u.s. ,  (). see
also yamataya v. fisher,  u.s. ,  (). cf. united states
ex rel. knauff v. shaughnessy,  u.s.  ().
[] oceanic steam navig. co. v. stranahan,  u.s. 
[] kwock jan fat v. white,  u.s. ,  (). see
also chin yow v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. sing tuck,  u.s.  (). see
also quon quon poy v. johnson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] zakonaite v. wolf,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c. § et seq. ().
[] united states ex rel. vajtauer v. comr. of immigration,
 u.s. ,  (). see also mahler v. eby,  u.s. , 
[] ng fung ho v. white,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ludecke v. watkins,  u.s.  (). three of the
four dissenting justices, justices douglas, murphy and rutledge, argued
that even an enemy alien could not be deported without a fair hearing.
[] steward machine co. v. davis,  u.s. , -
(); currin v. wallace,  u.s. ,  (); sunshine anthracite
coal co. v. adkins,  u.s. ,  (); detroit bank v. united
states,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] hill v. united states ex rel. weiner,  u.s. , 
[] district of columbia v. brooke,  u.s.  ().
[] panama r. co. v. johnson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. rock royal co-operative,  u.s. ,
[] currin v. wallace,  u.s.  ().
[] detroit bank v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] hurd v. hodge,  u.s.  ().
[] thiel v. southern pacific co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. , . cf. the following sentence from the
concurring opinion of justice jackson in railway express agency, inc.
v. new york,  u.s. ,  (): "i regard it as a salutary
doctrine that cities, states and the federal government must exercise
their powers so as not to discriminate between their inhabitants except
upon some reasonable differentiation fairly related to the object of
regulation."
[] addyston pipe and steel co. v. united states,  u.s.
[] baltimore & o.r. co. v. interstate commerce commission,
 u.s.  (); wilson v. new,  u.s.  (); ellis v.
united states,  u.s.  (). see also united states v.
garbish,  u.s.  ().
[] patterson v. the "eudora,"  u.s.  ().
[] philadelphia, b. & w.r. co. v. schubert,  u.s. 
[] texas & n.o.r. co. v. brotherhood of railway & s.s.
clerks,  u.s.  (); virginian r. co. v. system federation,
 u.s. ,  (); national labor relations board v. jones &
laughlin steel corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] highland v. russell car & snow plow co.,  u.s. ,
 (); united states v. rock royal co-operative,  u.s. 
(); sunshine anthracite coal co. v. adkins,  u.s.  ();
bowles v. willingham,  u.s.  ().
[] farrington v. tokushige,  u.s.  ().
[] yu cong eng v. trinidad,  u.s. ,  ().
[] fleming v. rhodes,  u.s. ,  ().
[] woods v. stone,  u.s.  ().
[] knox v. lee,  wall. ,  ().
[] norman v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  (),  u.s.c.  et seq. ().
[] paramino lumber co. v. marshall,  u.s.  ().
[] mulford v. smith,  u.s.  ().
[] mcfaddin v. evans-snider-buel co.,  u.s. 
[] montoya v. gonzales,  u.s.  ().
[] ochoa v. hernandez y morales,  u.s.  ().
[] united states ex rel. burnett v. teller,  u.s. ,
[] oregon & c.r. co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] capital trust co. v. calhoun,  u.s.  ().
[] frisbie v. united states,  u.s.  (); see
also margolin v. united states,  u.s.  (); hines v.
lowrey,  u.s.  ().
[] wickard v. filburn,  u.s.  ().
[] noble v. union river logging r. co.,  u.s. 
[] danzer co. v. gulf & s.i.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] lynch v. united states,  u.s. ,  (). see
also perry v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] louisville joint stock land bank v. radford,  u.s.
[] wright v. mountain trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] continental illinois nat. bank & trust co. v. chicago
r.i. & p.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] kuehner v. irving trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] re  church street bldg. corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] lynch v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dodge v. osborn,  u.s.  ().
[] graham v. goodcell,  u.s.  ().
[] anniston mfg. co. v. davis,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. heinszen & co.,  u.s. , 
[] united states v. new york & c. mail s.s. co.,  u.s.
[] united states v. carolene products co.,  u.s. 
(); carolene products co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] kentucky whip collar co. v. illinois c.r. co.,  u.s.
[] virginian r. co. v. system federation,  u.s. ,
 (); national labor relations board v. jones & laughlin steel
corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] national labor relations board v. stowe spinning co.,
[] national labor relations board v. mackay co.,  u.s.
[] woods v. miller,  u.s. ,  (). see also
bowles v. willingham,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte jackson,  u.s.  ().
[] public clearing house v. coyne,  u.s.  ();
sustained in donaldson v. read magazine,  u.s.  ().
[] american school of magnetic healing v. mcannulty, 
[] united states ex rel. milwaukee social democratic pub.
co. v. burleson,  u.s.  ().
[] st. joseph stock yards co. v. united states,  u.s.
 (); denver union stock yards co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[]  u.s.  (). the result of this case had been
foreshadowed by the opinion of justice stone in federal power commission
v. natural gas pipeline co.,  u.s. ,  () to the effect
that the commission was not bound to the use of any single formula or
combination of formulas in determining rates.
[] american telephone & telegraph co. v. united states,
 u.s.  (); united states v. new york telephone co.,  u.s.
 (); northwestern electric co. v. federal power commission, 
[] valvoline oil co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(); champlin refining co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] isbrandtsen-moller co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] st. louis s.w. ry. co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] akron c. & y.r. co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] dayton-goose creek r. co. v. united states,  u.s.
[] chicago, i. & l.r. co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(). cf. seaboard air line r. co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] united states v. berwind-white coal mine co.,  u.s.
[] united states ex rel. attorney general v. delaware &
hudson co.,  u.s. , , ,  ().
[] united states v. lowden,  u.s.  ().
[] louisville & n.r. co. v. mottley,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] railroad retirement board v. alton r. co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. bennett,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cook v. tait,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. lerner stores corp.,  u.s. , 
[] brushaber v. union p.r. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mccray v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] treat v. white,  u.s.  ().
[] flint v. stone tracy co.,  u.s.  ().
[] national paper & type co. v. bowers,  u.s. 
[] billings v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] steward machine co. v. davis,  u.s.  ();
helvering v. davis,  u.s.  ().
[] bromley v. mccaughn,  u.s.  ().
[] haavik v. alaska packers' association,  u.s. 
[] alaska fish salting & by-products co. v. smith, 
[] la belle iron works v. united states,  u.s. 
[] helvering v. northwest steel mills,  u.s. 
[] fernandez v. wiener,  u.s.  (); cf.
coolidge v. long,  u.s.  ().
[] untermeyer v. anderson,  u.s.  (). see also
blodgett v. holden,  u.s.  (); nichols v. coolidge, 
[] heiner v. donnan,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. hudson,  u.s.  (). see
also stockdale v. insurance companies,  wall. , ,  ();
brushaber v. union pac. r.r.,  u.s. ,  (); lynch v.
hornby,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cooper v. united states,  u.s.  (); see
also reinecke v. smith,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. mitchell,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. nat. grocery co.,  u.s.  ().
[] patton v. brady,  u.s.  ().
[] tyler v. united states,  u.s.  (); united
states v. jacobs,  u.s.  ().
[] reinecke v. smith,  u.s.  ().
[] tiger v. western investment co.,  u.s.  ().
see also brader v. james,  u.s.  (); williams v. johnson,
 u.s.  (); lone wolf v.. hitchcock,  u.s.  ().
[] choate v. trapp,  u.s.  (). see also
english v. richardson,  u.s.  ().
[] garfield v. united states,  u.s.  (). see
also united states ex rel. turner v. fisher,  u.s.  ().
[] winton v. amos,  u.s.  ().
[] united states ex rel. brown v. lane,  u.s. 
[] walker v. mcloud,  u.s. ,  (); carpenter
v. shaw,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. jones,  u.s. ,  ();
united states v. carmack,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. lynah,  u.s. ,  ().
[] kohl v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] chappell v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] oklahoma v. atkinson co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. chemical foundation,  u.s. , 
(). see also brown v. u.s.,  cr.  (); page (miller) v.
united states,  wall. ,  (); woodson v. deutsche g. &
s.s.v. roessler,  u.s.  (); united states v. dunnington, 
u.s.  (); cummings v. deutsche bank,  u.s.  ().
[] stoehr v. wallace,  u.s. ,  ().
[] silesian-american corp. v. clark,  u.s.  ();
becker steel co. v. cummings,  u.s.  ().
[] russian volunteer fleet v. united states,  u.s. 
(), followed in guessefeldt v. mcgrath,  u.s.  ().
[] shoemaker v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -; citing united states v. gettysburg
electric r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); rindge co. v. los angeles
county,  u.s. ,  (); old dominion land co. v. united
states,  u.s. ,  (); cincinnati v. vester,  u.s. ,
[] united states v. gettysburg electric r. co.,  u.s.
[] brown v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] monongahela nav. co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] james v. campbell,  u.s. ,  (). see also
hollister v. benedict & b. mfg. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] omnia commercial co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] international paper co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] hannibal bridge co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
[] old dominion land co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] united states v. sponenbarger,  u.s.  ().
[]  wall. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. causby,  u.s.  ().
[] portsmouth harbor land & hotel co. v. united states,
 u.s.  (). cf. portsmouth harbor land & hotel co. v.
united states,  u.s.  (); peabody v. united states,  u.s.
[] richards v. washington terminal co.,  u.s. 
[] gibson v. united states,  u.s. , , 
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. appalachian electric power co., 
[] oklahoma v. atkinson co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. commodore park, inc.,  u.s. 
[] lewis blue point oyster cultivation co. v. briggs, 
[] united states v. chandler-dunbar co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. willow river power co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. appalachian electric power co., 
[] united states v. lynah,  u.s.  (). see also
jacobs v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. cress,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] united states v. dickinson,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. kansas city ins. co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. cress,  u.s.  ().
[] horstmann co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] bauman v. ross,  u.s.  (); sharp v. united
states,  u.s. , -,  ().
[] united states v. welch,  u.s.  ().
[] bauman v. ross,  u.s.  ().
[] monongahela nav. co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] reichelderfer v. quinn,  u.s. ,  ().
[] sharp v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] monongahela nav. co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] united states ex rel. t.v.a. v. powelson,  u.s. ,
 (); united states v. miller,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states ex rel. t.v.a. v. powelson,  u.s. ,
 (); united states v. new river collieries co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. miller,  u.s. ,  (). see
also olson v. united states,  u.s.  (). cf. kimball
laundry co. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] boom co. v. patterson,  u.s.  (); mccandless
v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. chandler-dunbar co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. john j. felin & co.,  u.s. 
[] united states v. commodities trading corp.,  u.s.
[] united states v. cors,  u.s. ,  (). in
united states v. toronto nav co.,  u.s.  () the court
reversed a decision of the court of claims which based an award for an
obsolete great lakes car ferry in part on a capitalization of its prior
earnings, and in part on isolated sales of similar vessels used between
florida and cuba.
[] mitchell v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. general motors corp.,  u.s. ,
[] ibid. -.
[] united states v. petty motor co.,  u.s.  ().
[] danforth v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. klamath indians,  u.s. , 
(); jacobs v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] albrecht v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] henkels v. sutherland,  u.s.  (). see also
phelps v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] monongahela nav. co. v. united states,  u.s. ,
[] united states v. jones,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bauman v. ross,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. lee,  u.s. ,  ().
[] jacobs v. united states,  u.s.  (); united
states v. great falls mfg. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] hurley v. kincaid,  u.s.  ().
[] cherokee nation v. southern kansas r. co.,  u.s.
[] united states v. russell,  wall.  ().
[] shoemaker v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
coverage of the amendment 
offenses against the united states 
trial by jury 
impartial jury 
place of trial 
definition of crime 
right of confrontation 
assistance of counsel 
[pg ]
amendment 
in all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the state and district
wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have
been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and
cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against
him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor,
and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.
coverage of the amendment
criminal prosecutions in the district of columbia[] and in incorporated
territories[] must conform to this amendment, but those in
unincorporated territories need not.[] for this purpose, alaska was
held to be an incorporated territory even before the organization of its
territorial government.[] in in re ross[] the requirements of this
amendment were held to cover only citizens and others within the united
states or who are brought to the united states for trial for alleged
offenses committed elsewhere, not to citizens residing or temporarily
sojourning abroad.[] accordingly, laws passed to carry into effect
treaties granting extraterritorial rights were not rendered
unconstitutional by the fact that they did not secure to an accused the
right to trial by jury.
offenses against the united states
there are no common law offenses against the united states. only those
acts which congress has forbidden, with penalties for disobedience of
its command, are crimes.[] as used in the constitution [pg ]the word
"crime" embraces only offenses of a serious character. petty offenses
may be proceeded against summarily in any tribunal legally constituted
for that purpose.[] the nature of the act and the severity of
punishment prescribed determine whether an offense is serious or petty.
a penalty of $ for a violation, not necessarily involving moral
delinquency, of a revenue statute indicates only a petty offense.[] the
unlawful sale of the unused portion of railway excursion tickets without
a license, is at most an infringement of local police regulations; and
its moral quality is relatively inoffensive; it may therefore be tried
without a jury.[] but a charge of driving an automobile recklessly, so
as to endanger life and property, is a "grave offense" for which a jury
trial is requisite.[] a conspiracy to invade the rights of another
person also falls in that category.[]
actions to recover penalties imposed by act of congress,[] deportation
proceedings[] and contempt proceedings[] for violation of an
injunction have been held not to be criminal prosecutions. only a
prosecution which is technically criminal in its nature falls within the
purview of amendment vi.[] the concept of a criminal prosecution is
much narrower than that of a "criminal case" under the fifth
amendment.[]
trial by jury
the trial by jury required by the constitution includes all the
essential elements of jury trial which were recognized in this country
and in england when the constitution was adopted;[] a jury must
consist of twelve men, neither more nor less;[] the trial must be held
in the presence and under the superintendence of a judge having power to
instruct the jurors as to the law and advise them in respect of the
facts,[] and the verdict must be unanimous.[] but the requirement of
a jury trial is not jurisdictional; it is a privilege which the
defendant may waive with the consent of the government and the approval
of [pg ]the court. there is no distinction between a complete waiver of a
jury and a consent to be tried by less than twelve men.[] when a
person is charged with more than one crime, the right to a speedy trial
does not require that he be first tried on the earliest indictment; no
constitutional right is violated by removing him to another jurisdiction
for trial on a later indictment.[]
impartial jury
"***, the guarantee of an impartial jury to the accused in a criminal
prosecution, ***, secures to him the right to enjoy that mode of trial
from the first moment, and in whatever court, he is put on trial for the
offense charged. *** to accord to the accused a right to be tried by a
jury, in an appellate court, after he has been once fully tried
otherwise than by a jury, in the court of original jurisdiction, and
sentenced to pay a fine or be imprisoned for not paying it, does not
satisfy the requirements of the constitution."[]
the qualification of government employees to serve on juries in the
district of columbia has been the principal source of controversy
concerning the meaning of the phrase "impartial jury." in , the
supreme court decided, on common law grounds, that such employees were
disqualified in criminal proceedings instituted by the government.[]
as the proportion of public to private employees increased, this
decision created difficulties in securing properly qualified jurors. to
meet the situation, congress removed the disqualification by statute in
. in united states v. wood,[] the act was held valid as applied
in a criminal prosecution for theft from a private corporation. by a
narrow majority the court has subsequently held that government
employees as a class are not disqualified by an implied bias against a
person accused of violating the federal narcotics statutes,[] nor
against an officer of the communist party charged with willful failure
to appear before a congressional committee in compliance with a
subpoena.[] in both cases, the way was left open for a defendant to
establish the disqualification of federal employees by adducing proof of
actual bias.
[pg ]the constitution does not require congress to allow peremptory
challenge to jurors in criminal cases. consequently the contention that
several defendants being tried together on a charge of conspiracy were
denied a trial by an impartial jury because each was not allowed the
full statutory number of peremptory challenges was without merit.[] it
is good ground for challenge for cause that a juror has formed an
opinion as to the issue to be tried. but every opinion which a juror may
entertain does not necessarily disqualify him. upon the trial of the
issue of fact raised by such a challenge, the court must determine
whether the nature and strength of the opinion are such as in law
necessary to raise the presumption of partiality.[] a member of the
socialist party is not denied any constitutional right by being tried by
a jury composed exclusively of members of other parties and of property
owners.[]
place of trial
an accused cannot be tried in one district under an indictment showing
that the offense was committed in another;[] the locality in which the
offense is charged to have been committed determines the place and court
of trial.[] in a prosecution for conspiracy, the accused may be tried
in any state and district where an overt act was performed.[] where a
united states senator was indicted for agreeing to receive compensation
for services to be rendered in a proceeding before a government
department, and it appeared that a tentative arrangement for such
services was made in illinois and confirmed in st. louis, the defendant
was properly tried in st. louis, although he was not physically present
in missouri when notice of ratification was dispatched.[] the offense
of obtaining transportation of property in interstate commerce at less
than the carrier's published rates,[] or the sending of excluded
matter through the mails,[] may be made triable in any district
through which the forbidden transportation is conducted. by virtue of a
presumption that a letter is delivered in the district to which it is
addressed, the offense of scheming to defraud a corporation by mail was
held to have been committed in that district although the letter was
posted elsewhere.[] the constitution does not require any preliminary
hearing before issuance of a warrant for removal of an accused to the
court having jurisdiction of the charge.[] the assignment of a
district judge from one district to another, conformably to statute,
does not create a new judicial district whose boundaries are undefined
nor subject the accused to trial in a district not established when the
offense with which he is charged was committed.[] for offenses against
federal laws not committed within any state, congress has the sole power
to prescribe the place of trial; such an offense is not local and may be
tried at such place as congress may [pg ]designate.[] the place of trial
may be designated by statute after the offense has been committed.[]
definition of crime
the effect of the clause entitling an accused to know the nature and
cause of the accusation against him commences with the statutes fixing
or declaring offenses. it adopts the general rule of the common law that
such statutes are not to be construed to embrace offenses which are not
within their intention and terms. under this clause it is necessary that
a crime "be in some way declared by the legislative power"; it "cannot
be constructed by the courts from any supposed intention of the
legislature which the statute fails to state."[] a criminal statute
which is so vague that it leaves the standard of guilt to the "variant
views of the different courts and juries which may be called on to
enforce it"[] cannot be squared with this provision. thus it was held,
in the united states v. cohen grocery co.,[] that a statute making it
unlawful "for any person willfully *** to make any unjust or
unreasonable rate or charge in handling or dealing in or with any
necessaries" was unconstitutional because it was not "adequate to inform
persons accused of violation thereof of the nature and cause of the
accusation against them."[] but a provision of the immigration act[]
which makes it a felony for an alien against whom a specified order of
deportation is pending to "willfully fail or refuse to make timely
application in good faith for travel or other documents necessary to his
departure" is not, on its face, void for indefiniteness.[]
[pg ]an important aspect of this problem was presented, but not definitely
settled, in screws v. united states.[] there state law enforcement
officers had been convicted of violating a federal law making it a crime
for anyone acting under color of any law willfully to deprive anyone of
rights secured by the constitution of the united states.[] the
indictment charged that in beating to death a man whom they had just
arrested, these officers had deprived him of life without due process of
law. the defendant claimed that the statute was unconstitutional insofar
as it made criminal acts in violation of the due process clause, because
that concept was too vague to supply an ascertainable standard of
guilt.[] four opinions were written in the supreme court, no one of
which obtained the concurrence of a majority of the justices. to "avoid
grave constitutional questions" four members construed the word
"willfully" as "connoting a purpose to deprive a person of a specific
constitutional right,"[] and held that such "requirement of a specific
intent to deprive a person of a federal right made definite by decision
or other rule of law saves the act from any charge of
unconstitutionality on the grounds of vagueness."[] justices murphy
and rutledge considered the statute to be sufficiently definite with
respect to the offense charged and thought it unnecessary to anticipate
doubts that might arise in other cases.[] however, to prevent a
stalemate, justice rutledge voted with the four members who believed the
case should be reversed to be tried again on their narrower
interpretation of the statute. justices roberts, frankfurter and jackson
found the act too indefinite to be rescued by a restrictive
interpretation. with respect to the effect of the requirement of
willfulness, they said: "if a statute does not satisfy the due-process
requirement of giving decent advance notice of what it is which, if
happening, will be visited with punishment, so that men may presumably
have an opportunity to avoid the happening ***, then 'willfully'
bringing to pass such an undefined and too uncertain event cannot make
it sufficiently definite and ascertainable. 'willfully' doing something
that is forbidden, when that something is not sufficiently defined
according to the general conceptions of requisite certainty in our
criminal law, is not rendered sufficiently definite by that unknowable
having been done 'willfully.' it is true also of a statute that it
cannot lift itself up by its bootstraps."[] in williams v. united
states,[] however, it was held by a sharply divided court that §
did not err for vagueness where the indictment made it clear that the
constitutional right violated by the defendant was immunity from the use
of force and violence to obtain a confession, and this meaning was also
made clear by the trial judge's charge to the jury.[]
[pg ]statutes prohibiting the coercion of employers to hire unneeded
employees,[] establishing minimum wages and maximum hours of service
for persons engaged in the production of goods for interstate
commerce,[] forbidding undue or unreasonable restraints of trade,[]
making it unlawful to build fires near any forest or inflammable
material,[] banning the receipt of contributions by members of
congress from federal employees for any political purpose,[] or
penalizing the copying or taking of documents connected with the
national defense, with intent, or reason to believe that they are to be
used to the injury of the united states or to the advantage of a foreign
nation,[] have been held to be sufficiently definite to be
constitutional. a provision penalizing excessive charges in connection
with loans from the home owners loan corporation was not rendered
indefinite by the exception of "ordinary fees for services actually
rendered,"[] nor was a statute forbidding misstatement of the quantity
of the contents of a package wanting in certainty by reason of a proviso
permitting "reasonable variations."[]
the constitutional right to be informed of the nature and cause of the
accusation entitles the defendant to insist that the indictment apprise
him of the crime charged with such reasonable certainty that he can make
his defense and protect himself after judgment against another
prosecution on the same charge.[] no indictment is sufficient if it
does not allege all of the ingredients which constitute the crime. where
the language of a statute is, according to the natural import of the
words, fully descriptive of the offense, it is sufficient if the
indictment follows the statutory phraseology;[] but where the elements
of the crime have to be ascertained by reference to the common law or to
other statutes, it is not sufficient to set forth the offense in the
words of the statute; the facts necessary to bring the case within the
statutory definition must also be alleged.[] if an offense cannot be
accurately and clearly described without an allegation that the accused
is not within an exception contained in the statutes, an indictment
which does not contain such allegation is defective.[] despite the
omission of obscene particulars, an indictment in general language is
good if the unlawful conduct is so described so as reasonably to [pg ]inform
the accused of the nature of the charge sought to be established against
him.[] the constitution does not require the government to furnish a
copy of the indictment to an accused.[]
right of confrontation
the right of confrontation did not originate in the sixth amendment; it
was a common law right having recognized exceptions. the purpose of the
constitutional provision was to preserve that right, but not to broaden
it or wipe out the exceptions.[] the amendment does not accord a right
to be apprised of the names of witnesses who appeared before a grand
jury.[] it does not preclude the admission of dying declarations,[]
nor of the stenographic report of testimony given at a former trial by a
witness since deceased.[] an accused who is instrumental in concealing
a witness cannot complain of the admission of evidence to prove what
that witness testified at a former trial on a different indictment.[]
if the absence of the witness is chargeable to the negligence of the
prosecution, rather than to the procurement of the accused, evidence
given in a preliminary hearing before a united states commissioner
cannot be used at the trial.[] a statute which declared that the
judgment of conviction against the principal felons should be conclusive
evidence, in a prosecution against persons to whom they had transferred
property, that the property had been stolen or embezzled from the united
states, was held to contravene this clause.[]
assistance of counsel
the sixth amendment withholds from the federal courts, in all criminal
proceedings, the power to deprive an accused of his life or liberty
unless he has waived, or waives, the assistance of counsel.[] since
deportation proceedings are not criminal in character, the admission of
testimony given by the alien during investigation prior to arrest did
not render the hearing unfair, despite the fact that he [pg ]had not been
advised of his right to have counsel or to decline to answer questions
as to his alienage.[] the right to counsel is violated where, over the
defendant's objection, the court requires his counsel to represent a
co-defendant whose interest may possibly conflict with his;[] likewise
where the trial judge decided, without notice to a defendant and without
his presence, that the latter had consented to be represented by counsel
who also represented another defendant in the same case.[] the right
may be waived by a defendant whose education qualifies him to make an
intelligent choice.[] a sentence imposed upon a plea of guilty is
invalid if such plea was entered through deception or coercion of the
prosecuting attorney, or in reliance upon erroneous advice given by a
lawyer in the employ of the government, where the defendant did not have
the assistance of counsel and had not understandingly waived the right
to such assistance.[]
notes
[] callan v. wilson,  u.s.  ().
[] reynolds v. united states,  u.s.  (). see also
lovato v. new mexico,  u.s.  ().
[] balzac v. porto rico,  u.s. , - ().
[] rassmussen v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. hudson & goodwin,  cr. ,  ();
united states v. coolidge,  wheat.  (); united states v.
britton,  u.s. ,  (); united states v. eaton,  u.s.
[] callan v. wilson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] schick v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] district of columbia v. clawans,  u.s.  ().
[] district of columbia v. colts,  u.s.  ().
[] callan v. wilson,  u.s.  ().
[] oceanic navigation co. v. stranahan,  u.s. 
(); hepner v. united states,  u.s.  (); united states
v. regan,  u.s.  ().
[] united states ex rel. turner v. williams,  u.s. ,
 (); zakonaite v. wolf,  u.s.  ().
[] in re debs,  u.s. ,  (); gompers v. united
states,  u.s.  (); myers v. united states,  u.s. 
[] united states v. zucker,  u.s. ,  ().
[] counselman v. hitchcock,  u.s. ,  ().
[] patton v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] thompson v. utah,  u.s. ,  (); rassmussen
v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] capital traction co. v. hof,  u.s. ,  ().
[] maxwell v. dow,  u.s. ,  (); andres v.
united states,  u.s.  ().
[] patton v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] beavers v. haubert,  u.s.  ().
[] callan v. wilson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] crawford v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] frazier v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] dennis v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] stilson v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] reynolds v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ruthenberg v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] salinger v. loisel,  u.s.  ().
[] beavers v. henkel,  u.s. ,  ().
[] brown v. elliott,  u.s.  (); hyde v. united
states,  u.s.  (); haas v. henkel,  u.s.  ().
[] burton v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] armour packing co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] united states v. johnson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hagner v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hughes v. gault,  u.s.  (). cf. tinsley v.
treat,  u.s.  (); beavers v. henkel,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lamar v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] jones v. united states,  u.s. ,  (); united
states v. dawson,  how. ,  ().
[] cook v. united states,  u.s. ,  (). see
also united states v. socony-vacuum oil co.,  u.s. , -
(); also united states v. johnson,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. potter,  f. ,  (). see also
viereck v. united states,  u.s.  (); kraus bros. v. united
states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. cohen grocery co.,  f. , 
(), affirmed  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.c. §(c).
[] united states v. spector,  u.s.  ().
[] section  of the criminal code;  u.s.c. §.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] see also koehler et al. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] united states v. petrillo,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. darby,  u.s. ,  ().
[] nash v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. alford,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. wurzbach,  u.s.  ().
[] gorin v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] kay v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. shreveport grain & elevator co., 
[] united states v. cruikshank,  u.s. , , 
(); united states v. simmons,  u.s.  (); bartell v.
united states,  u.s.  (); burton v. united states,  u.s.
[] potter v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. carll,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. cook,  wall. ,  ().
[] rosen v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. van duzee,  u.s. ,  ().
[] salinger v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wilson v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] kirby v. united states,  u.s. ,  ();
robertson v. baldwin,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mattox v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] reynolds v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] motes v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] kirby v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] johnson v. zerbst,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states ex rel. bilokumsky v. tod,  u.s. 
[] glasser v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. hayman,  u.s.  ().
[] adams v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] walker v. johnston,  u.s.  (); von moltke v.
gillies,  u.s.  (). see also united states ex rel. mccann
v. adams,  u.s.  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
trial by jury in civil cases 
origin and purpose of the amendment 
trial by jury, elements of, preserved 
to what courts and cases applicable 
cases not governed by the amendment 
restrictive force of the amendment 
judge and jury 
line drawn by the common law 
directed verdicts 
waiver of right of trial by jury 
appeals from state courts to the supreme court 
[pg ]
amendment 
in suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed
twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no
fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of the
united states, than according to the rules of the common law.
trial by jury in civil cases
late in the federal convention it was moved that a clause be inserted in
article iii, section  of the draft constitution to read "*** and a
trial by jury shall be preserved as usual in civil cases." the proposal
failed when it was pointed out that the make-up and powers of juries
differed greatly in different states and that a uniform provision for
all states was impossible.[] the objection evidently anticipated that
in cases falling to their jurisdiction on account of the diversity of
citizenship of the parties, the federal courts would conform their
procedure to the laws of the several states.[] the omission, however,
raised an objection to the constitution which "was pressed with an
urgency and zeal *** well-nigh preventing its ratification."[] nor
was the agitation assuaged by hamilton's suggestion in the federalist
that congress would have ample power, in establishing the lower federal
courts and in making "exceptions" to the supreme court's appellate
jurisdiction, to safeguard jury trial in civil cases according to the
standards of the common law.[] his argument bore fruit, nevertheless,
in the seventh amendment, whereby, in the words of the court, the right
of trial by jury is preserved as it "existed under the english common
law when the amendment was adopted."[]
"trial by jury," in the sense of amendment vii, "is a trial by a jury of
twelve men, in the presence and under the superintendence of [pg ]a judge
empowered to instruct them on the law and to advise them on the facts
and (except in acquittal of a criminal charge) to set aside their
verdict if in his opinion it is against the law or the evidence."[] a
further requisite is "that there shall be a unanimous verdict of the
twelve jurors in all federal courts where a jury trial is held."[]
assuming such a jury, the amendment has for its primary purpose the
preservation of "*** the common law distinction between the province
of the court and that of the jury, whereby, in the absence of express or
implied consent to the contrary, issues of law are resolved by the court
and issues of fact are to be determined by the jury under appropriate
instructions by the court."[] but the amendment "does not exact the
retention of old forms of procedure" nor does it "prohibit the
introduction of new methods of ascertaining what facts are in issue
***" or new rules of evidence.[]
amendment vii governs only courts which sit under the authority of the
united states,[] including courts in the territories[] and the
district of columbia.[] it does not apply to a state court even when
it is enforcing a right created by federal statute.[] its coverage is
"*** limited to rights and remedies peculiarly legal in their nature,
and such as it was proper to assert in courts of law and by the
appropriate modes and proceedings of courts of law."[] the term
"common law" is used in contradistinction to suits in which equitable
rights alone were recognized at the time of the framing of the amendment
and equitable remedies were administered.[] hence it does not apply to
cases where recovery of money damages is incident to equitable relief
even though damages might have been recovered in an action at law.[]
nor does it apply to cases in admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, in
which the trial is by a court without a jury.[] nor does it reach
statutory proceedings unknown to the common law, such as an application
to a court of equity to enforce an order of an administrative body.[]
[pg ]
omission of a jury has been upheld in the following instances on the
ground that the suit in question was not a suit at common law within the
meaning of the seventh amendment;
() suits to enforce claims against the united states.[]
() suit authorized by territorial law against a municipality, based
upon a moral obligation only.[]
() suit to cancel a naturalization certificate for fraud.[]
() order of deportation of an alien.[]
() assessment of damages in patent infringement suit.[]
() longshoremen's and harbor workers' compensation act.[]
() jurisdiction of bankruptcy court to examine into reasonableness of
fees paid by person for legal services in contemplation of
bankruptcy.[]
() final decision of customs appraisers in regard to value of
imports.[]
it has been further held that there was no infringement of the
constitutional right to trial by jury in the following circumstances:
[pg ]() a territorial statute requiring specific answers to special
interrogations, in addition to a general verdict.[]
() a rule of a district of columbia court authorizing judgment by
default in an action ex contractu, on failure to show by affidavit a
good defense.[]
() a federal court's observance of a state statute making a certified
copy of a coroner's verdict prima facie evidence of the facts
stated.[]
() a federal statute ( stat. ) giving prima facie effect to
findings of the interstate commerce commission.[]
() an order of a district of columbia court appointing an auditor in a
law case to examine books and papers, make computations, hear testimony,
and render a report which will serve as prima facie evidence of the
facts found and conclusions reached, unless rejected by the court.[]
() a decree of the supreme court enjoining, in the exercise of its
original jurisdiction, the state of louisiana from continuing to
trespass upon lands under the ocean beyond its coasts and requiring the
state to account for the money derived from that area.[]
but the absolute right to a trial of the facts by a jury may not be
impaired by any blending with a claim, properly cognizable at law, of a
demand for equitable relief in aid of the legal action or during its
pendency. such aid in the federal courts must be sought in separate
proceedings.[] federal statutes from revised statutes (§) through
the judicial code (§), prohibiting courts of the united states to
sustain suits in equity where the remedy is complete at law, serve to
guard the right of trial by jury, and should be liberally construed.[]
so also should equity rule , requiring the answer to a bill in equity
to state any counterclaim arising out of the same transaction; such rule
was not intended to change the line between law and equity, and must be
construed as referring to equitable counterclaims only.[] nor may the
distinction between law and equity, so far as federal courts are
concerned, be obliterated by state legislation.[] so, where state law,
in advance of judgment, treated the whole proceeding upon a simple
contract, including determination of validity and of amount due, as an
equitable proceeding, it brought the case within the federal equity
jurisdiction on removal. ascertainment of plaintiff's demand being
properly by action at law, however, the fact [pg ]that the equity court had
power to summon a jury on occasion did not afford an equivalent of the
right of trial by jury secured by the seventh amendment.[] but where
state law gives an equitable remedy, such as to quiet title to land, the
federal courts will enforce it if it does not obstruct the rights of the
parties as to trial by jury.[] an order of the court of claims
attempting to reinstate a dismissed case in violation of plaintiff's
right to dismiss violates the latter's right to trial by jury and may be
corrected by mandamus.[]
judge and jury
as was noted above, the primary purpose of the amendment was to preserve
the historic line separating the province of the jury from that of the
judge, without at the same time preventing procedural improvement which
did not transgress this line. elucidating this formula, the court has
achieved the following results: it is constitutional for a federal
judge, in the course of trial, to express his opinion upon the facts,
provided all questions of fact are ultimately submitted to the jury;[]
to call the jury's attention to parts of the evidence he deems of
special importance,[] being careful to distinguish between matters of
law and matters of opinion in relation thereto;[] to inform the jury
when there is not sufficient evidence to justify a verdict, that such is
the case;[] to direct the jury, after plaintiff's case is all in, to
return a verdict for the defendant on the ground of the insufficiency of
the evidence;[] to set aside a verdict which in his opinion is against
the law or the evidence, and order a new trial;[] to refuse defendant
a new trial on the condition, accepted by plaintiff, that the latter
remit a portion of the damages awarded him;[] but not, on the other
hand, to deny plaintiff a new trial on the converse condition, although
defendant accepted it.[]
[pg ]
in  the court held, in slocum v. new york life insurance
company,[] that where upon the evidence a federal trial court, sitting
in new york, ought to have directed a verdict for one party but the jury
found for the other contrary to the evidence, the amendment rendered it
improper for a federal appeals court to order, in accordance with new
york practice, the entry of a judgment contrary to the verdict; that the
only course open to either court was to order a new trial. while plainly
in accordance with the common law as it stood in , the decision was
five-to-four and was subjected to a heavy fire of professional criticism
urging the convenience of the thing and the theory of the capacity of
the common law for growth.[] it has, moreover, been impaired, if not
completely undermined by certain more recent holdings. in the first of
these,[] in which the same justice spoke for the court as in the
slocum case, it was held that a trial court had the right to enter a
judgment on the verdict of the jury for the plaintiff after overruling a
motion by defendant for dismissal on the ground of insufficient
evidence. the court owned that its ruling was out of line with some of
its expressions in the slocum case.[] in the second case[] the court
sustained a united states district court in arkansas, in an action
between parties of diverse citizenship, in rejecting a motion by
defendant for dismissal and peremptorily directing a verdict for the
plaintiff. the supreme court held that there was ample evidence to
support the verdict and that the trial court, in following arkansas
procedure, had acted consistently with the federal conformity act.[]
in the third case,[] which involved an action against the government
for benefits under a war risk insurance policy which had been allowed to
lapse, the trial court directed a verdict for the government on the
ground of the insufficiency of the evidence and was sustained in so
doing by both the circuit court of appeals and the supreme court. three
justices, speaking by justice black, dissented in an opinion in which it
is asserted that "today's decision marks a continuation of the gradual
process of judicial [pg ]erosion which in one-hundred-fifty years has slowly
worn away a major portion of the essential guarantee of the seventh
amendment."[] that the court should experience occasional difficulty
in harmonizing the idea of preserving the historic common law covering
the relations of judge and jury with the notion of a developing common
law is not surprising.
parties have a right to enter into a stipulation waiving a jury and
submitting the case to the court upon an agreed statement of facts, even
without any legislative provision for waiver.[] "*** congress has,
by statute, provided for the trial of issues of fact in civil cases by
the court without the intervention of a jury, only when the parties
waive their right to a jury by a stipulation in writing. revised
statutes sections , ."[] this statutory provision for a written
stipulation, however, does not preclude other kinds of waivers.[] but
every reasonable presumption should be indulged against a waiver.[]
none is to be implied from a request for a directed verdict.[]
the last clause of amendment vii is not restricted in its application to
suits at common law tried before juries in united states courts. it
applies equally to a case tried before a jury in a state court and
brought to the united states supreme court on appeal.[]
notes
[]  farrand, records, .
[] see federal conformity act,  u.s.c.a. §.
[]  story, commentaries on the constitution, §.
[] federalist, nos.  and .
[] baltimore & c. line v. redman,  u.s. ,  ();
parsons v. bedford,  pet. , - ().
[] capital traction co. v. hof,  u.s. , ,  ().
here it was held that a civil trial before a justice of the peace in the
district of columbia, although by a jury of twelve men, was not a jury
trial in the sense of amendment vii.
[] maxwell v. dow,  u.s. ,  (). see also
american publishing co. v. fisher,  u.s.  (); springville
v. thomas,  u.s.  (); andres v. united states,  u.s.
[] baltimore & c. line v. redman,  u.s. ,  ();
walker v. new mexico, & s.p.r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); gasoline
products co. v. champlin ref. co.,  u.s. , - ();
dimick v. schiedt,  u.s. , , - ().
[] gasoline products co. v. champlin ref. co.,  u.s. ,
 (); ex parte peterson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] pearson v. yewdall,  u.s. ,  (). see also
edwards v. elliott,  wall. ,  (); justices of the sup. ct.
v. united states ex rel. murray,  wall. ,  (); walker v.
sauvinet,  u.s.  (); st. louis & k.c. land co. v. kansas city,
[] webster v. reid,  how. ,  (); kennon v.
gilmer,  u.s. ,  ().
[] capital traction co. v. hof,  u.s. ,  ().
[] minneapolis & st. l.r. co. v. bombolis,  u.s. 
(), which involved the federal employers liability act of . the
ruling is followed in four other cases in the same volume. see ibid.
, ,  and .
[] shields v. thomas,  how. ,  ().
[] parsons v. bedford,  pet. ,  (); barton v.
barbour,  u.s. ,  ().
[] clark v. wooster,  u.s. ,  (); pease v.
rathbun-jones eng. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] parsons v. bedford, above; waring v. clarke,  how.
,  (). see also the "sarah,"  wheat. ,  (), and
cases there cited.
[] labor board v. jones & laughlin,  u.s. ,  ().
see also interstate commerce commission v. brimson,  u.s. ,
 (); yakus v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mcelrath v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
see also galloway v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] guthrie nat. bank v. guthrie,  u.s. ,  ().
see also united states v. realty co.,  u.s. ,  ();
jefferson city gaslight co. v. clark,  u.s. ,  ().
[] luria v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gee wah lee v. united states,  f. (d)  ();
certiorari denied,  u.s.  ().
[] filer & s. co. v. diamond iron works,  f.  ();
certiorari denied,  u.s.  ().
[] crowell v. benson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] in re wood and henderson,  u.s.  ().
[] auffmordt v. hedden,  u.s. ,  ().
[] walker v. new mexico & s.p.r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] fidelity & d. co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
[] jensen v. continental life ins. co.,  f. (d) 
(), certiorari denied,  u.s.  ().
[] meeker v. lehigh valley r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] ex parte peterson,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
[] scott v. neely,  u.s. ,  (). see also
bennett v. butterworth,  how.  (); hipp v. babin,  how.
,  (); lewis v. cocks,  wall. ,  (); killian
v. ebbinghaus,  u.s. ,  (); buzard v. houston,  u.s.
[] schoenthal v. irving trust co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] american mills co. v. american surety co.,  u.s. ,
 (). see also stamey v. united states,  f. (d) 
[] thompson v. central ohio r. co.,  wall.  ().
[] whitehead v. shattuck,  u.s.  (); buzard v.
houston,  u.s.  (); greeley v. lowe,  u.s. , 
[] clark v. smith,  pet.  (); holland v.
challen,  u.s.  (); reynolds v. crawfordsville first nat.
bank,  u.s.  (); chapman v. brewer,  u.s.  ();
cummings v. merchants nat. bank,  u.s. ,  (); united
states v. landram,  u.s.  (); more v. steinbach,  u.s.
 (). cf. re simons,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte skinner & eddy corp.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] vicksburg & m.r. co. v. putnam,  u.s. , 
(); united states v. reading railroad,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. ; where are cited carver v. jackson ex dem.
astor et al.,  pet. ,  (); magniac v. thompson,  pet. ,
 (); mitchell v. harmony,  how. ,  ();
transportation line v. hope,  u.s. ,  ().
[] games v. dunn,  pet. ,  ().
[] sparf v. united states,  u.s. , - ();
pleasants v. fant,  wall. ,  (); randall v. baltimore &
ohio r.r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); meehan v. valentine,  u.s.
,  (); coughran v. bigelow,  u.s.  ().
[] treat mfg. co. v. standard steel & iron co.,  u.s.
 (); randall v. baltimore & ohio r.r. co.,  u.s. , 
() and cases there cited.
[] capital traction co. v. hof,  u.s. ,  ().
[] arkansas land & cattle co. v. mann,  u.s. , 
[] dimick v. schiedt,  u.s. , - ().
[] see austin wakeman scott, fundamentals of procedure in
actions at law (),  and articles there cited.
[] baltimore & c. line v. redman,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] lyon v. mutual benefit assn.,  u.s.  ().
[] galloway v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . as a matter of fact, the case being a claim
against the united states need not have been tried by a jury except for
the allowance of congress.
[] henderson's distilled spirits,  wall. ,  ().
see also rogers v. united states,  u.s. ,  (); parsons
v. armor,  pet.  (); campbell v. boyreau,  how. 
[] baylis v. travelers' ins. co.,  u.s. ,  (),
holding it error for a judge, in absence of any waiver, to find the
facts and render judgment thereon.
[] duignan v. united states,  u.s. ,  (),
holding jury trial waived by an appearance and participation in the
trial without demanding a jury.
[] hodges v. easton,  u.s. ,  ().
[] aetna insurance co. v. kennedy,  u.s.  ().
[] see justices of the sup. ct. v. united states ex rel.
murray,  wall.  (); chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago, 
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
excessive bail 
excessive fines 
cruel and unusual punishments 
[pg ]
amendment 
excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
when the bill of rights was being debated in congress, two members took
exception to this proposal. one "objected to the words 'nor cruel and
unusual punishment,' the import of them being too indefinite."[]
another leveled a similar criticism at the entire amendment; "what is
meant by the terms excessive bail? who are to be the judges? what is
understood by excessive fines? it lies with the court to determine. no
cruel and unusual punishment is to be inflicted; it is sometimes
necessary to hang a man, villains often deserve whipping, and perhaps
having their ears cut off; but are we in future to be prevented from
inflicting these punishments because they are cruel? if a more lenient
mode of correcting vice and deterring others from the commission of it
could be invented, it would be very prudent in the legislature to adopt
it; but until we have some security that this will be done, we ought not
to be restrained from making necessary laws by any declaration of this
kind."[]
excessive bail
a united states district court fixed the bail of twelve persons who were
arrested on charge of conspiring to violate the smith act[] at $,
each. this was on the theory advanced by the government that each
petitioner was a pawn in a conspiracy and in obedience to a superior
would flee the jurisdiction, a theory to support which no evidence was
introduced. the court held that bail set before trial at a figure higher
than reasonably calculated to assure the presence of defendant at his
trial is "excessive" in the sense of the eighth amendment, and that the
case of each defendant must be determined on its merits. bail of larger
amount than that usually fixed for serious crimes must be justified by
evidence to the point.[] but the power of the attorney general, under
§ of the internal security act of ,[] to hold in custody without
bail, at his discretion, pending determination as to their
deportability, aliens who are members of the communist party of the
united states, is not unconstitutional.[]
[pg ]
excessive fines
the supreme court has had little to say with reference to excessive
fines or bail. in an early case it held that it had no appellate
jurisdiction to revise the sentence of an inferior court, even though
the excessiveness of the fine was apparent on the face of the record.[]
in a dissenting opinion in united states ex rel. milwaukee publishing
co. v. burleson,[] justice brandeis intimated that the additional
mailing costs incurred by a newspaper to which the second-class mailing
privilege had been denied constituted, in effect, a fine for a past
offense which, since it was made to grow indefinitely each day, was an
unusual punishment interdicted by the constitution.[]
cruel and unusual punishments
the ban against "cruel and unusual punishment" has received somewhat
greater attention. in wilkerson v. utah[] the court observed that:
"difficulty would attend the effort to define with exactness the extent
of the constitutional provision which provides that cruel and unusual
punishments shall not be inflicted, but it is safe to affirm that
punishments of torture, ... and all others in the same line of
unnecessary cruelty, are forbidden by that amendment to the
constitution."[] shooting as a mode of executing the death penalty was
sustained over the objection that it was cruel and unusual.
a partially successful effort has been made to enlarge the concept of
unusual punishment to cover penalties which shock the sense of justice
by their absolute or relative severity. justice field pointed the way
for this development in his dissenting opinion in o'neil v.
vermont,[] wherein the majority refused to apply the eighth amendment
to a state. with the concurrence of two other justices he wrote that the
amendment was directed "against all punishments which by their excessive
length or severity are greatly disproportioned to the offenses
charged."[] eighteen years later a divided court condemned a
philippine statute prescribing fine and imprisonment of from twelve to
twenty years for entry of a known false statement in a public record, on
the ground that the gross disparity between this punishment and that
imposed for other more serious fines made it cruel and unusual, and as
such, repugnant to the bill of rights.[] no constitutional [pg ]infirmity
was discovered in a measure punishing as a separate offense each act of
placing a letter in the mails in pursuance of a single scheme to
defraud.[]
notes
[]  annals of congress  ().
[] ibid.
[] stack v. boyle,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.c.a. §(a)();  stat. .
[] carlson v. landon,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte watkins,  pet. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] weems v. united states,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] badders v. united states,  u.s.  (). cf.
donaldson v. read magazine,  u.s. ,  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
amendment 
the enumeration in the constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
the only right which the supreme court has explicitly acknowledged as
protected by this amendment is the right to engage in political
activity. that recognition was accorded by way of dictum in united
public workers v. mitchell, where the powers of congress to restrict
the political activities of federal employees was sustained.[] an
argument that the competition of the tva in selling electricity at rates
lower than those previously charged by private companies serving the
area amounted to an indirect regulation of the rates of those companies
and a destruction of the liberty said to be guaranteed by the ninth
amendment to the people of the states to acquire property and employ it
in a lawful business, was summarily rejected.[] previously the court
had upheld the right of the tva to sell electricity, saying that the
ninth amendment did not withdraw the right expressly granted by section
 of article iv to dispose of property belonging to the united
states.[]
notes
[] tennessee electric power co. v. t.v.a.,  u.s. ,
[] ashwander v. t.v.a.,  u.s. , ,  (). see
also the language of justice chase in calder v. bull,  dall. ,
 (); and of justice miller for the court in loan asso. v.
topeka,  wall. , - ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
scope and purpose 
the taxing power 
the commerce power 
police power 
state activities and instrumentalities 
[pg ]
amendment 
the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively,
or to the people.
scope and purpose
"the tenth amendment was intended to confirm the understanding of the
people at the time the constitution was adopted, that powers not granted
to the united states were reserved to the states or to the people. it
added nothing to the instrument as originally ratified ***."[] that
this provision was not conceived to be a yardstick for measuring the
powers granted to the federal government or reserved to the states was
clearly indicated by its sponsor, james madison, in the course of the
debate which took place while the amendment was pending concerning
hamilton's proposal to establish a national bank. he declared that:
"interference with the power of the states was no constitutional
criterion of the power of congress. if the power was not given, congress
could not exercise it; if given, they might exercise it, although it
should interfere with the laws, or even the constitutions of the
states."[] nevertheless, for approximately a century, from the death of
marshall until , the tenth amendment was frequently invoked to
curtail powers expressly granted to congress, notably the powers to
regulate interstate commerce, to enforce the fourteenth amendment and to
lay and collect taxes.
the first, and logically the strongest, effort to set up the tenth
amendment as a limitation on federal power was directed to the expansion
of that power by virtue of the necessary and proper clause. in mcculloch
v. maryland,[] the attorney-general of maryland cited the charges
made by the enemies of the constitution that it contained "*** a vast
variety of powers, lurking under the generality of its phraseology,
which would prove highly dangerous to the liberties of the people, and
the rights of the states, ***" and he cited the adoption of the tenth
amendment to allay these apprehensions, in support of his contention
that the power to create corporations was reserved by that amendment to
the states.[] stressing the [pg ]fact that this amendment, unlike the
cognate section of the articles of confederation, omitted the word
"expressly" as a qualification of the powers granted to the national
government, chief justice marshall declared that its effect was to leave
the question "whether the particular power which may become the subject
of contest has been delegated to the one government, or prohibited to
the other, to depend upon a fair construction of the whole
instrument."[]
the taxing power
not until after the civil war was the idea that the reserved powers of
the states comprise an independent qualification of otherwise
constitutional acts of the federal government actually applied to
nullify, in part, an act of congress. this result was first reached in a
tax case—collector v. day.[] holding that a national income tax, in
itself valid, could not be constitutionally levied upon the official
salaries of state officers, justice nelson made the sweeping statement
that "*** the states within the limits of their powers not granted,
or, in the language of the tenth amendment, 'reserved,' are as
independent of the general government as that government within its
sphere is independent of the states."[] in , collector v. day was
expressly overruled.[] nevertheless, the problem of reconciling state
and national interests still confronts the court occasionally, and was
elaborately considered in new york v. united states,[] where, by a
vote of six-to-two, the court upheld the right of the united states to
tax the sale of mineral waters taken from property owned by a state.
speaking for four members of the court, chief justice stone justified
the tax on the ground that "the national taxing power would be unduly
curtailed if the state, by extending its activities, could withdraw from
it subjects of taxation traditionally within it."[] justices
frankfurter and rutledge found in the tenth amendment "*** no
restriction upon congress to include the states in levying a tax exacted
equally from private persons upon the same subject matter."[] justices
douglas and black dissented, saying: "if the power of the federal
government to tax the states is conceded, the reserved power of the
states guaranteed by the tenth amendment does not give them the
independence which they have always been assumed to have."[]
[pg ]
the commerce power
a year before collector v. day was decided, the court held invalid,
except as applied in the district of columbia and other areas over which
congress has exclusive authority, a federal statute penalizing the sale
of dangerous illuminating oils.[] the court did not refer to the tenth
amendment. instead, it asserted that the "*** express grant of power
to regulate commerce among the states has always been understood as
limited by its terms; and as a virtual denial of any power to interfere
with the internal trade and business of the separate states; except,
indeed, as a necessary and proper means for carrying into execution some
other power expressly granted or vested."[] similarly, in the
employers' liability cases,[] an act of congress making every carrier
engaged in interstate commerce liable to "any" employee, including those
whose activities related solely to intrastate activities, for injuries
caused by negligence, was held unconstitutional by a closely divided
court, without explicit reliance on the tenth amendment. not until it
was confronted with the child labor law, which prohibited the
transportation in interstate commerce of goods produced in
establishments in which child labor was employed, did the court hold
that the state police power was an obstacle to adoption of a measure
which operated directly and immediately upon interstate commerce. in
hammer v. dagenhart,[] five members of the court found in the tenth
amendment a mandate to nullify this law as an unwarranted invasion of
the reserved powers of the states. this decision was expressly overruled
in united states v. darby.[]
during the twenty years following hammer v. dagenhart, a variety of
measures designed to regulate economic activities, directly or
indirectly, were held void on similar grounds. excise taxes on the
profits of factories in which child labor was employed,[] on the sale
of grain futures on markets which failed to comply with federal
regulations,[] on the sale of coal produced by nonmembers of a coal
code established as a part of a federal regulatory scheme,[] and a tax
on the processing of agricultural products, the proceeds of which were
paid to farmers who complied with production limitations imposed by the
federal government,[] were all found to invade the reserved powers of
the states. in schechter poultry corporation v. united states[] the
court, after holding that the commerce power did not extend to local
sales of poultry, cited the tenth amendment to refute the argument [pg ]that
the existence of an economic emergency justified the exercise of what
chief justice hughes called "extraconstitutional authority."[]
in  the court came full circle in its exposition of this amendment.
having returned to the position of john marshall four years earlier when
it sustained the social security[] and national labor relations
acts,[] it explicitly restated marshall's thesis in upholding the fair
labor standards act in united states v. darby.[] speaking for a
unanimous court, chief justice stone wrote: "the power of congress over
interstate commerce 'is complete in itself, may be exercised to its
utmost extent, and acknowledges no limitations other than are prescribed
in the constitution.' *** that power can neither be enlarged nor
diminished by the exercise or non-exercise of state power. *** it is
no objection to the assertion of the power to regulate interstate
commerce that its exercise is attended by the same incidents which
attend the exercise of the police power of the states. *** our
conclusion is unaffected by the tenth amendment which *** states but a
truism that all is retained which has not been surrendered."[]
police power
but even prior to  not all measures taken to promote objectives
which had traditionally been regarded as the responsibilities of the
states had been held invalid. in hamilton v. kentucky distilleries
co.,[] a unanimous court, speaking by justice brandeis, upheld "war
prohibition", saying: "that the united states lacks the police power,
and that this was reserved to the states by the tenth amendment, is
true. but it is none the less true that when the united states exerts
any of the powers conferred upon it by the constitution, no valid
objection can be based upon the fact that such exercise may be attended
by the same incidents which attend the exercise by a state of its police
power."[] and in a series of cases, which today seem irreconcilable
with hammer v. dagenhart, it sustained federal laws penalizing the
interstate transportation of lottery tickets,[] of [pg ]women for immoral
purposes,[] of stolen automobiles,[] and of tick-infested
cattle.[] it affirmed the power of congress to punish the forgery of
bills of lading purporting to cover interstate shipments of
merchandise,[] to subject prison made goods moved from one state to
another to the laws of the receiving state,[] and to regulate
prescriptions for the medicinal use of liquor as an appropriate measure
for the enforcement of the eighteenth amendment.[] but while congress
might thus prevent the use of the channels of interstate commerce to
frustrate state law, it could not itself, the court held, undertake to
punish a violation of that law by discriminatory taxation; and in united
states v. constantine,[] a grossly disproportionate excise tax
imposed on retail liquor dealers carrying on business in violation of
local law was held unconstitutional.
state activities and instrumentalities
today it is apparent that the tenth amendment does not shield the states
nor their political subdivisions from the impact of the authority
affirmatively granted to the federal government. it was cited to no
avail in case v. bowles,[] where a state officer was enjoined from
selling timber on school lands at a price in excess of the maximum
prescribed by the office of price administration. when california
violated the federal safety appliance act in the operation of the state
belt railroad as a common carrier in interstate commerce it was held
liable for the statutory penalty.[] at the suit of the attorney
general of the united states, the sanitary district of chicago was
enjoined from diverting water from lake michigan in excess of a
specified rate. on behalf of a unanimous court, justice holmes wrote:
"this is not a controversy among equals. the united states is asserting
its sovereign power to regulate commerce and to control the navigable
waters within its jurisdiction. *** there is no question that this
power is superior to that of the states to provide for the welfare or
necessities of their inhabitants."[] some years earlier, in a suit
brought by kansas to prevent colorado from using [pg ]the waters of the
arkansas river for irrigation, the attorney general of the united states
had unsuccessfully advanced the claim that the federal government had an
inherent legislative authority to deal with the matter. in a petition to
intervene in the suit he had taken the position, as summarized by the
supreme court, that "the national government *** has the right to make
such legislative provision as in its judgment is needful for the
reclamation of all these arid lands and for that purpose to appropriate
the accessible waters. *** all legislative power must be vested in
either the state or the national government; no legislative powers
belong to a state government other than those which affect solely the
internal affairs of that state; consequently all powers which are
national in their scope must be found vested in the congress of the
united states."[] the petition to intervene was dismissed on the
ground that the authority claimed for the federal government was
incompatible with the tenth amendment; but this could hardly happen
today.[] under its superior power of eminent domain, the united states
may condemn land owned by a state even where the taking will interfere
with the state's own project for water development and conservation.[]
the rights reserved to the states are not invaded by a statute which
requires a reduction in the amount of a federal grant-in-aid of the
construction of highways upon failure of a state to remove from office a
member of the state highway commission found to have violated federal
law by participating in a political campaign.[]
federal legislation frequently has been challenged as an
unconstitutional interference with the prerogative of the states to
control the entities they create, but the attack has been successful
only once, in hopkins federal savings and loan association v.
cleary.[] there an act of congress authorizing the conversion of state
building and loan associations without state consent was found to
contravene the tenth amendment. thirty years earlier, in northern
securities co. v. united states,[] a closely divided court had ruled
that this amendment was no barrier to the application of the sherman
antitrust act to prevent one corporation from restraining commerce by
means of stock ownership in two competing corporations. it announced the
general proposition that: "no state can, by merely [pg ]creating a
corporation, or in any other mode, project its authority into other
states, and across the continent, so as to prevent congress from
exerting the power it possesses under the constitution over interstate
and international commerce, or so as to exempt its corporation engaged
in interstate commerce from obedience to any rule lawfully established
by congress for such commerce. it cannot be said that any state may give
a corporation, created under its laws, authority to restrain interstate
or international commerce against the will of the nation as lawfully
expressed by congress. every corporation created by a state is
necessarily subject to the supreme law of the land."[] even a charter
contract between a state and an intrastate railroad, limiting the rates
of the latter, is no barrier to enforcement of an order of the
interstate commerce commission requiring an increase in local rates to
remove a discrimination against interstate commerce.[] an order of the
federal power commission prescribing the methods of keeping the accounts
of an electric company was sustained over the objection that it violated
the reserved right of the states under the tenth amendment.[] a
similar objection to the levy of a special surtax on any corporation
formed or availed of to prevent the imposition of a surtax upon its
shareholders was rejected, since the taxing statute did not limit in any
way the power of the corporations to declare or withhold dividends as
permitted by state law.[] likewise, the court held that the failure to
allow a credit against the undistributed profits tax for earnings which
could not be distributed under state law did not infringe the reserved
power of the state over its corporate offspring.[]
notes
[] united states v. sprague,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ii annals of congress  ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] graves v. o'keefe,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .
[] united states v. dewitt,  wall.  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). see also keller v. united states,
[] bailey v. drexel furniture co.,  u.s. , , 
[] hill v. wallace,  u.s.  (). see also trusler
v. crooks,  u.s.  ().
[] carter v. carter coal co.,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. butler,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] steward machine co. v. davis,  u.s.  ();
helvering v. davis,  u.s.  ().
[] national labor relations board v. jones & laughlin steel
corp.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also united states v.
carolene products co.,  u.s. ,  (); case v. bowles, 
[]  u.s. , , ,  (). see also fernandez
v. wiener,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] champion v. ames,  u.s.  ().
[] hoke v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] brooks v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] thornton v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. ferger,  u.s.  ().
[] kentucky whip & collar co. v. illinois c.r. co., 
[] everhard's breweries v. day,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). the civil rights act of , which
made it a crime for one person to deprive another of equal
accommodations at inns, theaters or public conveyances was found to
exceed the powers conferred on congress by the thirteenth and fourteenth
amendments, and hence to be an unlawful invasion of the powers reserved
to the states by the tenth—civil rights cases,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] sanitary district of chicago v. united states,  u.s.
[] kansas v. colorado,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] see united states v. appalachian electric power co.,
[] oklahoma v. atkinson co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] oklahoma v. united states civil service commission, 
[] ibid. , .
[] new york v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] northwestern electric co. v. federal power commission,
 u.s.  (). see also federal power commission v. east ohio
gas company,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. national grocery co.,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. northwest steel mills,  u.s.  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
purpose and early interpretation 
expansion of state immunity 
suits against state officials: two categories 
mandamus proceedings 
early limitation on injunction proceedings 
injunction proceedings today: ex parte young 
tort action against state officials 
suits to recover taxes 
consent of state to be sued 
waiver of immunity 
[pg ]
amendment 
the judicial power of the united states shall not be construed to extend
to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the
united states by citizens of another state, or by citizens or subjects
of any foreign state.
purpose and early interpretation
the action of the supreme court in accepting jurisdiction of a suit
against a state by a citizen of another state in , in chisholm v.
georgia[] provoked such angry reactions in georgia and such anxieties
in other states that at the first meeting of congress after this
decision what became the eleventh amendment was proposed by an
overwhelming vote and ratified with "vehement speed."[] the earliest
decisions interpretative of the amendment were three by chief justice
marshall. in cohens v. virginia,[] speaking for the court, he held
that the prosecution of a writ of error to review a judgment of a state
court, alleged to be in violation of the constitution or laws of the
united states, "does not commence or prosecute a suit against the
state," but continues one commenced by the state. the contrary holding
would have virtually repealed the th section of the judiciary act of
 (see p. ), and brought something like anarchy in its wake. in
osborn v. bank of the united states,[] decided three years later, the
court laid down two rules, one of which has survived and the other of
which was soon abandoned. the latter was the holding that a suit is not
one against a state unless the state is a party to the record.[] this
rule the court was forced to repudiate seven years later in governor of
georgia v. madrazo,[] in which it was conceded that the suit had been
brought against the governor solely in his official capacity and with
the design of forcing him to exercise his official powers. it is now a
well-settled rule that in determining whether a suit is prosecuted
against a state "the court will look behind and through the nominal
parties on the record to ascertain who are the real parties to the
suit."[] the other, more successful rule was that a state official
possesses no official capacity when acting illegally and hence can
derive no protection from an unconstitutional statute of a state.[]
[pg ]
expansion of state immunity
subsequent cases giving the amendment a restrictive effect are those
holding that counties and municipalities are suable in the federal
courts;[] and that government corporations of the state are not immune
when suable under the law which created them.[] meantime other cases
have expanded the prohibitions of the amendment to include suits brought
against a state by its own citizens,[] by a foreign state,[] by a
federally chartered corporation,[] or by a state as an agent of its
citizens to collect debts owed them by another state.[] these rulings
are based on the premise expressed in hans v. louisiana[] that the
amendment "actually reversed the decision" in chisholm v. georgia and,
as chief justice hughes indicated in monaco v. mississippi,[] had
the effect of prohibiting any suit against a state without its consent
except when brought by the united states[] or another state.
suits against state officials: two categories
most of the cases involving the eleventh amendment and those creating
the greatest difficulties are suits brought against state officials.
[pg ]such suits are governed by the same rules and principles as pertain to
the immunity of the united states itself from suits,[] with the result
that the rules of governmental immunity from suit generally are grounded
on decisions arising under both article iii and the eleventh amendment
without distinction as to whether a suit is against the united states or
a state.[] the line is not always easy to draw, nor are the cases
always strictly consistent. they do yield, however, to the formulation
of certain general rules. thus, suits brought against state officials
acting either in excess of their statutory authority[] or in pursuance
of an unconstitutional statute[] are suits against the officer in his
individual capacity and therefore are not prohibited by the eleventh
amendment; and suits against an officer for the commission of a common
law tort alleged to be justified by a statute or administrative order of
the state belong to the same category.[] on the other hand, suits
against the officers of a state involving what is conceded to be state
property or suits asking for relief which clearly call for the exercise
of official authority cannot be sustained.[]
[pg ]
mandamus proceedings
thus mandamus proceedings which seek "affirmative official action" on
the part of state officials as "the performance of an obligation which
belongs to the state in its political capacity"[] are uniformly
regarded as suits against the state. this rule is well illustrated by
louisiana ex rel. elliott v. jumel[] where a holder of louisiana
state bonds sought to compel the state treasurer to apply a sinking fund
that had been created under an earlier constitution for the payment of
the bonds to such purpose after a new constitution had abolished this
provision for retiring the bonds. the proceeding was held to be a suit
against the state because: "the relief asked will require the officers
against whom the process is issued to act contrary to the positive
orders of the supreme political power of the state, whose creatures they
are, and to which they are ultimately responsible in law for what they
do. they must use the public money in the treasury and under their
official control in one way, when the supreme power has directed them to
use it in another, and they must raise more money by taxation when the
same power has declared that it shall not be done."[] however,
mandamus proceedings to compel a state official to perform a plain or
ministerial duty which admits of no discretion are not suits against the
state since the official is regarded as acting in his individual
capacity in failing to act according to law.[]
early limitation on injunction proceedings
in spite of a dictum by justice bradley in the mccomb case that the
writs of mandamus and injunction are somewhat correlative to each other
in suits against state officials for illegal actions,[] injunctions
against state officials to restrain the enforcement of an
unconstitutional statute or action in excess of statutory authority are
more readily obtainable. they constitute in fact the single largest
class of [pg ]cases involving the issue of state immunity. until reagan v.
farmers' loan and trust company[] the court maintained a distinction
between the duty imposed upon an official by the general laws of the
state and the duty imposed by a specific unconstitutional statute and
held that whereas an injunction would not lie to restrain a state
official from enforcing an act alleged to be unconstitutional in
pursuance of the general duties of his office, it would lie to restrain
him from performing special duties vested in him by an unconstitutional
statute.[] the leading cases assertive of this distinction are ex
parte ayers and fitts v. mcghee, decided respectively in  and
injunction proceedings today: ex parte young
however, the distinction between injunction suits to restrain an
official from pursuing his general duties under the law and those to
restrain the performance of special duties under an unconstitutional
statute had been largely lost even before fitts v. mcghee, in reagan
v. farmers' loan and trust company[] and smyth v. ames,[] where
injunctions issued by the lower federal courts to restrain the
enforcement of railroad rate regulations were sustained even though the
officials against whom the suits were brought were acting under general
law. what remained of the distinction as a limitation upon suits against
state officials was dispelled by ex parte young,[] which not only
sustained an injunction restraining state officials from exercising
their discretionary duties but also upheld the authority of the lower
court to enjoin the enforcement of the statute prior to a determination
of its unconstitutionality. while ex parte ayers and fitts v.
mcghee[] were not overruled, the inevitable effect of the young case
was to abrogate the rule that a suit in equity against a state official
to enjoin discretionary action is a suit against the state, and to
convert the injunction into a device to test the validity of state
legislation in the federal courts prior to its interpretation in the
state courts and prior to any opportunity for state officials to put the
act into operation.[]
[pg ]but the earlier rule still crops up at times. thus as recently as ,
ex parte ayers[] was applied to the interpretation of the federal
interpleader act,[] so as to prevent taxpayers from enjoining tax
officials from collecting death taxes arising from the competing claims
of two states as being the last domicile of a decedent.[] on the other
hand, the eleventh amendment was held not to be infringed by joinder of
a state court judge and receiver in an interpleader proceeding in which
the state had no interest and neither the judge nor the receiver was
enjoined by the final decree.[]
tort actions against state officials
in tort actions against state officials the rule of united states v.
lee[] has been substantially incorporated into the eleventh amendment.
in tindal v. wesley[] the lee case was held to permit a suit by
claimants to real property in south carolina which they had purchased
from the state sinking fund commission but which had been retaken by the
state because the purchaser insisted on paying for the property with
revenue bond scrip issued by the state. in other cases the court had
held that the immunity of a state from [pg ]suit does not extend to actions
against state officials for damages arising out of willful and negligent
disregard of state laws.[]
suits to recover taxes
recent decisions, however, have rendered suits against state officials
to recover taxes increasingly difficult to maintain. although the court
long ago held that the sovereign immunity of the state prevented a suit
to recover money in the general treasury,[] it also held that a suit
would lie against a revenue officer to recover tax moneys illegally
collected and still in his possession.[] beginning, however, with
great northern life insurance co. v. read[] in  the court has
held that this kind of suit cannot be maintained unless the state
expressly consents to suits in the federal courts. in this case the
state statute provided for the payment of taxes under protest and for
suits afterwards against state tax collection officials for the recovery
of taxes illegally collected. the act also provided for the segregation
by the collector of taxes paid under protest. the read case has been
followed in two more recent cases[] involving a similar state of
facts, with the result that the rule once permitting such suits to
recover taxes from a segregated fund has been distinguished away.
consent of state to be sued
although dicta in some cases suggested that once a state consented
generally to be sued in a court of competent jurisdiction,[] suits
could be maintained against it in the federal courts, later decisions
involving statutory provisions for the payment of taxes under protest
followed by a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover do
not authorize suits in the federal courts. these rulings are based on
the assumption that when the court is dealing "with the sovereign
exemption from judicial interference in the vital field of financial
administration a clear declaration of the state's intention to submit
its fiscal problems to other courts than those of its own creation must
be found."[] long before these decisions it had been settled that a
state could confine to its own courts suits against it to recover
taxes.[] thus the questions involved in the cases laying down the
above rule concerned only the lack of an express consent to suit in the
federal courts.
[pg ]
waiver of immunity
the immunity of a state from suit is a privilege which it may waive at
pleasure by voluntary submission to suit,[] as distinguished from
appearing in a similar suit to defend its officials,[] and by general
law specifically consenting to suit in the federal courts. such consent
must be clear and specific and consent to suit in its own courts does
not imply a waiver of immunity in the federal courts.[] it follows,
therefore, that in consenting to be sued, the states, like the national
government, may attach such conditions to suit as they deem fit.
notes
[]  dall.  ().
[] justice frankfurter dissenting in larson v. domestic &
foreign corp.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wheat. , - ().
[]  wheat.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[]  pet.  ().
[] ex parte ayers,  u.s. ,  ().
[] osborn v. bank of the united states,  wheat. at ,
[] lincoln county v. luning,  u.s.  ().
[] hopkins v. clemson agricultural college,  u.s. 
(). see also bank of the united states v. planters' bank of
georgia,  wheat.  (), where a state bank was held liable to suit
although the state owned a portion of its stock, and briscoe v. bank
of kentucky,  pet.  (), and bank of kentucky v. wister, 
pet.  (), where the state bank was held liable to suit even
though the state owned all of the stock. compare, however, murray v.
wilson distilling co.,  u.s.  (), which held that a state in
engaging in the retail liquor business does not surrender its immunity
to suit for transaction of a nongovernmental nature. here the state
conducted the business directly rather than through the medium of a
corporation.
[] hans v. louisiana,  u.s.  (); fitts v. mcghee,
 u.s. ,  (); duhne v. new jersey,  u.s. , 
(); ex parte new york,  u.s.  ().
[] monaco v. mississippi,  u.s. ,  ().
[] smith v. reeves,  u.s.  ().
[] new hampshire v. louisiana,  u.s.  (). however,
this rule does not preclude a suit by a state to collect debts which
have been assigned to it and the proceeds of which will remain with it.
south dakota v. north carolina,  u.s.  ()
[] for the liability of the states to suit by the united
states see the discussion of the right of the united states to sue
under article iii, §, supra, pp. -.
[] tindal v. wesley,  u.s. ,  (). this case
applied the rule of united states v. lee,  u.s.  (), to
suits against states.
[] see for example larson v. domestic & foreign corp.,
 u.s.  (), where both the majority and dissenting opinions
utilize both types of cases in a suit against a federal official.
[] pennoyer v. mcconnaughy,  u.s.  (); scully v.
bird,  u.s.  (); atchison, topeka & s.f.r. co. v. o'connor,
 u.s.  (); greene v. louisville & i.r. co.,  u.s. 
(); louisville & nashville r. co. v. greene,  u.s.  ().
[] osborn v. bank of the united states,  wheat. 
(); board of liquidation v. mccomb,  u.s.  (); poindexter
v. greenhow,  u.s.  (); pennoyer v. mcconnaughy,  u.s.
 (); reagan v. farmers' loan & trust co.,  u.s.  ();
smyth v. ames,  u.s.  (); ex parte young,  u.s. 
(); truax v. raich,  u.s.  (); public service co. v.
corboy,  u.s.  (); sterling v. constantin,  u.s. 
(); davis v. gray,  wall.  (); tomlinson v. branch, 
wall.  (); litchfield v. webster co.,  u.s.  ();
allen v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s.  (); gunter v.
atlantic c.l.r. co.,  u.s.  (); prout v. starr,  u.s. 
(); scott v. donald,  u.s. ; also  u.s.  ().
[] south carolina v. wesley,  u.s.  (); tindal
v. wesley,  u.s.  (); hopkins v. clemson agricultural
college,  u.s.  (). in this last case the court held that a
suit would lie against the state agricultural college, and relief could
be granted to the extent that it would not affect the property rights of
the state. these cases involve such matters as the seizure and distraint
of property, wrongs done by government corporations, etc.
[] see for example governor of georgia v. madrazo,  pet.
 (); cunningham v. macon and brunswick r. co.,  u.s. 
(); louisiana ex rel. elliott v. jumel,  u.s.  ();
hagood v. southern,  u.s.  (); chandler v. dix,  u.s.
 (); murray v. wilson distilling co.,  u.s.  ();
hopkins v. clemson agricultural college,  u.s.  (); lankford
v. platte iron works,  u.s.  (); carolina glass co. v.
south carolina,  u.s.  (); kennecott copper corp. v. state
tax commission,  u.s.  ().
[] hagood v. southern,  u.s. ,  (). see also
pennoyer v. mcconnaughy,  u.s. ,  () where justice lamar
also emphasizes the operation of the judgment against the state itself.
[]  u.s. ,  (). see also christian v.
atlantic & n.c.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] louisiana ex rel. elliott v. jumel,  u.s. , 
[] board of liquidation v. mccomb,  u.s. ,  ().
this was a case involving an injunction, but justice bradley regarded
mandamus and injunction as correlative to each other in cases where the
official unlawfully commits or omits an act. see also rolston v.
missouri fund commissioners,  u.s. ,  (), where it is held
that an injunction would lie to restrain the sale of a railroad on the
ground that a suit to compel a state official to do what the law
requires of him is not a suit against the state. see also houston v.
ormes,  u.s.  ().
[] board of liquidation v. mccomb,  u.s. , 
[] poindexter v. greenhow,  u.s.  (); allen v.
baltimore & o.r. co.,  u.s.  (); pennoyer v. mcconnaughy,
 u.s.  (); in re tyler,  u.s.  (). as stated by
justice harlan in fitts v. mcghee,  u.s. , - (),
"there is a wide difference between a suit against individuals, holding
official positions under a state, to prevent them, under the sanction of
an unconstitutional statute, from committing by some positive act a
wrong or trespass, and a suit against officers of a state merely to test
the constitutionality of a state statute, in the enforcement of which
those officers will act only by formal judicial proceedings in the
courts of the state." see also north carolina v. temple,  u.s. 
[] see  u.s. ; and  u.s. .
[] for cases following ex parte young, see home telephone &
telegraph co. v. los angeles,  u.s.  (); truax v. raich,
 u.s.  (); cavanaugh v. looney,  u.s.  (); terrace
v. thompson,  u.s.  (); hygrade provision co. v. sherman,
 u.s.  (); massachusetts state grange v. benton,  u.s.
 (); hawks v. hamill,  u.s.  (). these last cases,
however, emphasize "manifest oppression" as a prerequisite to issuance
of such injunctions. see also fenner v. boykin,  u.s.  (),
where an injunction to restrain the enforcement of a state law
penalizing gambling contracts was denied. the rule of ex parte young
applies equally to the governor of a state in the enforcement of an
unconstitutional statute. continental baking co. v. woodring,  u.s.
 (); sterling v. constantin,  u.s.  (). joseph d.
block, "suit against government officers and the sovereign immunity
doctrine,"  harv. l. rev. ,  (), points out that ex parte
young is enunciating the doctrine that an official proceeding
unconstitutionally is "stripped of his official ... character" has given
impetus to the fiction that the suit must be against the officer as an
individual to be permissible under the eleventh amendment. two recent
cases in which ex parte young was followed are alabama comm'n v.
southern r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); and georgia r. v. redwine,
[]  u.s.  (). see also larson v. domestic and
foreign corp.,  u.s. , - ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] worcester county trust co. v. riley,  u.s. 
(); see also old colony trust co. v. seattle,  u.s. 
[] treinies v. sunshine mining co.,  u.s.  ().
see also missouri v. fiske,  u.s.  ().
[] johnson v. lankford,  u.s.  (); martin v.
lankford,  u.s.  ().
[] smith v. reeves,  u.s.  ().
[] atchison, topeka & s.f.r. co. v. o'connor,  u.s. 
[] ford motor co. v. dept. of treasury of indiana,  u.s.
 (); kennecott copper corp. v. state tax commission,  u.s.
[] lincoln county v. luning,  u.s.  (); hopkins
v. clemson agricultural college,  u.s.  ().
[] great northern ins. co. v. read,  u.s. ,  ();
ford motor co. v. dept. of treasury of indiana,  u.s.  ();
kennecott copper corp. v. state tax commission,  u.s.  ().
[] smith v. reeves,  u.s.  (). see also murray
v. wilson distilling co.,  u.s.  (); chandler v. dix, 
[] clark v. barnard,  u.s. ,  (); ashton v.
cameron county water improvement dist.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] farish v. state banking board,  u.s.  ();
missouri v. fiske,  u.s.  ().
[] murray v. wilson distilling co.,  u.s. , 
(), citing smith v. reeves,  u.s.  (); chandler v.
dix,  u.s.  (). see also graves v. texas co.,  u.s.
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
purpose and operation of the amendment 
electors as free agents 
[pg ]
amendment 
the electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot
for president and vice-president, one of whom, at least, shall not be an
inhabitant of the same state with themselves; they shall name in their
ballots the person voted for as president, and in distinct ballots the
person voted for as vice-president, and they shall make distinct lists
of all persons voted for as president, and of all persons voted for as
vice-president, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they
shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the
government of the united states, directed to the president of the
senate;—the president of the senate shall, in the presence of the
senate and house of representatives, open all the certificates and the
votes shall then be counted;—the person having the greatest number of
votes for president, shall be the president, if such number be a
majority of the whole number of electors appointed; and if no person
have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not
exceeding three on the list of those voted for as president, the house
of representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the president.
but in choosing the president, the votes shall be taken by states, the
representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the
states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice.
and if the house of representatives shall not choose a president
whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth
day of march[] next following, then the vice-president shall [pg ]act as
president, as in the case of the death or other constitutional
disability of the president.[]—the person having the greatest number
of votes as vice-president, shall be the vice-president, if such number
be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed, and if no
person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list,
the senate shall choose the vice-president; a quorum for the purpose
shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of senators, and a
majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. but no
person constitutionally ineligible to the office of president shall be
eligible to that of vice-president of the united states.
purpose and operation of the amendment
this amendment, which supersedes clause  of section  of article ii, of
the original constitution, was inserted on account of the tie between
jefferson and burr in the election of . the difference between the
procedure which it defines and that which was laid down in the original
constitution is in the provision it makes for a separate designation by
the electors of their choices for president and vice president,
respectively. the final sentence of clause , above, has been in turn
superseded today by amendment xx. in consequence of the disputed
election of , congress, by an act passed in , has laid down the
rule that if the vote of a state is not certified by the governor under
the seal thereof, it shall not be counted unless both houses of congress
are favorable.[] it should be noted that no provision is made by this
amendment for the situation which would result from a failure to choose
either a president or vice president, an inadequacy which amendment xx
undertakes to cure.
electors as free agents
acting under the authority of state law, the democratic committee of
alabama adopted a rule requiring that a party candidate for the office
of presidential elector take a pledge to support the nominees of the
party's national convention for president and vice president and that
the party's officers refuse to certify as a candidate for such office
any person who, otherwise qualified, refused to take such a pledge. [pg ]one
blair did so refuse and was upheld, in mandamus proceedings, by the
state supreme court, which ordered the chairman of the state democratic
executive committee to certify him to the secretary of state as a
candidate for the office of presidential elector in the democratic
primary to be held on may , . the supreme court at washington
granted certiorari and reversed this holding.[] the constitutional
issue arose out of the alabama court's findings that the required pledge
was incompatible with the twelfth amendment, which contemplated that
electors, once appointed, should be absolutely free to vote for any
person who was constitutionally eligible to the office of president or
vice president.[] this position the supreme court combatted as follows:
"it is true that the amendment says the electors shall vote by ballot.
but it is also true that the amendment does not prohibit an elector's
announcing his choice beforehand, pledging himself. the suggestion that
in the early elections candidates for electors—contemporaries of the
founders—would have hesitated, because of constitutional limitations,
to pledge themselves to support party nominees in the event of their
selection as electors is impossible to accept. history teaches that the
electors were expected to support the party nominees. experts in the
history of government recognize the longstanding practice. indeed, more
than twenty states do not print the names of the candidates for electors
on the general election ballot. instead, in one form or another, they
allow a vote for the presidential candidate of the national conventions
to be counted as a vote for his party's nominees for the electoral
college. this long-continued practical interpretation of the
constitutional propriety of an implied or oral pledge of his ballot by a
candidate for elector as to his vote in the electoral college weighs
heavily in considering the constitutionality of a pledge, such as the
one here required, in the primary. however, even if such promises of
candidates for the electoral college are legally unenforceable because
violative of an assumed constitutional freedom of the elector under the
constitution, art. ii, §, to vote as he may choose in the electoral
college, it would not follow that the requirement of a pledge in the
primary is unconstitutional. a candidacy in the primary is a voluntary
act of the applicant. he is not barred, discriminatorily, from
participating but must comply with the rules of the party. surely one
may voluntarily assume obligations to vote for a certain candidate. the
state offers him opportunity to become a candidate for elector on his
own terms, although he must file his declaration before the primary.
ala. code, tit. , §. even though the victory of an independent
candidate for elector in alabama cannot be anticipated, the state does
offer the opportunity for the development of other strong political
organizations where the need is felt for them by a sizable block of
voters. such parties may leave their electors to their own choice. we
conclude that the twelfth amendment does not bar a political party from
[pg ]requiring the pledge to support the nominees of the national
convention. where a state authorizes a party to choose its nominees for
elector in a party primary and to fix the qualifications for the
candidates, we see no federal constitutional objection to the
requirement of this pledge."[] justice jackson conceding that "as an
institution the electoral college suffered atrophy almost
indistinguishable from rigor mortis," nevertheless dissented on the
following ground: "it may be admitted that this law does no more than to
make a legal obligation of what has been a voluntary general practice.
if custom were sufficient authority for amendment of the constitution by
court decree, the decision in this matter would be warranted. usage may
sometimes impart changed content to constitutional generalities, such as
'due process of law,' 'equal protection,' or 'commerce among the
states.' but i do not think powers or discretions granted to federal
officials by the federal constitution can be forfeited by the court for
disuse. a political practice which has its origin in custom must rely
upon custom for its sanctions."[]
notes
[] by the twentieth amendment, adopted in , the term of
the president is to begin on the th of january.
[] under the twentieth amendment, §, in case a president is
not chosen before the time for beginning of his term, the vice
president-elect shall act as president, until a president shall have
qualified.
[] ray v. blair,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
origin and purpose of the amendment 
peonage 
discriminations and legal compulsions less than servitude 
enforcement 
[pg ]
amendment 
section . neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as
a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted,
shall exist within the united states, or any place subject to their
jurisdiction.
section . congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation.
origin and purpose of the amendment
"the language of the thirteenth amendment," which "reproduced the
historic words of the ordinance of  for the government of the
northwest territory, and gave them unrestricted application within the
united states,"[] was first construed in the slaughter-house cases.[]
presented there with the contention that a louisiana statute, by
conferring upon a single corporation the exclusive privilege of
slaughtering cattle in new orleans, had imposed an unconstitutional
servitude on the property of other butchers disadvantaged thereby, the
court expressed its inability, even after "a microscopic search," to
find in said amendment any "reference to servitudes, which may have been
attached to property in certain localities ***." on the contrary, the
term "servitude" appearing therein was declared to mean "a personal
servitude *** [as proven] by the use of the word 'involuntary,' which
can only apply to human beings. *** the word servitude is of larger
meaning than slavery, ***, and the obvious purpose was to forbid all
shades and conditions of african slavery." but while the court was
initially in doubt as to whether persons other than negroes could share
in the protection afforded by this amendment, it nevertheless conceded
that although "*** negro slavery alone was in the mind of the congress
which proposed the thirteenth article, [the latter] forbids any other
kind of slavery, now or hereafter. if mexican peonage or the chinese
coolie labor system shall develop slavery of the mexican or chinese race
within our territory, this amendment may safely be trusted to make it
void."[] all uncertainty on this score was dispelled in later
decisions; and in hodges v. united states[] the justices proclaimed
unequivocally that the thirteenth amendment is "not a declaration in
favor of a particular [pg ]people. it reaches every race and every
individual, and if in any respect it commits one race to the nation, it
commits every race and every individual thereof. slavery or involuntary
servitude of the chinese, of the italian, of the anglo-saxon are as much
within its compass as slavery or involuntary servitude of the
african."[]
peonage
notwithstanding its early acknowledgment in the slaughter-house cases
that peonage was comprehended within the slavery and involuntary
servitude proscribed by the thirteenth amendment,[] the court has had
frequent occasion to determine whether state legislation or the conduct
of individuals has contributed to reestablishment of that prohibited
status. defined as a condition of enforced servitude by which the
servitor is compelled to labor in liquidation of some debt or
obligation, either real or pretended, against his will, peonage was
found to have been unconstitutionally sanctioned by an alabama statute,
directed at defaulting sharecroppers, which imposed a criminal liability
and subjected to imprisonment farm workers or tenants who abandoned
their employment, breached their contracts, and exercised their legal
right to enter into employment of a similar nature with another person.
the clear purpose of such a statute was declared to be the coercion of
payment, by means of criminal proceedings, of a purely civil liability
arising from breach of contract.[] several years later, in bailey v.
alabama,[] the court voided another alabama statute which made the
refusal without just cause to perform the labor called for in a written
contract of employment, or to refund the money or pay for the property
advanced thereunder, prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud and
punishable as a criminal offense; and which was enforced subject to a
local rule of evidence which prevented the accused, for the purpose of
rebutting the statutory presumption, from testifying as to his
"uncommunicated motives, purpose, or intention." inasmuch as a state
"may not compel one man to labor for another in payment of a debt by
punishing him as a criminal if he does not perform the service or pay
the debt," the court refused to permit it "to accomplish the same result
[indirectly] by creating a statutory presumption which, upon proof of no
other fact, exposes him to conviction."[] in , in united states
v. reynolds,[] a third alabama enactment was condemned as conducive
to peonage through the permission it accorded to persons, fined upon
conviction for a misdemeanor, to confess judgment with a surety in the
amount of the fine and costs, and then to agree with said surety, in
consideration of the latter's payment of the confessed judgment, to
reimburse him by working [pg ]for him upon terms approved by the court,
which, the court pointed out, might prove more onerous than if the
convict had been sentenced to imprisonment at hard labor in the first
place. fulfillment of such a contract with the surety was viewed as
being virtually coerced by the constant fear it induced of rearrest, a
new prosecution, and a new fine for breach of contract, which new
penalty the convicted person might undertake to liquidate in a similar
manner attended by similar consequences. more recently, bailey v.
alabama has been followed in taylor v. georgia[] and pollock v.
williams,[] in which statutes of georgia and florida not materially
different from that voided in the bailey case, were found to be
unconstitutional. although the georgia statute prohibited the defendant
from testifying under oath, it did not prevent him from entering an
unsworn denial both of the contract and of the receipt of any cash
advancement thereunder, a factor which, the court emphasized, was no
more controlling than the customary rule of evidence in the bailey case.
in the florida case, notwithstanding the fact that the defendant pleaded
guilty and accordingly obviated the necessity of applying the prima
facie presumption provision, the court reached an identical result,
chiefly on the ground that the presumption provision, despite its
nonapplication, "had a coercive effect in producing the plea of guilty."
discriminations and legal compulsions less than servitude
a contention of "involuntary servitude" was rejected in the following
cases:
() racial discrimination. denial of admission to public places, such as
inns, restaurants, or theaters, or the segregation of races in public
conveyances, etc., was held not to give rise to a "condition of enforced
compulsory service of one to another," and effected no deprivation of
one's legal right to dispose of his person, property, and services. even
prior to the amendment, such discriminations had [pg ]never been "regarded
as badges of slavery"; and it was not "the intent of the amendment to
denounce every act which was wrong if done to a free man and yet
justified in a condition of slavery."[] likewise, individuals who
conspired to prevent citizens of african descent, because of their race
or color, from making or carrying out contracts of labor, and so from
pursuing a common calling, were not deemed to have reduced negroes to a
condition of involuntary servitude; and hence a federal statute which
penalized such a conspiracy was declared to be in excess of the
enforcement powers vested in congress by the thirteenth amendment.[]
() "services which have from time immemorial been treated as
exceptional." thus, contracts of seamen, which have from earliest
historical times been treated as exceptional, and involving, to a
certain extent, the surrender of personal liberty may be enforced
without regard to the amendment.[]
() "enforcement of those duties which individuals owe the state, such
as services in the army, militia, on the jury, etc." thus, "a state has
inherent power to require every able-bodied man within its jurisdiction
to labor for a reasonable time on public roads near his residence
without direct compensation."[] similarly, the exaction by congress of
enforced military duty from citizens of the united states, as was done
by the selective service act of may ,  ( stat. ); and the
requirement, under the selective training and service act of  (
u.s.c.a. app. §(g)), that conscientious objectors be assigned to
work of national importance under civilian direction, were held not to
contravene the thirteenth amendment.[]
() a state law which made it a misdemeanor for a lessor, or his agent
or janitor, intentionally to fail to furnish such water, heat, light,
elevator, telephone, or other service as may be required by the terms of
the lease and necessary to the proper and customary use of the building,
did not create an involuntary servitude.[]
() section (a) of the communications act ( u.s.c.a. §) making
it unlawful to coerce, compel, or constrain a licensee to employ persons
in excess of the number of the employees needed by the licensee in the
conduct of a radio broadcasting business, on its face, was construed as
not violating this amendment.[]
[pg ]
enforcement
"*** this amendment, besides abolishing forever slavery and
involuntary servitude ***, gives power to congress to protect all
persons within the jurisdiction of the united states from being in any
way subject to slavery or involuntary servitude, except as a punishment
for crime, and in the enjoyment of that freedom which it was the object
of the amendment to secure. ***"[] it "is undoubtedly
self-executing without any ancillary legislation, *** [but]
legislation may be necessary and proper to meet all the various ***
circumstances to be affected by it, and to prescribe proper modes of
redress for its violation in letter or spirit." this legislation,
moreover, "may be direct and primary, operating upon the acts of
individuals, whether sanctioned by state legislation or not; [whereas]
under the fourteenth [amendment], *** it *** can only be, corrective
in its character, addressed to counteract and afford relief against
state regulations or proceedings."[]
pursuant to its powers of enforcement under section two of this
amendment, congress on march ,  enacted a statute[] by the terms
of which the system of peonage was abolished and prohibited and
penalties were imposed on anyone who holds, arrests, or returns, or
causes, or aids in the arrest or return of a person to peonage. the
validity of this act was sustained in clyatt v. united states;[] and
more [pg ]recently, in united states v. gaskin,[] a proviso thereof was
construed as capable of supporting a conviction for arrest with intent
to compel performance of labor even though the debtor in fact rendered
no service after his arrest. each of the acts enumerated in that
proviso, the "holding, arresting, or the returning, may be the subject
of indictment and punishment."
notes
[] bailey v. alabama,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. , -.
[] ibid. -.
[] pursuant to its enforcement powers under section  of this
amendment, congress, on march ,  adopted a statute ( stat. ),
which is now found in  u.s.c.a. § and  u.s.c.a. §, by the
terms of which peonage was prohibited, and persons returning any one to
a condition of peonage were subjected to criminal punishment. this
statute was upheld in clyatt v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] peonage cases,  f.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). justice holmes, who was joined by
justice lurton, dissented on the ground that a state was not forbidden
by this amendment from punishing a breach of contract as a crime.
"compulsory work for no private master in a jail is not peonage."—ibid.
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). justice reed, with chief justice stone
concurring, contended in a dissenting opinion that a state is not
prohibited by the thirteenth amendment from "punishing the fraudulent
procurement of an advance in wages."—ibid. .
[] civil rights cases,  u.s. , - (); plessy v.
ferguson,  u.s.  ().
[] hodges v. united states;  u.s.  ().
[] robertson v. baldwin,  u.s. ,  ().
[] butler v. perry,  u.s. , 
().—work-or-fight laws, such as states enacted during world war i,
which required male residents to be employed during the period of that
war were sustained on similar grounds, as were municipal ordinances,
enforced during the depression, which compelled indigents physically
able to perform manual labor to serve the municipality without
compensation as a condition of receiving financial assistance.—state
v. mcclure,  boyce (del.) ;  a.  (); commonwealth v.
pouliot,  mass. ;  n.e.  ().
[] arver v. united states (selective draft law cases), 
u.s. ,  (); united states v. brooks,  f. supp.  ();
affirmed  f. (d)  (); certiorari denied,  u.s.  ().
it may be noted in this connection that labor leaders have contended
that conscription of labor in time of war, unaccompanied by
nationalization of industry, would mean that the conscripts, having thus
been forced by the government to work for private profit, would be
reduced to involuntary servitude. this position is not supported by the
precedents.—see corwin, total war and the constitution, -
[] brown (marcus) holding co. v. feldman,  u.s. , 
[] united states v. petrillo,  u.s. , - ().
injunctions and "cease and desist" orders in labor disputes have also
been repeatedly sustained against charges by labor that the prohibitions
of this amendment had been violated. see auto workers v. wis. board,
 u.s.  (), in which application of the wisconsin employment
peace act in support of an order forbidding recurrent, intermittent work
stoppages for unstated ends was held not to have imposed involuntary
servitude. see also western union tel. co. v. international b. of e.
workers,  f. (d)  (); international brotherhood, etc. v.
western u. tel. co.,  f. (d)  (), certiorari denied,  u.s.
[] united states v. harris,  u.s. ,  (). an
act of congress which penalized a conspiracy to deprive any person of
the equal protection of the laws or of equal privileges and immunities
under the laws was accordingly held unconstitutional insofar as its
validity was made to depend upon the thirteenth amendment.
[] civil rights cases,  u.s. , ,  ().
[]  stat. ;  u.s.c.a. §;  u.s.c.a. §.
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
section . citizenship; privileges and immunities; due process; equal protection 
citizens of the united states 
kinds and sources of citizenship 
history 
judicial elucidation of the citizenship clause 
national and state citizenship 
corporations 
privileges and immunities 
purpose and early history of the clause 
privileges and immunities of citizens of the united states 
privileges held not within the protection of the clause 
due process of law clause 
historical development 
police power: liberty: property 
liberty of contract--labor relations 
definitions 
"persons" defined 
due process and the police power 
definition 
limitations on the police power 
"liberty," in general 
definitions 
personal liberty: compulsory vaccination: sexual sterilization 
liberties pertaining to education (of teachers, parents, pupils) 
liberties safeguarded by the first eight amendments 
liberty of contract (labor relations) 
in general 
laws regulating hours of labor 
laws regulating labor in mines 
laws prohibiting employment of children in hazardous occupations 
laws regulating payment of wages 
minimum wage laws 
workmen's compensation laws 
collective bargaining 
regulation of charges; business affected with a public interest 
history 
nebbia v. new york 
judicial review of publicly determined rates and charges 
development 
limitations on judicial review 
ben avon case 
history of the valuation question 
regulation of public utilities (other than rates) 
in general 
compulsory expenditures 
grade crossings and other expenditures by railroads 
compellable services 
intercompany railway service 
intercompany discriminatory service charges 
safety regulations applicable to railroads 
liabilities and penalties 
regulation of corporations, business, professions, and trades 
domestic corporations 
foreign corporations 
business in general 
laws prohibiting trusts, discrimination, restraint of trade 
statutes preventing fraud in sale of goods 
blue sky laws; laws regulating boards of trade, etc. 
trading stamps 
banking 
loans, interest, assignments 
insurance 
professions, trades, occupations 
pharmacies 
miscellaneous business, professions, trades, and occupations 
protection of resources of the state 
oil and gas 
protection of property damaged by mining or drilling of wells 
water 
apple and citrus fruit industries 
fish and game 
limitations on ownership 
zoning, building lines, etc. 
safety regulations 
police power 
general 
health measures 
protection of water supply 
garbage 
sewers 
food and drugs, etc. 
milk 
protection of public morals 
gambling and lotteries 
red light districts 
sunday blue laws 
intoxicating liquor 
regulation of motor vehicles and motor carriers 
succession to property 
administration of estates 
abandoned property 
vested rights, remedial rights; political candidacy 
man's best friend 
control of local units of government 
taxation 
in general 
public purpose 
other considerations affecting validity: excessive burden; ration of amount to benefit received 
estate, gift and inheritance taxes 
other types of taxes 
income taxes 
franchise taxes 
severance taxes 
real property taxes (assessment) 
real property taxes (special assessments) 
jurisdiction to tax 
land 
tangible personalty 
intangible personalty 
general 
taxes on intangibles sustained 
taxes on intangibles invalidated 
transfer taxes (inheritance, estate, gift taxes) 
corporation taxes 
intangible personal property 
privilege taxes measured by corporate stock 
privilege taxes measured by gross receipts 
taxes on tangible personal property 
income and other taxes 
individual incomes 
incomes of foreign corporations 
chain store taxes 
insurance company taxes 
procedure in taxation 
in general 
notice and hearing in relation to general taxes 
notice and hearing in relation to assessments 
notice and hearing in relation to special assessments 
sufficiency and manner of giving notice 
sufficiency of remedy 
laches 
collection of taxes 
eminent domain 
historical development 
public use 
necessity for a taking 
what constitutes a taking for a public use 
just compensation 
uncompensated takings 
consequential damages 
limits to the above rule 
due process in eminent domain 
notice 
hearing 
occupation in advance of condemnation 
due process in civil proceedings 
some general criteria 
ancient usage and uniformity 
equality 
due process and judicial process 
jurisdiction 
in general 
how perfected: by voluntary appearance or service of process 
service of process in actions in personam: individuals, resident and nonresident 
suits in personam 
suability of foreign corporations 
service of process 
actions in rem--proceedings against land 
actions in rem--attachment proceedings 
actions in rem--corporations, estates, trusts, etc. 
actions in rem--divorce proceedings 
misnomer of defendant--false return, etc. 
notice and hearing 
legislative proceedings 
administrative proceedings 
statutory proceedings 
judicial proceedings 
sufficiency of notice and hearing 
power of states to regulate procedure 
generally 
pleading and practice 
commencement of actions 
pleas in abatement 
defenses 
amendments and continuances 
costs, damages, and penalties 
statutes of limitation 
evidence and presumptions 
jury trials: dispensing with trials 
due process in criminal proceedings 
general 
indefinite statutes: right of accused to knowledge of offense 
abolition of the grand jury 
right to counsel 
right to trial by jury 
self-incrimination: forced confessions 
unreasonable searches and seizures 
conviction based on perjured testimony 
confrontation: presence of the accused; public trial 
trial by impartial tribunal 
other attributes of a fair trial 
excessive bail, cruel and unusual punishment, sentence 
double jeopardy 
rights of prisoners 
access to the courts 
appeals: corrective process 
due process: miscellaneous 
appeals 
federal review of state procedure 
equal protection of the laws 
definition of terms 
what constitutes state action 
"persons" 
"within its jurisdiction" 
"equal protection of the laws" 
legislative classifications 
taxation 
classifications for the purpose of taxation 
foreign corporations 
income taxes 
inheritance taxes 
motor vehicle taxes 
poll taxes 
property taxes 
special assessment 
police power 
classification 
administrative discretion 
alien laws 
labor relations 
monopolies 
punishment for crime 
segregation 
political rights 
procedure 
general doctrine 
access to courts 
corporations 
expenses of litigation 
selection of jury 
section . apportionment of representation 
in general 
"indians not taxed" 
right to vote 
reduction of state's representation 
section . disqualification of officers 
in general 
section . public debt, etc. 
section . enforcement 
scope of the provision 
[pg ]
amendment 
section . all persons born or naturalized in the united
states, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the
united states and of the state wherein they reside. no state shall make
or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of
citizens of the united states; nor shall any state deprive any person of
life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
citizens of the united states
there are three categories of persons who, if subject to the
jurisdiction of the united states, are citizens thereof: () those who
are born citizens, of whom there are two classes, those who are born in
the united states and those who are born abroad of american parentage;
() those who achieve citizenship by qualifying for it in accordance
with the naturalization statutes; () those who have citizenship thrust
upon them, such as the members of certain indian tribes and the
inhabitants of certain dependencies of the united states. in the present
connection we are interested in those who are citizens by virtue of
birth in the united states.[]
in the famous dred scott case,[] chief justice taney had ruled that
united states citizenship was enjoyed by two classes of individuals: ()
white persons born in the united states as descendants of "persons, who
were at the time of the adoption of the constitution recognized as
citizens in the several states and [who] became also citizens of this
new political body," the united states of america, and () those who,
having been "born outside the dominions of the united states," had
migrated thereto and been naturalized therein. the states were
competent, he conceded, to confer state citizenship upon anyone in their
midst, but could not make the recipient of such [pg ]status a citizen of the
united states. the negro, however, according to the chief justice, was
ineligible to attain united states citizenship either from a state or by
virtue of birth in the united states, even as a free man descended from
a negro residing as a free man in one of the states at the date of
ratification of the constitution. that basic document did not
contemplate the possibility of negro citizenship.[] by the fourteenth
amendment this deficiency of the original constitution was cured.[]
by the decision in  in united states v. wong kim ark,[] all
children born in the united states to aliens, even temporary sojourners,
if they are not exempt from territorial jurisdiction, are citizens
irrespective of race or nationality. but children born in the united
states to alien enemies in hostile occupation or to diplomatic
representatives of a foreign state, not being "subject to the
jurisdiction thereof," i.e., of the united states, are not citizens.[]
likewise persons born on a public vessel of a foreign country while
within the waters of the united states are not considered as having been
born within the jurisdiction of the united states, and hence are not
citizens thereof.[] conversely, a chinese born on the high seas aboard
an american vessel of chinese parents residing in the united states was
declared not to be a citizen on the ground of not having been born "in
the united states."[] but a child who was born in like circumstances of
parents who were citizens of the united states was declared, shortly
before the civil war, to be a citizen thereof.[]
[pg ]
with the ratification of the fourteenth amendment a distinction between
citizenship of the united states and citizenship of a state was clearly
recognized and established. "not only may a man be a citizen of the
united states without being a citizen of a state, but an important
element is necessary to convert the former into the latter. he must
reside within the state to make him a citizen of it, but it is only
necessary that he should be born or naturalized in the united states to
be a citizen of the union. it is quite clear, then, that there is a
citizenship of the united states, and a citizenship of a state, which
are distinct from each other, and which depend upon different
characteristics or circumstances in the individual."[] national
citizenship, although not created by this amendment, was thereby made
"paramount and dominant."[]
citizens of the united states within the meaning of this article must be
natural and not artificial persons; a corporate body is not a citizen of
the united states.[]
privileges and immunities
unique among constitutional provisions, the privileges and immunities
clause of the fourteenth amendment enjoys the distinction of having been
rendered a "practical nullity" by a single decision of the supreme court
rendered within five years after its ratification. in the
slaughter-house cases[] a bare majority of the court frustrated the
aims of the most aggressive sponsors of this clause, to whom was
attributed an intention to centralize "in the hands of the federal
government large powers hitherto exercised by the states" with a view to
enabling business to develop unimpeded by state interference. this
expansive alteration of the federal system was to have been [pg ]achieved by
converting the rights of the citizens of each state as of the date of
the adoption of the fourteenth amendment into privileges and immunities
of united states citizenship and thereafter perpetuating this newly
defined status quo through judicial condemnation of any state law
challenged as "abridging" any one of the latter privileges. to have
fostered such intentions, the court declared, would have been "to
transfer the security and protection of all the civil rights *** to
the federal government, *** to bring within the power of congress the
entire domain of civil rights heretofore belonging exclusively to the
states," and to "constitute this court a perpetual censor upon all
legislation of the states, on the civil rights of their own citizens,
with authority to nullify such as it did not approve as consistent with
those rights, as they existed at the time of the adoption of this
amendment *** [the effect of] so great a departure from the structure
and spirit of our institutions; *** is to fetter and degrade the state
governments by subjecting them to the control of congress, in the
exercise of powers heretofore universally conceded to them of the most
ordinary and fundamental character; *** we are convinced that no such
results were intended by the congress ***, nor by the legislatures
*** which ratified" this amendment, and that the sole "pervading
purpose" of this and the other war amendments was "the freedom of the
slave race."
conformably to these conclusions the court advised the new orleans
butchers that the louisiana statute conferring on a single corporation a
monopoly of the business of slaughtering cattle abrogated no rights
possessed by them as united states citizens and that insofar as that law
interfered with their claimed privilege of pursuing the lawful calling
of butchering animals, the privilege thus terminated was merely one of
"those which belonged to the citizens of the states as such, and" that
these had been "left to the state governments for security and
protection" and had not been by this clause "placed under the special
care of the federal government." the only privileges which the latter
clause expressly protected against state encroachment were declared to
be those "which owe their existence to the federal government, its
national character, its constitution, or its laws."—privileges, indeed,
which had been available to united states citizens even prior to the
adoption of the fourteenth amendment; and inasmuch as under the
principle of federal supremacy no state ever was competent to interfere
with their enjoyment, the privileges and immunities clause of the
fourteenth amendment was thereby reduced to a superfluous reiteration of
a prohibition already operative against the states.[]
[pg ]
although the court has expressed a reluctance to attempt a definitive
enumeration of those privileges and immunities of united states citizens
such as are protected against state encroachment, it nevertheless felt
obliged in the slaughter-house cases "to suggest some which owe their
existence to the federal government, its national character, its
constitution, or its laws." among those then identified were the
following: right of access to the seat of government, and to the
seaports, subtreasuries, land offices, and courts of justice in the
several states; right to demand protection of the federal government on
the high seas, or abroad; right of assembly and privilege of the writ of
habeas corpus; right to use the navigable waters of the united states;
and rights secured by treaty.[]
in a later listing in twining v. new jersey,[] decided in , the
court recognized "among the rights and privileges" of national
citizenship the following: the right to pass freely from state to
state;[] the right to petition congress for a redress of
grievances;[] the right to vote for national officers;[] the right
to enter public lands;[] the right to be protected against violence
while in the lawful custody of a united states marshal;[] and the
right to inform the united states authorities of violations of its
laws.[] earlier in a decision not referred to in the aforementioned
enumeration, the court had also acknowledged that the carrying on of
interstate commerce is "a right which every citizen of the united states
is entitled to exercise."[]
during the past fifteen years this clause has been accorded somewhat
uneven treatment by the court which, on two occasions at least, has
manifested a disposition to magnify the restraint which it imposes on
state action by enlarging previous enumerations of the privileges
[pg ]protected thereby. in hague v. c.i.o.,[] decided in , the court
affirmed that freedom to use municipal streets and parks for the
dissemination of information concerning provisions of a federal statute
and to assemble peacefully therein for discussion of the advantages and
opportunities offered by such act was a privilege and immunity of a
united states citizen. the latter privilege was deemed to have been
abridged by city officials who acted in pursuance of a void ordinance
which authorized a director of safety to refuse permits for parades or
assemblies on streets or parks whenever he believed riots could thereby
be avoided and who forcibly evicted from their city union organizers who
sought to use the streets and parks for the aforementioned purposes.[]
again in edwards v. california,[] four justices[] who concurred in
the judgment that a california statute restricting the entry of indigent
migrants was unconstitutional preferred to rest their decision on the
ground that the act interfered with the right of citizens to move freely
from state to state. in thus rejecting the commerce clause, relied on by
the majority as the basis for disposing of this case, the minority
thereby resurrected an issue first advanced in the old decision of
crandall v. nevada[] and believed to have been resolved in favor of
the commerce clause by helson and randolph v. kentucky.[] colgate
v. harvey,[] however, which was decided in  and overruled in
,[] represented the first attempt by the court since adoption of
the fourteenth amendment to convert the privileges and immunities clause
into a source of protection of other than those "interests growing out
of the relationship between the citizen and the national government."
here the court declared that the right of a citizen, resident in one
state, to contract in another, to transact any lawful business, or to
make a loan of money, in any state other than that in which the citizen
resides was a privilege of national citizenship which was abridged by a
state income tax law excluding from taxable income interest received on
money loaned within the state.[] whether or not this overruled
precedent is again to be revived and the privileges and immunities
clause again placed in readiness for further expansion cannot yet be
determined with assurance; but in oyama v. california,[] decided in
, the court, in a single sentence, affirmed the contention of a
native-born youth that california's alien land law, applied so as to
work a forfeiture of property purchased in his name with funds advanced
by his parent, a japanese alien ineligible to citizenship and precluded
from owning land by the terms thereof, deprived him "of his privileges
as an american citizen." in none of the previous enumerations has the
right to acquire and retain property been set forth as one of the
privileges of american citizenship protected against state abridgment;
nor is any connection readily discernible between this right and the
"relationship between the citizen and the national government." however,
the right asserted by oyama was supported by a "federal statute enacted
before the fourteenth amendment" [pg ]which provided that "all citizens of
the united states shall have the same right, in every state and
territory, as is enjoyed by white citizens thereof to *** purchase,
*** and hold *** real *** property."[]
in the following cases state action was upheld against the challenge
that it abridged the immunities or privileges of citizens of the united
states:
() statute limiting hours of labor in mines.[]
() statute taxing the business of hiring persons to labor outside the
state.[]
() statute requiring employment of only licensed mine managers and
examiners, and imposing liability on the mine owner for failure to
furnish a reasonably safe place for workmen.[]
() statute restricting employment under public works of the state to
citizens of the united states, with a preference to citizens of the
state.[]
() statute making railroads liable to employees for injuries caused by
negligence of fellow servants, and abolishing the defense of
contributory negligence.[]
() statute prohibiting a stipulation against liability for negligence
in delivery of interstate telegraph messages.[]
() refusal of state court to license a woman to practice law.[]
() law taxing in the hands of a resident citizen a debt owing from a
resident of another state and secured by mortgage of land in the
debtors' state.[]
() statutes regulating the manufacture and sale of intoxicating
liquors.[]
() statute regulating the method of capital punishment.[]
() statute restricting the franchise to male citizens.[]
[pg ]() statute requiring persons coming into a state to make a declaration
of intention to become citizens and residents thereof before being
permitted to register as voters.[]
() statute restricting dower, in case wife at time of husband's death
is a nonresident, to lands of which he died seized.[]
() statute restricting right to jury trial in civil suits at common
law.[]
() statute restricting drilling or parading in any city by any body of
men without license of the governor. "the right voluntarily to associate
together as a military company or organization, or to drill ***,
without, and independent of, an act of congress or law of the state
authorizing the same, is not an attribute of national citizenship."[]
() provision for prosecution upon information, and for a jury (except
in capital cases) of eight persons.[] upon an extended review of the
cases, the court held that "the privileges and immunities of citizens of
the united states do not necessarily include all the rights protected by
the first eight amendments to the federal constitution against the
powers of the federal government"; and specifically, that the right to
be tried for an offense only upon indictment, and by a jury of , rests
with the state governments and is not protected by the fourteenth
amendment. "those are not distinctly privileges or immunities [of
national citizenship] where everyone has the same as against the federal
government, whether citizen or not." similarly, freedom from testimonial
compulsion, or self-incrimination, is not "an immunity that is protected
by the fourteenth amendment against state invasion."[]
() statute penalizing the becoming or remaining a member of any
oath-bound association (other than benevolent orders, etc.,) with
knowledge that the association has failed to file its constitution and
membership lists. the privilege of remaining a member of such an
association, "if it be a privilege arising out of citizenship at all,"
is an incident of state rather than united states citizenship.[]
() statute allowing a state to appeal in criminal cases for errors of
law and to retry the accused.[]
() statute making the payment of poll taxes a prerequisite to the
right to vote.[]
() statute whereby deposits in banks outside the state are taxed at
¢ per $ and deposits in banks within the state are taxed at ¢ per
$. "*** the right to carry out an incident to a trade, business or
calling such as the deposit of money in banks is not a privilege of
national citizenship."[]
() the right to become a candidate for state office is a privilege of
state citizenship, not national citizenship.[]
() the illinois election code which requires that a petition to form
and nominate candidates for a new political party be signed [pg ]by at least
 voters from each of at least  of the  counties in the state,
notwithstanding that % of the voters reside in only one county and
%, in the  most populous counties.[]
due process of law clause
although many years after ratification the court ventured the not very
informative observation that the fourteenth amendment "operates to
extend *** the same protection against arbitrary state legislation,
affecting life, liberty and property, as is offered by the fifth
amendment,"[] and that "ordinarily if an act of congress is valid
under the fifth amendment it would be hard to say that a state law in
like terms was void under the fourteenth,"[] the significance of the
due process clause as a restraint on state action appears to have been
grossly underestimated by litigants no less than by the court in the
years immediately following its adoption. from the outset of our
constitutional history due process of law as it occurs in the fifth
amendment had been recognized as a restraint upon government, but, with
one conspicuous exception,[] only in the narrower sense that a
legislature must provide "due process for the enforcement [pg ]of law"; and
it was in accordance with this limited appraisal of the clause that the
court disposed of early cases arising thereunder.
thus, in the slaughter-house cases,[] in which the clause was timidly
invoked by a group of butchers challenging on several grounds the
validity of a louisiana statute which conferred upon one corporation the
exclusive privilege of butchering cattle in new orleans, the court
declared that the prohibition against a deprivation of property "has
been in the constitution since the adoption of the fifth amendment, as a
restraint upon the federal power. it is also to be found in some form of
expression in the constitutions of nearly all the states, as a restraint
upon the power of the states. *** we are not without judicial
interpretation, therefore, both state and national, of the meaning of
this clause. and it is sufficient to say that under no construction of
that provision that we have ever seen, or any that we deem admissible,
can the restraint imposed by the state of louisiana upon the exercise of
their trade by the butchers of new orleans be held to be a deprivation
of property within the meaning of that provision."[] four years later,
in munn v. illinois,[] the court again refused to interpret the due
process clause as invalidating state legislation regulating the rates
charged for the transportation and warehousing of grain. overruling
contentions that such legislation effected an unconstitutional
deprivation of property by preventing the owner from earning a
reasonable compensation for its use and by transferring to the public an
interest in a private enterprise, chief justice waite emphasized that
"the great office of statutes is to remedy defects in the common law as
they are developed, *** we know that this power [of rate regulation]
may be abused; but that is no argument against its existence. for
protection against abuses by legislatures the people must resort to the
polls, not to the courts."[]
deploring such attempts, nullified consistently in the preceding cases,
to convert the due process clause into a substantive restraint on the
powers of the states, justice miller in davidson v. new orleans[]
obliquely counseled against a departure from the conventional
application of the clause, albeit he acknowledged the difficulty of
arriving at a precise, all inclusive, definition thereof. "it is not a
little remarkable," he observed, "that while this provision has been in
the constitution of the united states, as a restraint upon the authority
[pg ]of the federal government, for nearly a century, and while, during all
that time, the manner in which the powers of that government have been
exercised has been watched with jealousy, and subjected to the most
rigid criticism in all its branches, this special limitation upon its
powers has rarely been invoked in the judicial forum or the more
enlarged theatre of public discussion. but while it has been part of the
constitution, as a restraint upon the power of the states, only a very
few years, the docket of this court is crowded with cases in which we
are asked to hold that state courts and state legislatures have deprived
their own citizens of life, liberty, or property without due process of
law. there is here abundant evidence that there exists some strange
misconception of the scope of this provision as found in the fourteenth
amendment. in fact, it would seem, from the character of many of the
cases before us, and the arguments made in them, that the clause under
consideration is looked upon as a means of bringing to the test of the
decision of this court the abstract opinions of every unsuccessful
litigant in a state court of the justice of the decision against him,
and of the merits of the legislation on which such a decision may be
founded. if, therefore, it were possible to define what it is for a
state to deprive a person of life, liberty, or property without due
process of law, in terms which would cover every exercise of power thus
forbidden to the state, and exclude those which are not, no more useful
construction could be furnished by this or any other court to any part
of the fundamental law. but, apart from the imminent risk of a failure
to give any definition which would be at once perspicuous,
comprehensive, and satisfactory, there is wisdom, ***, in the
ascertaining of the intent and application of such an important phrase
in the federal constitution, by the gradual process of judicial
inclusion and exclusion, as the cases presented for decision shall
require, ***"[]
in thus persisting in its refusal to review, on other than procedural
grounds, the constitutionality of state action, the court was rejecting
additional business; but a bare half-dozen years later, in again
reaching a result in harmony with past precedents, the justices gave
fair warning of the imminence of a modification of their views. thus,
after noting that the due process clause, by reason of its operation
upon "all the powers of government, legislative as well as executive and
judicial," could not be appraised solely in terms of the "sanction of
settled usage," justice mathews, speaking for the court in hurtado v.
california,[] declared that, "arbitrary power, enforcing its edicts to
the injury of the persons and property of its subjects, is not law,
whether manifested as the decree of a personal monarch or of an
impersonal multitude. and the limitations imposed by our constitutional
[pg ]law upon the action of the governments, both state and national, are
essential to the preservation of public and private rights,
notwithstanding the representative character of our political
institutions. the enforcement of these limitations by judicial process
is the device of self-governing communities to protect the rights of
individuals and minorities, as well against the power of numbers, as
against the violence of public agents transcending the limits of lawful
authority, even when acting in the name and wielding the force of the
government."[] thus were the states put on notice that every species
of state legislation, whether dealing with procedural or substantive
rights, was subject to the scrutiny of the court when the question of
its essential justice is raised.
police power: liberty: property
what induced the court to dismiss its fears of upsetting the balance in
the distribution of powers under the federal system and to enlarge its
own supervisory powers over state legislation were the appeals more and
more addressed to it for adequate protection of property rights against
the remedial social legislation which the states were increasingly
enacting in the wake of industrial expansion. at the same time the added
emphasis on the due process clause which satisfaction of these requests
entailed afforded the court an opportunity to compensate for its earlier
virtual nullification of the privileges and immunities clause of the
amendment. so far as such modification of its position needed to be
justified in legal terms, theories concerning the relation of government
to private rights were available to demonstrate the impropriety of
leaving to the state legislatures the same ample range of police power
they had enjoyed prior to the civil war. preliminary, however, to this
consummation the slaughter-house cases and munn v. illinois had to be
overruled in part, at least, and the views of the dissenting justices in
those cases converted into majority doctrine.
about twenty years were required to complete this process, in the course
of which the restricted view of the police power advanced by justice
field in his dissent in munn v. illinois,[] namely, that it is
solely a power to prevent injury, was in effect ratified by the court
itself. this occurred in , in mugler v. kansas,[] where the
power was defined as embracing no more than the power to promote public
health, morals, and safety. during the same interval, ideas embodying
the social compact and natural rights, which had been espoused by
justice bradley in his dissent in the slaughter-house cases,[] had
been transformed tentatively into constitutionally enforceable
limitations upon government,[] with the consequence that the states,
in exercising their police power, could foster only those purposes of
[pg ]health, morals, and safety which the court had enumerated and could
employ only such means as would not unreasonably interfere with the
fundamental natural rights of liberty and property, which justice
bradley had equated with freedom to pursue a lawful calling and to make
contracts for that purpose.[]
so having narrowed the scope of the state's police power in deference to
the natural rights of liberty and property, the court next proceeded to
read into the latter currently accepted theories of laissez faire
economics, reinforced by the doctrine of evolution as elaborated by
herbert spencer, to the end that "liberty", in particular, became
synonymous with governmental hands-off in the field of private economic
relations. in budd v. new york,[] decided in , justice brewer in
a dictum declared: "the paternal theory of government is to me odious.
the utmost possible liberty to the individual, and the fullest possible
protection to him and his property, is both the limitation and duty of
government." and to implement this point of view the court next
undertook to water down the accepted maxim that a state statute must be
presumed to be valid until clearly shown to be otherwise.[] the first
step was taken with the opposite intention. this occurred in munn v.
illinois,[] where the court, in sustaining the legislation before it,
declared: "for our purposes we must assume that, if a state of facts
could exist that would justify such legislation, it actually did exist
when the statute now under consideration was passed."[] ten years
later, in mugler v. kansas[] this procedure was improved upon, and a
state-wide anti-liquor law was sustained on the basis of the proposition
that deleterious social effects of the excessive use of alcoholic
liquors were sufficiently notorious for the court to be able to take
notice of them; [pg ]that is to say, for the court to review and appraise
the considerations which had induced the legislature to enact the
statute in the first place.[] however, in powell v.
pennsylvania,[] decided the following year, the court, being
confronted with a similar act involving oleomargarine, concerning which
it was unable to claim a like measure of common knowledge, fell back
upon the doctrine of presumed validity, and declaring that "it does not
appear upon the face of the statute, or from any of the facts of which
the court must take judicial cognizance, that it infringes rights
secured by the fundamental law, ***"[] sustained the measure.
in contrast to the presumed validity rule under which the court
ordinarily is not obliged to go beyond the record of evidence submitted
by the litigants in determining the validity of a statute, the judicial
notice principle, as developed in mugler v. kansas, carried the
inference that unless the court, independently of the record, is able to
ascertain the existence of justifying facts accessible to it by the
rules governing judicial notice, it will be obliged to invalidate a
police power regulation as bearing no reasonable or adequate relation to
the purposes to be subserved by the latter; namely, health, morals, or
safety. for appraising state legislation affecting neither liberty nor
property, the court found the rule of presumed validity quite
serviceable; but for invalidating legislation constituting governmental
interference in the field of economic relations, and, more particularly,
labor-management relations, the court found the principle of judicial
notice more advantageous. this advantage was enhanced by the disposition
of the court, in litigation embracing the latter type of legislation, to
shift the burden of proof from the litigant charging unconstitutionality
to the state seeking enforcement. to the latter was transferred the task
of demonstrating that a statute interfering with the natural right of
liberty or property was in fact "authorized" by the constitution and not
merely that the latter did not expressly prohibit enactment of the same.
liberty of contract—labor relations
although occasionally acknowledging in abstract terms that freedom of
contract is not absolute but is subject to restraint by the state [pg ]in
the exercise of its police powers, the court, in conformity with the
aforementioned theories of economics and evolution, was in fact
committed to the principle that freedom of contract is the general rule
and that legislative authority to abridge the same could be justified
only by exceptional circumstances. to maintain such abridgments at a
minimum, the court intermittently employed the rule of judicial notice
in a manner best exemplified by a comparison of the early cases of
holden v. hardy[] and lochner v. new york,[] decisions which
bear the same relation to each other as powell v. pennsylvania[] and
mugler v. kansas.[]
in holden v. hardy, decided in , the court, in reliance upon the
principle of presumed validity, allowed the burden of proof to remain
with those attacking the validity of a statute and upheld a utah act
limiting the period of labor in mines to eight hours per day. taking
cognizance of the fact that labor below the surface of the earth was
attended by risk to person and to health and for these reasons had long
been the subject of state intervention, the court registered its
willingness to sustain a limitation on freedom of contract which a state
legislature had adjudged "necessary for the preservation of health of
employees," and for which there were "reasonable grounds for believing
that *** [it was] supported by the facts."[]
seven years later, however, a radically altered court was predisposed in
favor of the doctrine of judicial notice, through application of which
it arrived at the conclusion, in lochner v. new york, that a law
restricting employment in bakeries to ten hours per day and  hours per
week was an unconstitutional interference with the right of adult
laborers, sui juris, to contract with respect to their means of
livelihood. denying that in so holding that the court was in effect
substituting its own judgment for that of the legislature, justice
peckham, nevertheless, maintained that whether the act was within the
police power of the state was a "question that must be answered by the
court"; and then, in disregard of the accumulated medical evidence
proffered in support of the act, uttered the following observation: "in
looking through statistics regarding all trades and occupations, it may
be true that the trade of a baker does not appear to be as healthy as
some trades, and is also vastly more healthy than still others. to the
common understanding the trade of a baker has never been regarded as an
unhealthy one. *** it might be safely affirmed that almost all
occupations more or less affect the health. [pg ]*** but are we all, on
that account, at the mercy of the legislative majorities?"[]
of two dissenting opinions filed in the case, one, prepared by justice
harlan, stressed the abundance of medical testimony tending to show that
the life expectancy of bakers was below average, that their capacity to
resist diseases was low, and that they were peculiarly prone to suffer
irritations of the eyes, lungs, and bronchial passages; and concluded
that the very existence of such evidence left the reasonableness of the
measure under review open to discussion and that the the latter fact, of
itself, put the statute within legislative discretion.
"'responsibility,' according to justice harlan, 'therefore, rests upon
the legislators, not upon the courts. no evils arising from such
legislation could be more far reaching than those that might come to our
system of government if the judiciary, abandoning the sphere assigned to
it by the fundamental law, should enter the domain of legislation, and
upon grounds merely of justice or reason or wisdom annul statutes that
had received the sanction of the people's representatives. *** the
public interest imperatively demand—that legislative enactments should
be recognized and enforced by the courts as embodying the will of the
people, unless they are plainly and palpably beyond all question in
violation of the fundamental law of the constitution.'"[]
the second dissenting opinion written by justice holmes has received the
greater measure of attention, however, for the views expressed therein
were a forecast of the line of reasoning to be followed by the court
some decades later. according to justice holmes: "this case is decided
upon an economic theory which a large part of the country does not
entertain. if it were a question whether i agreed with that theory, i
should desire to study it further and long before making up my mind. but
i do not conceive that to be my duty, because i strongly believe that my
agreement or disagreement has nothing to do with the right of a majority
to embody their opinions in law. it is settled by various decisions of
this court that state constitutions and state laws may regulate life in
many ways which we as legislators might think as injudicious or if you
like as tyrannical as this, and which equally with this interfere with
the liberty to contract. *** the fourteenth amendment does not enact
mr. herbert spencer's social statics. *** but a constitution is not
intended to embody a particular economic theory, whether of paternalism
and the organic relation of the citizen to the state or of laissez
faire. it is made for people of fundamentally differing views, and the
accident of our finding certain opinions natural and familiar or novel
and even shocking ought not to conclude our judgment upon the question
whether statutes embodying them conflict with the [pg ]constitution *** i
think that the word 'liberty,' in the fourteenth amendment is perverted
when it is held to prevent the natural outcome of a dominant opinion,
unless it can be said that a rational and fair man necessarily would
admit that the statute proposed would infringe fundamental principles as
they have been understood by the traditions of our people and our
law."[]
in part, justice holmes's criticism of his colleagues was unfair, for
his "rational and fair man" could not function in a vacuum, and, in
appraising the constitutionality of state legislation, could no more
avoid being guided by his preferences or "economic predilections" than
were the justices constituting the majority. insofar as he was resigned
to accept the broader conception of due process of law in preference to
the historical concept thereof as pertaining to the enforcement rather
than the making of law and did not affirmatively advocate a return to
the maxim that the possibility of abuse is no argument against
possession of a power, justice holmes, whether consciously or not, was
thus prepared to observe, along with his opponents in the majority, the
very practices which were deemed to have rendered inevitable the
assumption by the court of a "perpetual censorship" over state
legislation. the basic distinction, therefore, between the positions
taken by justice peckham for the majority and justice holmes, for what
was then the minority, was the espousal of the conflicting doctrines of
judicial notice by the former and of presumed validity by the latter.
although the holmes dissent bore fruit in time in the form of the
bunting v. oregon[] and muller v. oregon[] decisions overruling
the lochner case, the doctrinal approach employed in the earlier of
these by justice brewer continued to prevail until the depression in the
's. in view of the shift in the burden of proof which application of
the principle of judicial notice entailed, counsel defending the
constitutionality of social legislation developed the practice of
submitting voluminous factual briefs replete with medical or other
scientific data intended to establish beyond question a substantial
relationship between the challenged statute and public health, safety,
or morals. whenever the court was disposed to uphold measures pertaining
to industrial relations, such as laws limiting hours[] of work, it
generally intimated that the facts thus submitted by way of
justification had been authenticated sufficiently for it to take
judicial cognizance thereof; but whenever it chose to invalidate
comparable legislation, such as enactments establishing minimum wages
for women and children,[] it brushed aside such supporting data,
proclaimed its inability to perceive any reasonable connection between
the statute and the legitimate objectives of health or safety, and
condemned the former as an arbitrary interference with freedom of
contract.
[pg ]during the great depression, however, the laissez faire tenet of
self-help was supplanted by the belief that it is peculiarly the duty of
government to help those who are unable to help themselves; and to
sustain remedial legislation enacted in conformity with the latter
philosophy, the court had to revise extensively its previously
formulated concepts of "liberty" under the due process clause. not only
did the court take judicial notice of the demands for relief arising
from the depression when it overturned prior holdings and sustained
minimum wage legislation,[] but in upholding state legislation
designed to protect workers in their efforts to organize and bargain
collectively, the court virtually had to exclude from consideration the
employer's contention that such legislation interfered with his liberty
of contract in contravention of the due process clause and to exalt as a
fundamental right the correlative liberty of employees, which right the
state legislatures were declared to be competent to protect against
interference from private sources. to enable these legislatures to
balance the equities, that is, to achieve equality in bargaining power
between employer and employees, the court thus sanctioned a diminution
of liberty in the sense of the employer's freedom of contract and a
corresponding increase in the measure of liberty enjoyable by the
workers. to the extent that it acknowledged that liberty of the
individual may be infringed by the coercive conduct of other individuals
no less than by the arbitrary action of public officials, the court in
effect transformed the due process clause into a source of encouragement
to state legislatures to intervene affirmatively by way of mitigating
the effects of such coercion. by such modification of its views,
liberty, in the constitutional sense of freedom resulting from restraint
upon government, was replaced by the civil liberty which an individual
enjoys by virtue of the restraints which government, in his behalf,
imposes upon his neighbors.
[pg ]
"persons" defined
notwithstanding the historical controversy that has been waged as to
whether the framers of the fourteenth amendment intended the word,
"person," to mean only natural persons, or whether the word, "person,"
was substituted for the word, "citizen," with a view to protecting
corporations from oppressive state legislation,[] the supreme court,
as early as the granger cases,[] decided in , upheld on the merits
various state laws without raising any question as to the status of
railway corporation-plaintiffs to advance due process contentions. there
is no doubt that a corporation may not be deprived of its property
without due process of law;[] and although prior decisions have held
that the "liberty" guaranteed by the fourteenth amendment is the liberty
of natural, not artificial, persons,[] nevertheless a newspaper
corporation was sustained, in , in its objection that a state law
deprived it of liberty of press.[] as to the natural persons protected
by the due process clause, these include all human beings regardless of
race, color, or citizenship.[]
ordinarily, the mere interest of an official as such, in contrast to an
actual injury sustained by a natural or artificial person through
invasion of personal or property rights, has not been deemed adequate to
enable him to invoke the protection of the fourteenth amendment against
state action.[] similarly, municipal corporations are viewed as
having no standing "to invoke the provisions of the fourteenth amendment
in opposition to the will of their creator," the state.[] however,
state officers are acknowledged to have an interest, despite their not
having sustained any "private damage," in resisting an [pg ]"endeavor to
prevent the enforcement of laws in relation to which they have official
duties," and, accordingly, may apply to federal courts for the "review
of decisions of state courts declaring state statutes which [they] seek
to enforce to be repugnant to the" fourteenth amendment.[]
due process and the police power
definition.—the police power of a state today embraces
regulations designed to promote the public convenience or the general
prosperity as well as those to promote public safety, health, morals,
and is not confined to the suppression of what is offensive, disorderly,
or unsanitary, but extends to what is for the greatest welfare of the
state.[]
limitations on the police power.—because the police power of a
state is the least limitable of the exercises of government, such
limitations as are applicable thereto are not readily definable. being
neither susceptible of circumstantial precision, nor discoverable by any
formula, these limitations can be determined only through appropriate
regard to the subject matter of the exercise of that power.[] "it is
settled [however] that neither the 'contract' clause nor the 'due
process' clause had the effect of overriding the power of the state to
establish all regulations that are reasonably necessary to secure the
health, safety, good order, comfort, or general welfare of the
community; that this power can neither be abdicated nor bargained away,
and is inalienable even by express grant; and that all contract and
property [or other vested] rights are held subject to its fair
exercise."[] [pg ]insofar as the police power is utilized by a state, the
means employed to effect its exercise can be neither arbitrary nor
oppressive, but must bear a real and substantial relation to an end
which is public, specifically, the public health, public safety, or
public morals, or some other phase of the general welfare.[]
the general rule is that if a police power regulation goes too far, it
will be recognized as a taking of property for which compensation must
be paid.[] yet where mutual advantage is a sufficient compensation,
an ulterior public advantage may justify a comparatively insignificant
taking of private property for what in its immediate purpose seems to be
a private use.[] on the other hand, mere "cost and inconvenience
(different words, probably, for the same thing) would have to be very
great before they could become an element in the consideration of the
right of a state to exert its reserved power or its police power."[]
moreover, it is elementary that enforcement of uncompensated obedience
to a regulation passed in the legitimate exertion of the police power is
not a taking without due process of law.[] similarly, initial
compliance with a regulation which is valid when adopted occasions no
forfeiture of the right to protest when that regulation subsequently
loses its validity by becoming confiscatory in its operation.[]
"liberty" in general
definition.—"while *** [the] court has not attempted to
define with exactness the liberty thus guaranteed, the term has received
much consideration and some of the included things have been definitely
stated. without doubt, it denotes not merely freedom from bodily
restraint but also right of the individual to contract, to engage in any
of the common occupations of life, to acquire useful knowledge, to
marry, establish a home and bring up children, to worship god according
to the dictates of his own conscience, and generally to [pg ]enjoy those
privileges long recognized at common law as essential to the orderly
pursuit of happiness by free men."[]
personal liberty: compulsory vaccination: sexual
sterilization.—personal liberty is not infringed by a compulsory
vaccination law[] enacted by a state or its local subdivisions
pursuant to the police power for the purpose of protecting inhabitants
against the spread of smallpox. "the principle that sustains compulsory
vaccination is [also] broad enough to cover" a statute providing for
sexual sterilization of inmates of state supported institutions who are
found to be afflicted with an hereditary form of insanity or
imbecility.[] equally constitutional is a statute which provides for
the commitment, after probate proceedings, of a psychopathic
personality, defined by the state court as including those persons who,
by habitual course of misconduct in sexual matters, have evidenced utter
lack of power to control their sexual impulses and are likely to commit
injury.[] however, a person cannot be deprived of his liberty under a
vague statute which subjected to fine or imprisonment, as a "gangster,"
any one not engaged in any lawful occupation, known to be a member of a
gang consisting of two or more persons, and who had been convicted of a
crime in any state in the union.[]
liberties pertaining to education (of teachers, parents,
pupils).—a state law forbidding the teaching in any private
denominational, parochial, or public school, of any modern language,
other than english, to any child who has not successfully passed the
eighth grade was declared, in meyer v. nebraska[] to be an
unconstitutional interference with the right of a foreign language
teacher to teach and "of parents to engage him so to instruct their
children." although the court did incorporate into its opinion in this
case the general definition of "liberty" set forth above, its holding
was substantially a reaffirmation of the liberty, in this instance of
the teacher, to pursue a lawful calling free and clear of arbitrary
restraints imposed by the state. in pierce v. society of the
sisters,[] the court elaborated further upon the liberty of parents
when it declared that a state law requiring compulsory public school
education of children, aged eight to sixteen, "unreasonably interferes
with the liberty of parents and guardians to direct the upbringing and
education of children under their control."[] as to a student,
neither his liberty to pursue his happiness nor his property or property
rights were infringed when he was denied admission to a state university
for refusing to comply with a law requiring renunciation of allegiance
to, or affiliation with, [pg ]a greek letter fraternity. the right to attend
such an institution was labelled, not an absolute, but a conditional
right; inasmuch as the school was wholly under the control of the state,
the latter was competent to enact measures such as the present one
regulating internal discipline thereat.[] similarly, "the fourteenth
amendment as a safeguard of 'liberty' [does not] confer the right to be
students in the state university free from obligation to take military
training as one of the conditions of attendance."[]
liberties safeguarded by the first eight amendments.—in what
has amounted to a constitutional revolution, the court, since the end of
world war i, has substantially enlarged the meaning of the term,
"liberty," appearing in the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment. as a consequence of this altered interpretation, states and
their local subdivisions have been restrained in their attempts to
interfere with the press, or with the freedom of speech, assembly, or
religious precepts of their inhabitants, and prevented from withholding
from persons charged with commission of a crime certain privileges
deemed essential to the enjoyment of a "fair trial." cases revealing to
what extent there has been incorporated into the "liberty" of the due
process clause of the fourteenth amendment the substance of the first
amendment are set forth in the discussion presented under the latter
amendment; whereas the decisions indicating the scope of the absorption
into the fourteenth amendment of the procedural protection afforded by
the fourth, fifth, sixth, and eighth amendments are included in the
material hereinafter presented under the subtitle, criminal proceedings.
liberty of contract (labor relations)
in general.—liberty of contract, a concept originally advanced
by justices bradley and field in the slaughter-house cases,[] was
elevated to the status of accepted doctrine in  in allgeyer v.
louisiana.[] applied repeatedly in subsequent cases as a restraint on
state power, freedom of contract has also been alluded to as a property
right, as is evident in the language of the court in coppage v.
kansas:[] "included in the right of personal liberty and the right of
private property—partaking of the nature of each—is the right to make
contracts for the acquisition of property. chief among such contracts is
that of personal employment, by which labor and other services are
exchanged for money or other forms of property. if this right be [pg ]struck
down or arbitrarily interfered with, there is a substantial impairment
of liberty in the long-established constitutional sense."
however, by a process of reasoning that was almost completely discarded
during the depression, the court was nevertheless able, prior thereto,
to sustain state ameliorative legislation by acknowledging that freedom
of contract was "a qualified and not an absolute right. *** liberty
implies the absence of arbitrary restraint, not immunity from reasonable
regulations and prohibitions imposed in the interests of the community.
*** in dealing with the relation of the employer and employed, the
legislature has necessarily a wide field of discretion in order that
there may be suitable protection of health and safety, and that peace
and good order may be promoted through regulations designed to insure
wholesome conditions of work and freedom from oppression."[] through
observance of such qualifying statement the court was induced to uphold
the following types of labor legislation.
laws regulating hours of labor.—the due process clause has
been construed as permitting enactment by the states of laws: ()
limiting the hours of labor in mines and smelters to eight hours per
day;[] () prescribing eight hours a day or a maximum of  hours per
week as a limitation of the hours at which women may labor;[] and ()
providing that no person shall work in any mill, etc., more than ten
hours per day (with exceptions) but permitting overtime, not to exceed
three hours a day, on condition that it is paid at the rate of one and
one-half times the regular wage.[] because of the almost plenary
powers of the state and its municipal subdivisions to determine the
conditions under which work shall go forward on public projects,
statutes limiting the hours of labor on public works were also upheld at
a relatively early date.[]
[pg ]laws regulating labor in mines.—the regulation of mines being
so patently within the police power, states have been upheld in the
enactment of laws providing for appointment of mining inspectors and
requiring payment of their fees by mine owners,[] compelling
employment of only licensed mine managers and mine examiners, and
imposing upon mine owners liability for the wilful failure of their
manager and examiner to furnish a reasonably safe place for
workmen.[] other similar regulations which have been sustained have
included laws requiring that entries be of a specified width,[] that
boundary pillars be installed between adjoining coal properties as a
protection against flood in case of abandonment,[] and that
washhouses be provided for employees.[]
laws prohibiting employment of children in hazardous
occupations.—to make effective its prohibition against the
employment of persons under  years of age in dangerous occupations, a
state has been held to be competent to require employers at their peril
to ascertain whether their employees are in fact below that age.[]
laws regulating payment of wages.—no unconstitutional
deprivation of liberty of contract was deemed to have been occasioned by
a statute requiring redemption in cash of store orders or other
evidences of indebtedness issued by employers in payment of wages.[]
nor was any constitutional defect discernible in laws requiring
railroads to pay their employees semimonthly[] and to pay them on the
day of discharge, without abatement or reduction, any funds due
them.[] similarly, freedom of contract was held not to be infringed
by an act requiring that miners, whose compensation was fixed on the
basis of weight, be paid according to coal in the mine car rather than
at a certain price per ton for coal screened after it has been brought
to the surface, and conditioning such payment on the presence of no
greater percentage of dirt or impurities than that ascertained as
unavoidable by the state industrial commission.[]
[pg ]minimum wage laws.—the theory that a law prescribing minimum
wages for women and children violates due process by impairing freedom
of contract was finally discarded in .[] the current theory of
the court, particularly when labor is the beneficiary of legislation,
was recently stated by justice douglas for a majority of the court, in
the following terms: "our recent decisions make plain that we do not sit
as a superlegislature to weigh the wisdom of legislation nor to decide
whether the policy which it expresses offends the public welfare. the
legislative power has limits ***. but the state legislatures have
constitutional authority to experiment with new techniques; they are
entitled to their own standard of the public welfare; they may within
extremely broad limits control practices in the business-labor field, so
long as specific constitutional prohibitions are not violated and so
long as conflicts with valid and controlling federal laws are
avoided."[] proceeding from this basis the court sustained a missouri
statute giving employees the right to absent themselves four hours on
election day, between the opening and closing of the polls, without
deduction of wages for their absence. it was admitted that this was a
minimum wage law, but, said justice douglas, "the protection of the
right of suffrage under our scheme of things is basic and fundamental,"
and hence within the police power. "of course," the justice added, "many
forms of regulation reduce the net return of the enterprise *** most
regulations of business necessarily impose financial burdens on the
enterprise for which no compensation is paid. those are part of the
costs of our civilization. extreme cases are conjured up where an
employer is required to pay wages for a period that has no relation to
the legitimate end. those cases can await decision as and when they
arise. the present law has no such infirmity. it is designed to
eliminate any penalty for exercising the right of suffrage and to remove
a practical obstacle to getting out the vote. the public welfare is a
broad and inclusive concept. the moral, social, economic, and physical
well-being of the community is one part of it; the political well-being,
another. the police power which is adequate to fix the financial burden
for one is adequate for the other. the judgment of the legislature that
time out for voting should cost the employee nothing may be a debatable
one. it is indeed conceded by the opposition to be such. but if our
recent cases mean anything, they leave debatable issues as respects
business, economic, and social affairs to legislative decision. we could
strike down this law only if we returned to the philosophy of the
lochner, coppage, and adkins cases."[]
[pg ]workmen's compensation laws.—"this court repeatedly has upheld
the authority of the states to establish by legislation departures from
the fellow-servant rule and other common-law rules affecting the
employer's liability for personal injuries to the employee.[] ***
these decisions have established the propositions that the rules of law
concerning the employer's responsibility for personal injury or death of
an employee arising in the course of employment are not beyond
alteration by legislation in the public interest; that no person has a
vested right entitling him to have these any more than other rules of
law remain unchanged for his benefit; and that, if we exclude arbitrary
and unreasonable changes, liability may be imposed upon the employer
without fault, and the rules respecting his responsibility to one
employee for the negligence of another and respecting contributory
negligence and assumption of risk are subject to legislative
change."[]
accordingly, a state statute which provided an exclusive system to
govern the liabilities of employers and the rights of employees and
their dependents, in respect of compensation for disabling injuries and
death caused by accident in certain hazardous occupations,[] was held
not to work a deprivation of property without due process of law in
rendering the employer liable irrespective of the doctrines of
negligence, contributory negligence, assumption of risk, and negligence
of fellow-servants, nor in depriving the employee, or his dependents, of
the higher damages which, in some cases, might be rendered under these
doctrines.[] likewise, an act which allowed an injured employee an
election of remedies permitting restricted recovery under a compensation
law although guilty of contributory negligence, and full compensatory
damages under the employers' liability act did not deprive an employer
of his property without due process of law.[] similarly, an elective
statute has been sustained which provided that, in actions against
employers rejecting the system, the inquiry should be presumed to have
resulted directly from the employer's negligence and the burden of
rebutting said presumption shall rest upon the latter.[]
[pg ]contracts limiting liability for injuries, consummated in advance of
the injury received, may be prohibited by the state, which may further
stipulate that subsequent acceptance of benefits under such contracts
shall not constitute satisfaction of a claim for injuries thereafter
sustained.[] also, as applied to a nonresident alien employee hired
within the state but injured on the outside, an act forbidding any
contracts exempting employers from liability for injuries outside the
state has been construed as not denying due process to the
employer.[] the fact that a state, after having allowed employers to
cover their liability with a private insurer, subsequently withdrew that
privilege and required them to contribute to a state insurance fund was
held to effect no unconstitutional deprivation as applied to an employer
who had obtained protection from an insurance company before this change
went into effect.[] likewise, as long as the right to come under a
workmen's compensation statute is optional with an employer, the latter,
having chosen to accept benefits thereof, is estopped from attempting to
escape its burdens by challenging the constitutionality of a provision
thereof which makes the finding of fact of an industrial commission
conclusive if supported by any evidence regardless of its
preponderance.[]
when, by the terms of a workmen's compensation statute, the wrongdoer,
in case of wrongful death, is obliged to indemnify the employer or the
insurance carrier of the employer of the decedent, in the amount which
the latter were required under said act to contribute into special
compensation funds, no unconstitutional deprivation of the wrongdoer's
property was discernible.[] by the same course of reasoning neither
the employer nor the carrier was held to have been denied due process by
another provision in an act requiring payments by them, in case an
injured employee dies without dependents, into special funds to be used
for vocational rehabilitation or disability compensation of injured
workers of other establishments.[] compensation also need not be
based exclusively on loss of earning power, and an award authorized by
statute for injuries resulting in disfigurement of the face or head,
independent of compensation for inability to work, has been conceded to
be neither an arbitrary nor oppressive exercise of the police
power.[]
[pg ]collective bargaining.—during the 's, liberty, in the
sense of freedom of contract, judicially translated into what one
justice has labelled the allgeyer-lochner-adair-coppage doctrine,[]
lost its potency as an obstacle to the enforcement of legislation
calculated to enhance the bargaining capacity of workers as against that
already possessed by their employers. prior to the manifestation, in
senn v. tile layers protective union,[] decided in , of a
greater willingness to defer to legislative judgment as to the wisdom
and need of such enactments, the court had, on occasion, sustained
measures such as one requiring every corporation to furnish, upon
request, to any employee, when discharged or leaving its service, a
letter, signed by the superintendent or manager, setting forth the
nature and duration of his service to the corporation and stating truly
the cause of his leaving.[] added provisions that such letters shall
be on plain paper selected by the employee, signed in ink and sealed,
and free from superfluous figures, and words, were also sustained as not
amounting to any unconstitutional deprivation of liberty and
property.[] on the ground that the right to strike is not absolute,
the court in a similar manner upheld a statute by the terms of which an
officer of a labor union was punished for having ordered a strike for
the purpose of enforcing a payment to a former employee of a stale claim
for wages.[]
[pg ]the significance of the case of senn v. tile layers protective
union[] as an indicator of the range of the alteration of the court's
views concerning the constitutionality of state labor legislation
derives in part from the fact that the statute upheld therein was not
appreciably different from that voided in truax v. corrigan.[] both
statutes were alike in that they withheld the remedy of injunction; but
by reason of the fact that the invalidated act did not contain the more
liberal and also more precise definition of a labor dispute set forth in
the later enactment and, above all, did not affirmatively purport to
sanction peaceful picketing only, the court was enabled to maintain that
truax v. corrigan, insofar as "the statute there in question was ***
applied to legalize conduct which was not simply peaceful picketing,"
was distinguishable. specifically, the court in the senn case gave its
approval to the application of a wisconsin statute which authorized the
giving of publicity to labor disputes, declared peaceful picketing and
patrolling lawful, and prohibited the granting of injunctions against
such conduct to a controversy in which the matter at issue was the
refusal of a tiling contractor employing nonunion workmen to sign a
closed shop agreement unless a provision requiring him to abstain from
working in his business as a tile layer or helper should be eliminated.
inasmuch as the enhancement of job opportunities for members of the
union was a legitimate objective, the state was held competent to
authorize the fostering of that end by peaceful picketing, and the fact
that the sustaining of the union in its efforts at peaceful persuasion
might have the effect of preventing senn from continuing in business as
an independent entrepreneur was [pg ]declared to present an issue of public
policy exclusively for legislative determination.[]
the policy of many state legislatures in recent years, however, has been
to adopt legislation designed to control the abuse of the enormous
economic power which previously enacted protective measures enabled
labor unions to amass; and it is the constitutionality of such
restrictive measures that has lately concerned the court. thus, in
railway mail association v. corsi,[] section  of new york's civil
rights law which forbids a labor organization to deny any person
membership by reason of race, color, or creed, or to deny any member, on
similar grounds, equal treatment in designation for employment,
promotion, or dismissal by an employer was sustained, when applied to an
organization of railway mail clerks, as not interfering unlawfully with
the latter's right to choose its members nor abridging its property
rights, or liberty of contract. inasmuch as it held "itself out to
represent the general business needs of employees" and functioned "under
the protection of the state," the union was deemed to have forfeited the
right to claim exemption from legislation protecting workers against
discriminatory exclusion.[] similarly approved as constitutional in
lincoln union v. northwestern co.[] and american federation of
labor v. american sash co.[] were state laws outlawing the closed
shop; and when labor unions invoked in their own defense the freedom of
contract doctrine that hitherto had been employed to nullify legislation
intended for their protection, the court, speaking through justice black
announced its refusal "to return, *** to *** [a] due process
philosophy that has been deliberately discarded. *** the due process
clause," it maintained, does not "forbid a state to pass laws clearly
designed to safeguard the opportunity of nonunion workers to get and
hold jobs, free from discrimination against them because they are
nonunion workers."[] also in harmony with the last mentioned pair of
cases is auto workers v. wisconsin board[] in which was upheld
enforcement of the wisconsin employment peace act which proscribed as an
unfair labor practice efforts of a union, after collective bargaining
negotiations had become deadlocked, to coerce an employer through a
"slow-down" in production achieved by the irregular, but frequent,
calling of union meetings during working hours without advance notice to
the employer or notice as to whether or when the employees would return,
and without informing him of the specific terms sought by such tactics.
"no one," declared the court, can question "the state's power [pg ]to police
coercion by *** methods" which involve "considerable injury to
property and intimidation of other employees by threats."[] finally,
in giboney v. empire storage co.,[] the court acknowledged that no
violation of the constitution results when a state law forbidding
agreements in restraint of trade is construed by state courts as
forbidding members of a union of ice peddlers from peacefully picketing
a wholesale ice distributor's place of business for the sole purpose of
inducing the latter not to sell to nonunion peddlers.
history
in endeavoring to measure the impact of the due process clause upon
efforts by the states to control the charges exacted by various
businesses for their services, the supreme court, almost from the
inception of the fourteenth amendment, has devoted itself to the
examination of two questions: () whether that clause precluded that
kind of regulation of certain types of business, and () the nature of
the restraint, if any, which this clause imposes on state control of
rates in the case of businesses as to which such control exists. for a
brief interval following the ratification of the fourteenth amendment,
the supreme court appears to have underestimated the significance of
this clause as a substantive restraint on the power of states to fix
rates chargeable by an industry deemed appropriately subject to such
controls. thus, in munn v. illinois,[] the first of the "granger"
cases, in which maximum charges established by a state legislature for
chicago grain elevator companies were [pg ]challenged, not as being
confiscatory in character, but rather as a regulation beyond the power
of any state agency to impose, the court, in an opinion that was largely
an obiter dictum, declared that the due process clause did not operate
as a safeguard against oppressive rates, that if regulation was
permissible, the severity thereof was within legislative discretion and
could be ameliorated only by resort to the polls. not much time was
permitted to elapse, however, before the court effected a complete
withdrawal from this position; and by [] it had fully converted
the due process clause into a positive restriction which the judicial
branch is duty bound to enforce whenever state agencies seek to impose
rates which, in its estimation, are arbitrary or unreasonable.
in contrast to the speed with which the court arrived at those above
mentioned conclusions, more than fifty years were to elapse before it
developed its currently applicable formula for determining the propriety
of subjecting specific businesses to state regulation of their prices or
charges. prior to , unless a business were "affected with a public
interest," control of its prices, rates, or conditions of service was
viewed as an unconstitutional deprivation of liberty and property
without due process of law. during the period of its application,
however, this standard, "business affected with a public interest,"
never acquired any precise meaning; and as a consequence lawyers were
never able to identify all those qualities or attributes which
invariably distinguished a business so affected from one not so
affected. the best the court ever offered by way of enlightenment was
the following classification of businesses subject to regulation,
prepared by chief justice taft.[] these were said to comprise: "()
those [businesses] which are carried on under the authority of a public
grant of privileges which either expressly or impliedly imposes the
affirmative duty of rendering a public service demanded by any member of
the public. such are the railroads, other common carriers and public
utilities. () certain occupations, regarded as exceptional, the public
interest attaching to which, recognized from earliest times, has
survived the period of arbitrary laws by parliament or colonial
legislatures for regulating all trades and callings. such are those of
the keepers of inns, cabs and grist mills. *** () businesses which
though not public at their inception may be fairly said to have risen to
be such and have become subject in consequence to some government
regulation. they have come to hold such a peculiar relation to the
public that this is superimposed upon them. in the language of the
cases, the owner by devoting his business to the public use, in effect
grants the public an interest in that use and subjects himself to public
regulation to the extent of that interest [pg ]although the property
continues to belong to its private owner and to be entitled to
protection accordingly."
through application of this now outmoded formula the court found it
possible to sustain state laws regulating charges made by grain
elevators,[] stockyards,[] and tobacco warehouses,[] and fire
insurance rates[] and commissions paid to fire insurance agents.[]
voided, because the businesses sought to be controlled were deemed to be
not so affected, were state statutes fixing the price at which gasoline
may be sold,[] or at which ticket brokers may resell tickets
purchased from theatres,[] and limiting competition in the
manufacture and sale of ice through the withholding of licenses to
engage therein.[]
nebbia v. new york
in upholding, by a vote of five-to-four, a depression induced new york
statute fixing prices at which fluid milk might be sold, the court, in
, finally shelved the concept of "a business affected with a public
interest."[] older decisions, insofar as they negatived a power to
control prices in businesses found not "to be clothed with a public use"
were now reviewed as resting, "finally, upon the basis that the
requirements of due process were not met because the laws were found
arbitrary in their operation and effect. price control, like any other
form of regulation, is [now] unconstitutional only if arbitrary,
discriminatory, or demonstrably irrelevant to the policy the legislature
is free to adopt, and hence an unnecessary and unwarranted interference
with individual liberty." conceding that "the dairy industry is not, in
the accepted sense of the phrase, a public utility"; that is, a
"business affected with a public interest," the court in effect declared
that price control henceforth is to be viewed merely as an exercise by
the state of its police power, and as such is subject only to the
restrictions which due process of law imposes on arbitrary interference
with liberty and property. nor was the court disturbed by the fact that
a "scientific validity" had been claimed for the theories of adam smith
relating to the "price that will clear the market." however much the
minority might stress the unreasonableness of any [pg ]artificial state
regulation interfering with the determination of prices by "natural
forces,"[] the majority was content to note that the "due process
clause makes no mention of prices" and that "the courts are both
incompetent and unauthorized to deal with the wisdom of the policy
adopted or the practicability of the law enacted to forward it."
having thus concluded that it is no longer the nature of the business
which determines the validity of a regulation of its rates or charges
but solely the reasonableness of the regulation, the court had little
difficulty in upholding, in olsen v. nebraska,[] a state law
prescribing the maximum commission which private employment agencies may
charge. rejecting the contentions of the employment agencies that the
need for such protective legislation had not been shown, the court held
that differences of opinion as to the wisdom, need, or appropriateness
of the legislation "suggest a choice which should be left to the
states"; and that there was "no necessity for the state to demonstrate
before us that evils persist despite the competition" between public,
charitable, and private employment agencies. the older case of ribnik
v. mcbride,[] which founded the invalidation of similar legislation
upon the now obsolete concept of a "business affected with a public
interest" was expressly overruled.
[pg ]
development
in munn v. illinois,[] its initial holding concerning the
applicability of the fourteenth amendment to governmental price
fixing,[] the court, not only asserted that governmental regulation
of rates charged by public utilities and allied businesses was within
the states' police power but added that the determination of such rates
by a legislature was conclusive and not subject to judicial review or
revision. expanding the range of permissible governmental fixing of
prices, the court, in the nebbia case,[] more recently declared that
prices established for business in general would invite judicial
condemnation only if "arbitrary, discriminatory, or demonstrably
irrelevant to the policy the legislature is free to adopt." the latter
standard of judicial appraisal, as will be subsequently noted,
represents less of a departure from the principle enunciated in the munn
case than that which the court evolved, in the years following , to
measure the validity of state imposed public utility rates, and this
difference in the judicial treatment of prices and rates accordingly
warrants an explanation at the outset. unlike operators of public
utilities who, in return for the grant of certain exclusive, virtually
monopolistic privileges by the governmental unit enfranchising them,
must assume an obligation to provide continuous service, proprietors of
other businesses are in receipt of no similar special advantages and
accordingly are unrestricted in the exercise of their right to liquidate
and close their establishments. at liberty, therefore, as public
utilities invariably are not, to escape, by dissolution, the
consequences of publicly imposed charges deemed to be oppressive, owners
of ordinary business, presumably for that reason, have thus far been
unable to convince the courts that they too, no less than public
utilities, are in need of that protection which judicial review affords.
consistently with its initial pronouncement in the munn case, that the
reasonableness of compensation allowed under permissible rate regulation
presented a legislative rather than a judicial question, the court, in
davidson v. new orleans,[] also rejected the contention that, by
virtue of the due process clause, businesses, even though subject to
control of their prices or charges, were nevertheless entitled to "just
compensation." less than a decade was to elapse, however, before the
court, appalled perhaps by prospective consequences of leaving business
"at the mercy of the majority of the legislature," began to reverse
itself. thus, in , chief justice waite, in the railroad [pg ]commission
cases,[] warned that "this power to regulate is not a power to
destroy; [and] the state cannot do that in law which amounts to a taking
of property for public use without just compensation or without due
process of law"; or, in other words, cannot impose a confiscatory rate.
by treating "due process of law" and "just compensation" as equivalents,
the court, contrary to its earlier holding in davidson v. new orleans,
was in effect asserting that the imposition of a rate so low as to
damage or diminish private property ceased to be an exercise of a
state's police power and became one of eminent domain. nevertheless,
even the added measure of protection afforded by the doctrine of the
railroad commission cases proved inadequate to satisfy public utilities;
for through application of the latter the courts were competent to
intervene only to prevent legislative imposition of a confiscatory rate,
a rate so low as to be productive of a loss and to amount to a taking of
property without just compensation. nothing less than a judicial
acknowledgment that when the "reasonableness" of legislative rates is
questioned, the courts should finally dispose of the contention was
deemed sufficient by such businesses to afford the relief desired; and
although as late as [] the court doubted that it possessed the
requisite power, it finally acceded to the wishes of the utilities in
, and, in chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. minnesota[] ruled as
follows: "the question of the reasonableness of a rate ***, involving
as it does the element of reasonableness both as regards the company and
as regards the public, is eminently a question for judicial
investigation, requiring due process of law for its determination. if
the company is deprived of the power of charging rates for the use of
its property, and such deprivation takes place in the absence of an
investigation by judicial machinery, it is deprived of the lawful use of
its property, and thus, in substance and effect, of the property itself,
without due process of law ***"
despite a last hour attempt, in budd v. new york,[] to reconcile
munn v. illinois with chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. minnesota by
confining application of the latter decision to cases wherein rates had
been fixed by a commission and denying its pertinence to rates directly
imposed by a legislature, the court, in reagan v. farmers' loan and
trust co.,[] set at rest all lingering doubts as to the scope of
judicial intervention by declaring that, "if a carrier," in the absence
of a legislative rate, "attempted to charge a shipper an unreasonable
sum," the court, in accordance with common law principles, will pass on
the reasonableness of its rates and has "jurisdiction *** to award to
the shipper any amount exacted [pg ]*** in excess of a reasonable rate; ***
the province of the courts is not changed, nor the limit of judicial
inquiry altered, because the legislature instead of a carrier prescribes
the rates."[] reiterating virtually the same principle in smyth v.
ames,[] the court not only obliterated the distinction between
confiscatory and unreasonable rates, but also contributed the additional
observation that the requirements of due process are not met unless a
court reviews not merely the reasonableness of a rate but also
determines whether the rate permits the utility to earn a fair return on
a fair valuation of its investment.
limitations on judicial review
as to what courts will not do, when reviewing rate orders of a state
commission, the following negative statements of the supreme court
appear to have enduring value. as early as , the court asserted:
"the courts are not authorized to revise or change the body of rates
imposed by a legislature or a commission; they do not determine whether
one rate is preferable to another, or what under all circumstances would
be fair and reasonable as between the carriers and [pg ]the shippers; they
do not engage in any mere administrative work; *** [however, there can
be no doubt] of their power and duty to inquire whether a body of rates
*** is unjust and unreasonable, ***, and if found so to be, to
restrain its operation."[] and later, in , although it was
examining the order of a federal rate-making agency, the court made a
similar observation which appears to be equally applicable to the
judicial review of regulations of state agencies. the courts cannot,
"under the guise of exerting judicial power, usurp merely administrative
functions by setting aside" an order of the commission within the scope
of the power delegated to such commission, upon the ground that such
power was unwisely or inexpediently exercised.[]
also inferable from these early holdings, and effective to restrict the
bounds of judicial investigation, is the notion that a distinction can
be made between factual questions which give rise only to controversies
as to the wisdom or expediency of an order issued by a commission and
determinations of fact which bear on a commission's power to act; namely
those questions which are inseparable from the constitutional issue of
confiscation, and that judicial review does not extend to the former.
this distinction is accorded adequate emphasis by the court in
louisville & n.r. co. v. garrett,[] in which it declared that "the
appropriate question for the courts" is simply whether a "commission,"
in establishing a rate, "acted within the scope of its power" and did
not violate "constitutional rights *** by imposing confiscatory
requirements" and that a carrier, contesting the rate thus established,
accordingly was not entitled to have a court also pass upon a question
of fact regarding the reasonableness of a higher rate charged by it
prior to the order of the commission. all that need concern a court, it
said, is the fairness of the proceeding whereby the commission
determined that the existing rate was excessive; but not the expediency
or wisdom of the commission's having superseded that rate with a rate
regulation of its own.
likewise, with a view to diminishing the number of opportunities which
courts may enjoy for invalidating rate regulations of state commissions,
the supreme court has placed various obstacles in the path of the
complaining litigant. thus, not only must a person challenging a rate
assume the burden of proof,[] but he must present a case of "manifest
constitutional invalidity";[] and if, notwithstanding his effort, the
question of confiscation remains in doubt, no relief will be
granted.[] moreover, even though a public utility, which has
petitioned a commission for relief from allegedly confiscatory rates,
need not await [pg ]indefinitely a decision by the latter before applying to
a court for equitable relief,[] the latter ought not to interfere in
advance of any experience of the practical result of such rates.[]
in the course of time, however, a distinction emerged between ordinary
factual determinations by state commissions and factual determinations
which were found to be inseparable from the legal and constitutional
issue of confiscation. in two older cases arising from proceedings begun
in lower federal courts to enjoin rates, the court initially adopted the
position that it would not disturb such findings of fact insofar as
these were supported by substantial evidence. thus, in san diego land
and town company v. national city,[] the court declared that: after
a legislative body has fairly and fully investigated and acted, by
fixing what it believes to be reasonable rates, the courts cannot step
in and say its action shall be set aside because the courts, upon
similar investigation, have come to a different conclusion as to the
reasonableness of the rates fixed. "judicial interference should never
occur unless the case presents, clearly and beyond all doubt, such a
flagrant attack upon the rights of property under the guise of
regulation as to compel the court to say that the rates prescribed will
necessarily have the effect to deny just compensation for private
property taken for the public use." and in a similar later case[] the
court expressed even more clearly its reluctance to reexamine factual
determinations of the kind just described. the court is not bound "to
reexamine and weigh all the evidence, ***, or to proceed according to
*** [its] independent opinion as to what are proper rates. it is
enough if *** [the court] cannot say that it was impossible for a
fair-minded board to come to the result which was reached."
moreover, in reviewing orders of the interstate commerce commission, the
court, at least in earlier years,[] chose to be guided by
approximately the same standards of appraisal as it had originally
formulated for examining regulations of state commissions; and inasmuch
as the following excerpt from its holding in interstate commerce
commission v. union pacific r. co.[] represents an adequate
summation of the law as it stood prior to , it is set [pg ]forth below:
"*** questions of fact may be involved in the determination of
questions of law, so that an order, regular on its face, may be set
aside if it appears that the rate is so low as to be confiscatory ***;
or if the commission acted so arbitrarily and unjustly as to fix rates
contrary to evidence, or without evidence to support it; or if the
authority therein involved has been exercised in such an unreasonable
manner as to cause it to be within the elementary rule that the
substance, and not the shadow, determines the validity of the exercise
of the power. *** in determining these mixed questions of law and
fact, the court confines itself to the ultimate question as to whether
the commission acted within its power. it will not consider the
expediency or wisdom of the order, or whether, on like testimony, it
would have made a similar ruling. *** [the commission's] conclusion,
of course, is subject to review, but when supported by evidence is
accepted as final; not that its decision, ***, can be supported by a
mere scintilla of proof—but the courts will not examine the facts
further than to determine whether there was substantial evidence to
sustain the order."
the ben avon case
these standards of review were abruptly rejected by the court in ohio
valley water company v. ben avon borough,[] decided in , as
being no longer sufficient to satisfy the requirements of due process.
unlike previous litigation involving allegedly confiscatory rate orders
of state commissions, which had developed from rulings of lower federal
courts in injunctive proceedings, this case reached the supreme court by
way of appeal from a state appellate tribunal;[] and although the
latter did in fact review the evidence and ascertained that the state
commission's findings of fact were supported by substantial evidence, it
also construed the statute providing for review as denying to state
courts "the power to pass upon the weight of such evidence." largely on
the strength of this interpretation of the applicable state statute, the
supreme court held that when the order of a legislature, or of a
commission, prescribing a schedule of maximum future rates is challenged
as confiscatory, "the state must provide a fair opportunity for
submitting that issue to a judicial tribunal for determination upon its
own independent judgment as to both law and facts; otherwise the order
is void because in conflict with the due process clause, fourteenth
amendment."
[pg ]without departing from the ruling, previously enunciated in louisville
& n.r. co. v. garrett,[] that the failure of a state to grant a
statutory right of judicial appeal from a commission's regulation is not
violative of due process as long as relief is obtainable by a bill in
equity for injunction, the court also held that the alternative remedy
of injunction expressly provided by state law did not afford an adequate
opportunity for testing judicially a confiscatory rate order. it
conceded the principle stressed by the dissenting justices that "where a
state offers a litigant the choice of two methods of judicial review, of
which one is both appropriate and unrestricted, the mere fact that the
other which the litigant elects is limited, does not amount to a denial
of the constitutional right to a judicial review."[]
history of the valuation question
for almost fifty years the court was to wander through a maze of
conflicting formulas for valuing public service corporation property
only to emerge therefrom in  at a point not very far removed from
munn v. illinois.[] by holding, in , in federal power
commission v. natural gas pipeline co.,[] that the "constitution
does not bind rate-making bodies to the service of any single formula or
combination of formulas," and in , in federal power commission v.
hope gas co.,[] that "it is the result reached not the method
employed which is controlling, *** [that] it is not the theory but the
impact of the rate order which counts, [and that] if the total effect of
the rate order cannot be said to be unjust and unreasonable, judicial
inquiry under the act is at an end," the court, in effect, abdicated
from the position assumed in the ben avon case.[] without
surrendering the judicial power to declare rates unconstitutional on
grounds of a substantive[] deprivation of due process, the court
announced that it would not overturn a result deemed by it to be just
simply because "the method employed [by a commission] to reach that
result may contain infirmities. *** [a] commission's order does not
become suspect by reason of the fact that it is challenged. it is the
product of expert judgment which carries a presumption of validity. and
he who would upset the rate order *** carries the heavy burden of
making a convincing showing that it is invalid because it is unjust and
unreasonable in its consequences."[]
[pg ]in dispensing with the necessity of observing any of the formulas for
rate computation which previously had currency, the court did not
undertake to devise, by way of substitution, any discernible guide to
aid it in ascertaining whether a so-called end result is unreasonable.
it did intimate that rate-making "involves a balancing of the investor
and consumer interests," which does not, however, "'insure that the
business shall produce net revenues,' *** from the investor or company
point of view it is important that there be enough revenue not only for
operating expenses but also for the capital costs of the business. these
include service on the debt and dividends on the stock. *** by that
standard the return to the equity owner should be commensurate with
returns on investments in other enterprises having corresponding risks.
that return, moreover, should be sufficient to assure confidence in the
financial integrity of the enterprise, so as to maintain its credit and
to attract capital."[] nevertheless, in the light of the court's
concentration on the reasonableness of the final result rather than on
the correctness of the methods employed to reach that result, it is
conceivable that methods or formulas, now discredited in whole or in
part, might continue to be observed by state commissions in drafting
rate orders that will prove to be justiciably sustainable.[]
[pg ]
in general
by virtue of the nature of the business they carry on and the public's
interest in it, public utilities are subject, as to their local
business, to state regulation exerted either directly by legislature or
by duly authorized administrative bodies.[] but inasmuch as their
property remains under the full protection of the constitution, it
follows that whenever this power of regulation is exerted in what the
court considers to be an "arbitrary" or "unreasonable" way and to be in
effect an infringement upon the right of ownership, such exertion of
power is void as repugnant to the due process clause.[] thus, a city
cannot take possession of the equipment of a street railway company, the
franchise of which has expired,[] although it may subject said
company to the alternative of accepting an inadequate price for its
property or of ceasing operations and removing its [pg ]property from the
streets.[] likewise, a city, which is desirous of establishing a
lighting system of its own, may not remove, without compensation, the
fixtures of a lighting company already occupying the streets under a
franchise;[] but in erecting its own waterworks in competition with
that of a company which has no exclusive charter, a municipality
inflicts no unconstitutional deprivation.[] nor is the property of a
telegraph company illegally taken by a municipal ordinance which
demands, as a condition of the establishment of poles and conduits in
the city streets, that positions be reserved for the city's wires, which
shall be carried free of charge, and which provides for the moving of
the conduits, when necessary, at company expense.[] and, the fact
that a state, by mere legislative or administrative fiat, cannot convert
a private carrier into a common carrier will not protect a foreign
corporation which has elected to enter a state, the constitution and
laws of which require that it operate its local private pipe line as a
common carrier. such foreign corporation is viewed as having waived its
constitutional right to be secure against imposition of conditions which
amount to a taking of property without due process of law.[]
compulsory expenditures
the enforcement of uncompensated obedience to a regulation for the
public health and safety is not an unconstitutional taking of property
without due process of law.[] thus, where the applicable rule so
required at the time of the granting of its charter, a water company may
be compelled to furnish connections at its own expense to one residing
on an ungraded street in which it voluntarily laid its lines.[]
however, if pipe and telephone lines are located on a right of way owned
by a pipe line company, the latter cannot, without a denial of due
process, be required to relocate such equipment at its [pg ]own
expense;[] but if its pipes are laid under city streets, a gas
company validly may be obligated to assume the cost of moving them to
accommodate a municipal drainage system.[]
to require a turnpike company, as a condition of its taking tolls, to
keep its road in repair and to suspend collection thereof, conformably
to a state statute, until the road is put in good order, does not take
property without due process of law, notwithstanding the fact that
present patronage does not yield revenue sufficient to maintain the road
in proper condition.[] nor is a railroad bridge company
unconstitutionally deprived of its property when, in the absence of
proof that the addition will not yield a reasonable return, it is
ordered to widen its bridge by inclusion of a pathway for pedestrians
and a roadway for vehicles.[]
grade crossings and other expenditures by railroads.—when
railroads are required to repair a viaduct under which they
operate,[] or to reconstruct a bridge or provide means for passing
water for drainage through their embankment,[] or to sprinkle that
part of the street occupied by them,[] their property is not taken
without due process of law. but if an underground cattle-pass is to be
constructed, not as a safety measure but as a means of sparing the
farmer the inconvenience attendant upon the use of an existing and
adequate grade crossing, collection of any part of the cost thereof from
a railroad is a prohibited taking for private use.[] as to grade
crossing elimination, the rule is well established that the state may
exact from railroads the whole, or such part, of the cost thereof as it
deems appropriate, even though commercial highway users, who make no
contribution whatsoever, benefit from such improvements. but, the power
of the state in this respect is not unlimited. if its imposition is
"arbitrary" and "unreasonable" it may be set aside; but to reach that
conclusion, it may become necessary to consider certain relevant facts;
e.g., whether a new highway on which an underpass is to be constructed
is essential to the transportation needs of a community already well
served by a crossing equipped with devices which are adequate for safety
and convenience of a local traffic; whether the underpass is prescribed
as part of a national system of federal aid highways [pg ]for the
furtherance of motor vehicle traffic, much of which is in direct
competition with the railroad; whether the increase in such traffic will
greatly decrease rail traffic and hence the revenue of the railroad;
whether the amount of taxes paid by the railroads of the state, part of
which is devoted to the upkeep of public highways used by motor
carriers, is disproportionately higher than the amount paid by motor
carriers.[]
compellable services
the primary duty of a public utility being to serve on reasonable terms
all those who desire the service it renders, it follows that a company
cannot pick and choose and elect to serve only those portions of its
territory which it finds most profitable, leaving the remainder to get
along without the service which it alone is in a position to give.
compelling a gas company to continue serving specified cities as long as
it continues to do business in other parts of the state entails
therefore no unconstitutional deprivation.[] likewise a railway may
be compelled to continue the service of a branch or part of a line
although the operation involves a loss.[] but even though a utility,
as a condition of enjoyment of powers and privileges granted by the
state, is under a continuing obligation to provide reasonably adequate
service, and even though that obligation cannot be avoided merely
because performance occasions financial loss, yet if a company is at
liberty to surrender its franchise and discontinue operations, it cannot
be compelled to continue at a loss.[]
pursuant to the principle that the state may require railroads to
provide adequate facilities suitable for the convenience of the
communities served by them,[] such carriers have been obligated to
establish stations at proper places for the convenience of patrons,[]
to stop [pg ]all their intrastate trains at county seats,[] to run a
regular passenger train instead of a mixed passenger and freight
train,[] to furnish passenger service on a branch line previously
devoted exclusively to carrying freight,[] to restore a siding used
principally by a particular plant but available generally as a public
track, and to continue, even though not profitable by itself, a
sidetrack[] as well as the upkeep of a switch-track leading from its
main line to industrial plants.[] however, a statute requiring a
railroad without indemnification to install switches on the application
of owners of grain elevators erected on its right of way was held
void.[] whether a state order requiring transportation service is to
be viewed as reasonable may necessitate consideration of such facts as
the likelihood that pecuniary loss will result to the carrier, the
nature, extent and productiveness of the carrier's intrastate business,
the character of the service required, the public need for it, and its
effect upon service already being rendered.[] if the service required
has no substantial relation to transportation, it will be deemed
arbitrary and void, as in the case of an order requiring railroads to
maintain cattle scales to facilitate trading in cattle,[] and of a
prohibition against letting down an unengaged upper berth while the
lower berth was occupied.[]
intercompany railway service.—"since the decision in wisconsin
m. & p.r. co. v. jacobson,  u.s.  (), there can be no doubt
of the power of a state, acting through an administrative body, to
require railroad companies to make track connections. but manifestly
that does not mean that a commission may compel them to build branch
lines, so as to connect roads lying at a distance from each other; nor
does it mean that they may be required to make connections at every
point where their tracks come close together in city, town and country,
regardless of the amount of business to be done, or the number of
persons who may utilize the connection if built. the question in [pg ]each
case must be determined in the light of all the facts, and with a just
regard to the advantage to be derived by the public and the expense to
be incurred by the carrier. *** if the order involves the use of
property needed in the discharge of those duties which the carrier is
bound to perform, then, upon proof of the necessity, the order will be
granted, even though 'the furnishing of such necessary facilities may
occasion an incidental pecuniary loss.' *** where, however, the
proceeding is brought to compel a carrier to furnish a facility not
included within its absolute duties, the question of expense is of more
controlling importance. in determining the reasonableness of such an
order the court must consider all the facts—the places and persons
interested, the volume of business to be affected, the saving in time
and expense to the shipper, as against the cost and loss to the
carrier."[]
although a carrier is under a duty to accept goods tendered at its
station, it cannot be required, upon payment simply for the service of
carriage, to accept cars offered at an arbitrary connection point near
its terminus by a competing road seeking to reach and use the former's
terminal facilities. nor may a carrier be required to deliver its cars
to connecting carriers without adequate protection from loss or undue
detention or compensation for their use.[] but a carrier may be
compelled to interchange its freight cars with other carriers under
reasonable terms,[] and to accept, for reshipment over its lines to
points within the state, cars already loaded and in suitable
condition.[]
intercompany discriminatory railroad service charges.—due
process is not denied when two carriers, who wholly own and dominate a
small connecting railroad, are prohibited from exacting higher charges
from shippers accepting delivery over said connecting road than are
collected from shippers taking delivery at the terminals of said
carriers.[] nor is it "unreasonable" or "arbitrary" to require a
railroad to desist from demanding freight in advance on merchandise
received from one carrier while it accepts merchandise of the same
character at the same point from another carrier without such
prepayment.[]
[pg ]
safety regulations applicable to railroads
the following regulations with reference to railroads have been upheld:
a prohibition against operation on certain streets,[] restrictions on
speed, operations, etc., in business sections,[] requirement of
construction of a sidewalk across a right of way,[] or removal of a
track crossing a thoroughfare,[] compelling the presence of a flagman
at a crossing notwithstanding that automatic device might be cheaper and
better,[] compulsory examination of employees for color
blindness,[] full crews on certain trains,[] specification of a
type of locomotive headlight,[] safety appliance regulations,[]
and a prohibition on the heating of passenger cars from stoves or
furnaces inside or suspended from the cars.[]
liabilities and penalties
a statute making the initial carrier[] or the connecting or
delivering carrier,[] liable to the shipper for the nondelivery of
goods is not unconstitutional; nor is a law which provides that a
railroad shall be responsible in damages to the owner of property
injured by fire communicated by its locomotive engines and which grants
the railroad an insurable interest in such property along its route and
authority to procure insurance against such liability.[] equally
consistent with the requirements of due process are the following two
enactments; the first, imposing on all common carriers a penalty for
failure to settle within a reasonable specified period claims for
freight lost or damaged in shipment and conditioning payment of that
penalty upon recovery by the claimant in subsequent suit of more than
the amount tendered,[] and the second, levying double damages and an
attorney's fee upon a railroad for failure to pay within a reasonable
time after demand the amount claimed by an owner for stock injured or
killed. however, only in the event that the application of the latter
statute is limited to cases where the plaintiff has not demanded more
than he recovered in court will its constitutionality be upheld;[]
but when the penalty allowed thereunder is exacted in a case in which
the plaintiff demanded more than he sued for and recovered, a defendant
railroad is arbitrarily deprived of its property without due
process.[] the [pg ]requirements of fair play are similarly violated by a
statute which, by imposing double liability for failure to pay the full
amount of damages within  days after notice, unless the claimant
recovers less than the amount offered in settlement, in effect penalizes
a carrier for guessing incorrectly what a jury would award.[]
to penalize a carrier which has collected transportation charges in
excess of established maximum rates by permitting a person wronged to
sue for and collect as liquidated damages $ plus a reasonable
attorney's fee is to subject the carrier to a requirement so
unreasonable as to be repugnant to the due process clause; for such
liability is not only disproportionate to actual damages, but is being
exacted under conditions which do not afford the carrier an adequate
opportunity for safely testing the validity of the rates before any
liability for the penalty attaches.[] where it appears, however, that
the carrier had an opportunity to test the reasonableness of the rate,
and that its deviation therefrom, by collection of an overcharge, did
not proceed from any belief that the rate was invalid, the validity of
the penalty imposed is not to be tested by comparison with the amount of
the overcharge. inasmuch as it is imposed as punishment for violation of
a law, the legislature may adjust its amount to the public wrong rather
than the private injury, and the only limitation which the fourteenth
amendment imposes is that the penalty prescribed shall not be "so severe
and oppressive as to be wholly disproportioned to the offense and
obviously unreasonable." in accordance with the latter standard, a
statute granting an aggrieved passenger (who recovered $ for an
overcharge of  cents) the right to recover in a civil suit not less
than $ nor more than $ plus costs and a reasonable attorney's fee
is constitutional.[]
for like reasons, a statute requiring railroads to erect and maintain
fences and cattle guards, and making them liable in double amount of
damages for their failure to so maintain them is not
unconstitutional.[] nor is a nebraska law which establishes a minimum
rate of speed for delivery of livestock and which requires every carrier
violating the same to pay the owner of such livestock the sum of $ per
car per hour.[] on the other hand, when a telephone company, [pg ]in
accordance with its established and uncontested regulations, suspends
the service of a patron in arrears, infliction upon it of penalties
aggregating $,, levied pursuant to a statute imposing fines of $
per day for alleged discrimination, is so plainly arbitrary and
oppressive as to take property without due process.[]
domestic corporations
although a corporation is the creation of a state which reserves the
power to amend or repeal corporate charters, the retention of such power
will not support the taking of the corporate property without due
process of law. to terminate the life of a corporation by annulling its
charter is not to confiscate its property but to turn it over to the
stockholders after liquidation.[] conversely, unreasonable
regulation, as by the imposition of confiscatory rates, although it
ostensibly falls short of termination of the corporate existence,
entails an invalid deprivation.[]
foreign corporations
foreign corporations also enjoy the protection which the due process
clause affords; but such protection does not entitle them to enter
another state or, once having been permitted to enter, to continue to do
business therein.[] the power of a state to exclude or to expel a
foreign corporation being almost plenary as long as interstate commerce
is not directly affected, it follows that a state may subject such entry
or continued operation to conditions. thus, a state law which requires
the filing of articles with a local official as a condition prerequisite
to the validity of conveyances of local realty to such corporations is
not violative of due process.[] neither is a state statute which
requires a foreign insurance company, as part of the price of entry, to
maintain reserves computed by a specific percentage of premiums,
including membership fees, received in all states.[] similarly a
statute requiring corporations to dispose of farm land not necessary to
the conduct of their business is not invalid as applied to a foreign
hospital corporation, even though the latter, because of changed
economic conditions, is unable to recoup its original investment from
the sale which it is thus compelled to make.[]
[pg ]
business: in general
"the constitution does not guarantee the unrestricted privilege to
engage in a business or to conduct it as one pleases. certain kinds of
business may be prohibited; and the right to conduct a business, or to
pursue a calling, may be conditioned. *** statutes prescribing the
terms upon which those conducting certain businesses may contract, or
imposing terms if they do enter into agreements, are within the state's
competency."[]
laws prohibiting trusts, discrimination, restraint of trade.—a
state act prohibiting trusts, etc., is not in conflict with the
fourteenth amendment as to a person combining with others to pool and
fix prices, divide net earnings, and prevent competition in the purchase
and sale of grain.[] nor does the fourteenth amendment preclude a
state from adopting a policy against all combinations of competing
corporations and enforcing it even against combinations which may have
been induced by good intentions and from which benefit and not injury
may have resulted.[] nor is freedom of contract unconstitutionally
abridged by a statute which prohibits retail lumber dealers from uniting
in an agreement not to purchase materials from wholesalers selling
directly to consumers in the retailers' localities,[] nor by a law
punishing combinations for "maliciously" injuring a rival in his
business profession or trade.[] similarly, a prohibition of unfair
discrimination by any one engaged in the manufacture or distribution of
a commodity in general use for the purpose of intentionally destroying
competition of any regular dealer in such commodity by making sales
thereof at a lower rate in one section of the state than in another,
after equalization for distance, effects no invalid deprivation of
property or interference with freedom of contract.[] liberty of
contract is infringed, however, by a law punishing dealers in cream who
pay higher prices in one locality than in another. although high bidding
by strong buyers tends toward monopoly, the statute has no reasonable
relation to such bidding, but infringes private rights whose exercise is
not shown to produce evil consequences.[] a law sanctioning contracts
requiring that commodities identified by trade mark will not be sold by
the vendee or subsequent vendees except at prices stipulated by the
original vendor does not violate the due process clause.[]
[pg ]statutes preventing fraud in sale of goods.—laws and
ordinances tending to prevent frauds and requiring honest weights and
measures in the sale of articles of general consumption have long been
considered lawful exertions of the police power.[] thus, a
prohibition on the issuance by other than an authorized weigher of any
weight certificate for grain weighed at any warehouse or elevator where
state weighers are stationed, or to charge for such weighing, is not
unconstitutional.[] nor is a municipal ordinance requiring that
commodities sold in load lots by weight be weighed by a public
weigh-master within the city invalid as applied to one delivering coal
from state-tested scales at a mine outside the city.[] a statute
requiring merchants to record sales in bulk not made in the regular
course of business is also within the police power.[]
similarly, the power of a state to prescribe standard containers to
protect buyers from deception as well as to facilitate trading and to
preserve the condition of the merchandise is not open to question.
accordingly, an administrative order issued pursuant to an authorizing
statute and prescribing the dimensions, form, and capacity of containers
for strawberries and raspberries is not arbitrary inasmuch as the form
and dimensions bore a reasonable relation to the protection of the
buyers and the preservation in transit of the fruit.[] similarly, an
ordinance fixing standard sizes of bread loaves and prohibiting the sale
of other sizes is not unconstitutional.[] however, by a case decided
in , a "tolerance" of only two ounces in excess of the minimum
weight of a loaf of bread is unreasonable when it is impossible to
manufacture good bread without frequently exceeding the prescribed
tolerance and is consequently unconstitutional;[] but by one decided
ten years later, regulations issued in furtherance of a statutory
authorization which impose a rate of tolerance not to exceed three
ounces to a pound of bread and requiring that the bread maintain the
statutory minimum weight for not less than  hours after cooling are
constitutional.[] likewise a law requiring that lard not sold in bulk
should be put upon in containers holding one, three, or five pounds
weight, or some whole multiple of these numbers, does not deprive
sellers of their property without the process of law.[]
[pg ]the right of a manufacturer to maintain secrecy as to his compounds and
processes must be held subject to the right of the state, in the
exercise of the police power and in the promotion of fair dealing, to
require that the nature of the product be fairly set forth.[] nor
does a statute providing that the purchaser of harvesting or threshing
machinery for his own use shall have a reasonable time after delivery
for inspecting and testing it, and permitting recission of the contract
if the machinery does not prove reasonably adequate, and further
declaring any agreement contrary to its provisions to be against public
policy and void, does not violate the due process clause.[]
blue sky laws; laws regulating boards of trade, etc.—in the
exercise of its power to prevent fraud and imposition, a state may
regulate trading in securities within its borders, require a license of
those engaging in such dealing, make issuance of a license dependent on
a public officer's being satisfied of the good repute of the applicants,
and permit him, subject to judicial review of his findings, to revoke
the same.[] a state may forbid the giving of options to sell or buy
at a future time any grain or other commodity.[] it may also forbid
sales on margin for future delivery;[] and may prohibit the keeping
of places where stocks, grain, etc., are sold but not paid for at the
time, unless a record of the same be made and a stamp tax paid.[]
making criminal any deduction by the purchaser from the actual weight of
grain, hay, seed, or coal under a claim of right by reason of any custom
or rule of a board of trade is a valid exercise of the police power and
does not deprive the purchaser of his property without due process of
law, nor interfere with his liberty of contract.[]
trading stamps.—a prohibitive license fee upon the use of
trading stamps is not unconstitutional.[]
[pg ]
banking
the fourteenth amendment does not deny to states the power to forbid a
business simply because it was permitted at common law; and therefore,
where public interests so demand, a state may place the banking business
under legislative control and prohibit it except under prescribed
conditions. accordingly, a statute subjecting state banks to assessments
for a depositors' guaranty fund is within the police power of the states
and does not deprive the banks of property without due process of
law.[] also, a law requiring savings banks to turn over to the state
deposits inactive for thirty years (when the depositor cannot be found),
with provision for payment to the depositor or his heirs on
establishment of the right, does not effect an invalid taking of the
property of said banks; nor does a kentucky statute requiring banks to
turn over to the protective custody of that state deposits that have
been inactive ten or twenty-five years (depending on the nature of the
deposit).[]
the constitutional rights of creditors in an insolvent bank in the hands
of liquidators are not violated by a later statute permitting reopening
under a reorganization plan approved by the court, the liquidating
officer, and by three-fourths of the creditors.[] similarly, a
federal reserve bank is not unlawfully deprived of business rights of
liberty of contract by a law which allows state banks to pay checks in
exchange when presented by or through a federal reserve bank, post
office, or express company and when not made payable otherwise by a
maker.[]
loans, interest, assignments
in fixing maximum rates of interest on money loaned within its borders,
a state is acting clearly within its police power; and the details are
within legislative discretion if not unreasonably or arbitrarily
exercised.[] equally valid as an exercise of a state's police power
is a requirement that assignments of future wages as security [pg ]for debts
of less than $, to be valid, must be accepted in writing by the
employer, consented to by the assignors, and filed in a public office.
such a requirement deprives neither the borrower nor the lender of his
property without due process of law.[]
insurance
the relations generally of those engaged in the insurance business[]
as well as the business itself have been peculiarly subject to
supervision and control.[] the state may fix insurance rates and
regulate the compensation of insurance agents.[] it may impose a fine
on "any person 'who shall act in any manner in the negotiation or
transaction of unlawful insurance *** with a foreign insurance company
not admitted to do business [within said state].'"[] it may forbid
life insurance companies and their agents to engage in the undertaking
business and undertakers to serve as life insurance agents.[] nor
does a virginia law which forbids the making of contracts of casualty or
surety insurance, by companies authorized to do business therein, except
through registered agents, which requires that such contracts applicable
to persons or property in the state be countersigned by a registered
local agent, and which prohibits such agents from sharing more than %
of a commission with a nonresident broker, deprive authorized foreign
casualty and surety insurers of due process.[] and just as all banks
may be required to contribute to a depositors' guaranty fund, so may all
automobile liability insurers be required to submit to the equitable
apportionment among them of applicants who are in good faith entitled
to, but are financially unable to, procure such insurance through
ordinary methods.[]
however, a statute which prohibits the assured from contracting directly
with a marine insurance company outside the state for coverage of
property within the state is invalid as a deprivation of liberty without
due process of law.[] for the same reason, a state may not prevent a
citizen from concluding with a foreign life insurance company at its
home office a policy loan agreement whereby the policy of [pg ]his life is
pledged as collateral security for a cash loan to become due upon
default in payment of premiums, in which case the entire policy reserve
might be applied to discharge the indebtedness. authority to subject
such an agreement to the conflicting provisions of domestic law is not
deducible from the power of a state to license a foreign insurance
company as a condition of its doing business therein.[]
a stipulation that policies of hail insurance shall take effect and
become binding twenty-four hours after the hour in which an application
is taken and further requiring notice by telegram of rejection of an
application is not invalid.[] nor is any arbitrary restraint upon
their liberty of contract imposed upon surety companies by a statute
providing that any bond executed after its enactment for the faithful
performance of a building contract shall inure to the benefit of
materialmen and laborers, notwithstanding any provision of the bond to
the contrary.[] likewise constitutional is a law requiring that a
policy, indemnifying a motor vehicle owner against liability to persons
injured through negligent operation, shall provide that bankruptcy of
the insured shall not release the insurer from liability to an injured
person.[]
if fire insurance companies, in case of total loss, are compelled to pay
the amount for which the property was insured, less depreciation between
the time of issuing the policy and the time of the loss, such insurers
are not deprived of their property without due process of law.[]
moreover, even though it has its attorney-in-fact located in illinois,
signs all its contracts there, and forwards therefrom all checks in
payment of losses, a reciprocal insurance association, if it covers real
property located in new york, may be compelled to comply with new york
regulations which require maintenance of an office in that state and the
countersigning of policies by an agent resident therein.[] also, to
discourage monopolies and to encourage competition in the matter of
rates, a state constitutionally may impose on all fire insurance
companies connected with a tariff association fixing rates a liability
or penalty to be collected by the insured of % in excess of actual
loss or damage, stipulations in the insurance contract to the contrary
notwithstanding.[]
[pg ]a state statute by which a life insurance company, if it fails to pay
upon demand the amount due under a policy after death of the insured, is
made liable in addition for fixed damages, reasonable in amount, and for
a reasonable attorney's fee is not unconstitutional even though payment
is resisted in good faith and upon reasonable grounds.[] it is also
proper by law to cut off a defense by a life insurance company based on
false and fraudulent statements in the application, unless the matter
misrepresented actually contributed to the death of the insured.[] a
provision that suicide, unless contemplated when the application for a
policy was made, shall be no defense is equally valid.[] when a
cooperative life insurance association is reorganized so as to permit it
to do a life insurance business of every kind, policyholders are not
deprived of their property without due process of law.[] similarly,
when the method of liquidation provided by a plan of rehabilitation of a
mutual life insurance company is as favorable to dissenting
policyholders as would have been the sale of assets and pro rata
distribution to all creditors, the dissenters are unable to show any
taking without due process. dissenters have no constitutional right to a
particular form of remedy.[]
professions, trades, occupations
employment agencies.—an act imposing license fees for
operating such agencies and prohibiting them from sending applicants to
an employer who has not applied for labor does not deny due process of
law.[]
pharmacies.—a pennsylvania law forbidding a corporation to own
therein any drug store, excepting those owned and operated at the time
of the enactment, unless all its stockholders are licensed pharmacists,
violates the due process clause as applied to a foreign corporation, all
of whose stockholders are not pharmacists, which sought to extend its
business in pennsylvania by acquiring and operating therein two
additional stores.[]
miscellaneous business, professions, trades, and
occupations.—the practice of medicine, using this word in its most
general [pg ]sense, has long been the subject of regulation;[] and in
pursuance of its power a state may exclude osteopathic physicians from
hospitals maintained by it or its municipalities;[] and may regulate
the practice of dentistry by prescribing qualifications that are
reasonably necessary, requiring licenses, establishing a supervisory
administrative board, and by prohibiting certain advertising regardless
of its truthfulness.[] but while statutes requiring pilots to be
licensed[] and railroad engineers to pass color blindness tests[]
have been sustained, an act making it a misdemeanor for a person to act
as a railway passenger conductor without having had two years'
experience as a freight conductor or brakeman is invalid.[]
legislation has been upheld which regulated or required licenses for
admissions to places of amusement,[] grain elevators,[] detective
agencies,[] sale of cigarettes,[] or cosmetics,[] and the
resale of theatre tickets;[] or which absolutely forbade the
advertising of cigarettes,[] or the use of a representation of the
united states flag on an advertising medium,[] the solicitation by a
layman of business of collecting and adjusting claims,[] the keeping
of private markets within six squares of a public market,[] the
keeping of billiard halls except in hotels,[] or the purchase by junk
dealers of wire, copper, etc., without ascertaining the sellers' right
to sell.[]
[pg ]
oil and gas
to prevent waste production may be prorated; the prohibition of wasteful
conduct, whether primarily in behalf of the owners of gas in a common
reservoir or because of the public interests involved is consistent with
the constitution.[] thus a statute which defines waste as including,
in addition to its ordinary meaning, economic waste, surface waste, and
waste incident to production in excess of transportation or marketing
facilities or reasonable market demands, and which provides that
whenever full production from a common source of supply can be obtained
only under conditions constituting waste, a producer may take only such
proportion of all that may be produced from such common source without
waste, as the production of his wells bears to the total production of
such common source, is not repugnant to the due process clause.[] but
whether a system of proration based on hourly potential is as fair as
one based upon estimated recoverable reserves or some other combination
of factors is a question for administrative and not judicial judgment.
in a domain of knowledge still shifting and growing, and in a field
where judgment is necessarily beset by the necessity of inferences
bordering on the conjecture even for those learned in the art, it has
been held to be presumptuous for courts, on the basis of conflicting
expert testimony, to nullify an oil proration order, promulgated by an
administrative commission in execution of a regulatory scheme intended
to conserve a state's oil resources, as violative of due process.[]
on the other hand, where the evidence showed that an order, purporting
to limit daily total production of a gas field and to prorate the
allowed production among several wells, had for its real purpose, not
the prevention of waste nor the undue drainage from the reserves of
other well owners, but rather the compelling of pipe line owners to
furnish a market to those who had no pipe line connections, the order
was held void as a taking of private property for private benefit.[]
as authorized by statute the oklahoma corporation commission, finding
that existing low field prices for gas were resulting in economic and
physical waste, issued orders fixing a minimum price for natural gas and
requiring the cities service company to take gas ratably from another
producer in the same field at the dictated price. the orders were
sustained by the court as conservation measures.[]
[pg ]even though carbon black is more valuable than the gas from which it is
extracted, and notwithstanding a resulting loss of investment in a plant
for the manufacture of carbon black, a state, in the exercise of its
police power, may forbid the use of natural gas for products, such as
carbon black, in the production of which such gas is burned without
fully utilizing for other manufacturing or domestic purposes the heat
therein contained.[] likewise, for the purpose of regulating and
adjusting coexisting rights of surface owners to underlying oil and gas,
it is within the power of a state to prohibit the operators of wells
from allowing natural gas, not conveniently necessary for other
purposes, to come to the surface without its lifting power having been
utilized to produce the greatest quantity of oil in proportion.[]
protection of property damaged by mining or drilling of wells
an ordinance conditioning the right to drill for oil and gas within the
city limits upon the filing of a bond in the sum of $, for each
well, to secure payment of damages from injuries to any persons or
property resulting from the drilling operation, or maintenance of any
well or structures appurtenant thereto, is consistent with due process
of law, and is not rendered unreasonable by the requirement that the
bond be executed, not by personal sureties, but by a bonding company
authorized to do business in the state.[] on the other hand, a
pennsylvania statute, which forbade the mining of coal under private
dwellings or streets or cities by a grantor that had reserved the right
to mine, was viewed as restricting the use of private property too much,
and hence as a "taking" without due process of law.[]
water
a statute making it unlawful for a riparian owner to divert water into
another state does not deprive him of property without due process of
law. "the constitutional power of the state to insist that its natural
advantages shall remain unimpaired by its citizens is not dependent upon
any nice estimate of the extent of present use or speculation as to
future needs. *** what it has it may keep and give no one a reason for
its will."[]
apple and citrus fruit industries
a statute requiring the destruction of cedar trees to avoid the
infecting with cedar rust of apple orchards within the vicinity of [pg ]two
miles is not unreasonable, notwithstanding the absence of provision for
compensation for the trees thus removed or the decrease in the market
value of realty caused by their destruction. apple growing being one of
the principal agricultural pursuits in virginia and the value of cedar
trees throughout that state being small as compared with that of apple
orchards, the state was constitutionally competent to decide upon the
destruction of one class of property in order to save another which, in
the judgment of its legislature, is of greater value to the public.[]
with a similar object in view; namely, to protect the reputation of one
of its major industries, florida was held to possess constitutional
authority to penalize the delivery for shipment in interstate commerce
of citrus fruits so immature as to be unfit for consumption.[]
fish and game
over fish found within its waters, and over wild game, the state has
supreme control.[] it may regulate or prohibit fishing and hunting
within its limits;[] and for the effective enforcement of such
restrictions, it may forbid the possession within its borders of special
instruments of violations, such as nets, traps, and seines, regardless
of the time of acquisition or the protestations of lawful intentions on
the part of a particular possessor.[] to conserve for food fish found
within its waters, a state constitutionally may provide that a reduction
plant, processing fish for commercial purposes, may not accept more fish
than can be used without deterioration, waste, or spoilage; and, as a
shield against the covert depletion of its local supply, may render such
restriction applicable to fish brought into the state from the
outside.[] likewise, it is within the power of a state to forbid the
transportation outside the state of game killed therein;[] and to
make illegal possession during the closed season even of game imported
from abroad.[]
zoning, building lines, etc.
by virtue of their possession of the police power, states and their
municipal subdivisions may declare that in particular circumstances and
in particular localities specific businesses, which are not nuisances
per se are to be deemed nuisances in fact and in law.[]
consequently [pg ]when, by an ordinance enacted in good faith, a
municipality prohibited brickmaking in a designated area, the land of a
brickmaker in said area was not taken without due process of law,
although such land contained valuable clay deposits which could not
profitably be removed for processing elsewhere, was far more valuable
for brickmaking than for any other purpose, and had been acquired by him
before it was annexed to the municipality, and had long been used as a
brickyard.[] on the same basis laws have been upheld which restricted
the location of dairy or cow stables,[] of livery stables,[] of
the grazing of sheep near habitations.[] also a state may declare the
emission of dense smoke in cities or populous neighborhoods a nuisance
and restrain it; and regulations to that effect are not invalid even
though they affect the use of property or subject the owner to the
expense of complying with their terms.[]
not only may the height of buildings be regulated;[] but it also is
permissible to create a residential district in a village and to exclude
therefrom apartment houses, retail stores, and billboards. before
holding unconstitutional an ordinance establishing such a district, it
must be shown to be clearly arbitrary and unreasonable and to have no
substantial relation to the public health, safety, or general
welfare.[] on the other hand, erection of a home for the aged within
a residential district cannot be made to depend upon the consent of
owners of two-thirds of the property within  feet of the site
thereof;[] nor may the interests of nonassenting property owners be
ignored by an ordinance which requires municipal officers to establish
building lines in a block on request of owners of two-thirds of the
property therein.[] but ordinances requiring lot owners, when
constructing new buildings, to set them back a certain distance from the
street lines is constitutional unless clearly arbitrary or
unreasonable.[] however, colored persons cannot be forbidden to
occupy houses in blocks where the greater number of houses are occupied
by white persons, and vice versa. such a prohibition, the practical
effect of which is to prevent the sale of lots in such blocks to colored
persons, violates the constitutional prohibitions against interference
with property rights except by due process of laws; and cannot be
sustained on the ground that it will promote public peace by preventing
race conflicts.[]
[pg ]
safety regulations
as a legitimate exercise of the police power calculated to promote
public safety and diminish fire hazards, municipal ordinances have been
sustained which prohibit the storage of gasoline within  feet of any
dwelling,[] or require that all tanks with a capacity of more than
ten gallons, used for the storage of gasoline, be buried at least three
feet under ground,[] or which prohibit washing and ironing in public
laundries and wash houses, within defined territorial limits, from 
p.m. to  a.m.[] equally sanctioned by the fourteenth amendment is
the demolition and removal by cities of wooden buildings erected within
defined fire limits contrary to regulations in force at the time.[]
nor does construction of property in full compliance with existing laws
confer upon the owner an immunity against exercise of the police power.
thus, a  amendment to a multiple dwelling law, requiring
installation of automatic sprinklers in lodginghouses of nonfireproof
construction erected prior to said enactment, does not, as applied to a
lodginghouse constructed in  in conformity with all laws then
applicable, deprive the owner thereof of due process, even though
compliance entails an expenditure of $, on a property worth only
general
according to settled principles, the police power of a state must be
held to embrace the authority not only to enact directly quarantine[]
and health laws of every description but also to vest in municipal
subdivisions a capacity to safeguard by appropriate means public health,
safety and morals. the manner in which this objective is to be
accomplished is within the discretion of the state and its localities,
subject only to the condition that no regulation adopted by either shall
contravene the constitution or infringe any right granted or secured by
that instrument.[]
[pg ]
health measures
protection of water supply.—a state may require the removal of
timber refuse from the vicinity of a watershed for a municipal water
supply to prevent the spread of fire and consequent damage to such
watershed.[]
garbage.—an ordinance for cremation of garbage and refuse at a
designated place as a means for the protection of the public health is
not a taking of private property without just compensation even though
such garbage and refuse may have some elements of value for certain
purposes.[]
sewers.—compelling property owners to connect with a publicly
maintained system of sewers and enforcing that duty by criminal
penalties does not violate the due process clause.[]
food and drugs, etc.—"the power of the state to *** prevent
the production within its borders of impure foods, unfit for use, and
such articles as would spread disease and pestilence, is well
established";[] and statutes forbidding or regulating the manufacture
of oleomargarine have been upheld as a valid exercise of such
power.[] for the same reasons, statutes ordering the destruction of
unsafe and unwholesome food[], prohibiting the sale and authorizing
confiscation of impure milk[] have been sustained, notwithstanding
that such articles had a value for purposes other than food. there also
can be no question of the authority of the state, in the interest of
public health and welfare, to forbid the sale of drugs by itinerant
vendors,[] or the sale of spectacles by an establishment not in
charge of a physician or optometrist.[] nor is it any longer possible
to doubt the validity of state regulations pertaining to the
administration, sale, prescription, and use of dangerous and
habit-forming drugs.[]
milk.—equally valid as police power regulations are laws
forbidding the sale of ice cream not containing a reasonable proportion
of butter fat,[] or of condensed milk made from skimmed milk rather
than whole milk,[] or of food preservatives containing boric
acid.[] similarly, a statute which prohibits the sale of milk to
which has been [pg ]added any fat or oil other than milk fat, and which has,
as one of its purposes, the prevention of fraud and deception in the
sale of milk products, does not, when applied to "filled milk" having
the taste, consistency, and appearance of whole milk products, violate
the due process clause. filled milk is inferior to whole milk in its
nutritional content; and cannot be served to children as a substitute
for whole milk without producing a dietary deficiency.[] however, a
statute forbidding the use of shoddy, even when sterilized, was held to
be arbitrary and therefore invalid.[]
protection of the public morals
gambling and lotteries.—unless effecting a clear, unmistakable
infringement of rights securely by fundamental law, legislation
suppressing gambling will be upheld by the court as concededly within
the police power of a state.[] accordingly, a state may validly make
a judgment against those winning money a lien upon the property in which
gambling is conducted with the owner's knowledge and consent.[] for
the same reason, lotteries, including those operated under a legislative
grant, may be forbidden, irrespective of any particular equities.[]
red light districts.—an ordinance prescribing limits in a city
outside of which no woman of lewd character shall dwell does not deprive
persons owning or occupying property in or adjacent to said limits of
any rights protected by the constitution.[]
sunday blue laws.—the supreme court has uniformly recognized
state laws relating to the observance of sunday as representing a
legitimate exercise of the police power. thus, a law forbidding the
keeping open of barber shops on sunday is constitutional.[]
intoxicating liquor.—"*** on account of their well-known
noxious qualities and the extraordinary evils shown by experience to be
consequent upon their use, a state *** [is competent] to prohibit
[absolutely the] manufacture, gift, purchase, sale, or transportation of
intoxicating liquors within its borders ***."[] and to implement
such prohibition, a state has the power to declare that places where
liquor is manufactured or kept shall be deemed common [pg ]nuisances;[]
and even to subject an innocent owner to the forfeiture of his property
for the acts of a wrongdoer.[]
regulation of motor vehicles and carriers
the highways of a state are public property, the primary and preferred
use of which is for private purposes; their uses for purposes of gain
may generally be prohibited by the legislature or conditioned as it sees
fit.[] in limiting the use of its highways for intrastate
transportation for hire, a state reasonably may provide that carriers
who have furnished adequate, responsible, and continuous service over a
given route from a specified date in the past shall be entitled to
licenses as a matter of right, but that the licensing of those whose
service over the route began later than the date specified shall depend
upon public convenience and necessity.[] to require private contract
carriers for hire to obtain a certificate of convenience and necessity,
which is not granted if the service of common carriers is impaired
thereby, and to fix minimum rates applicable thereto which are not less
than those prescribed for common carriers is valid as a means of
conserving highways;[] but any attempt to convert private carriers
into common carriers,[] or to subject them to the burdens and
regulations of common carriers, without expressly declaring them to be
common carriers, is violative of due process.[] in the absence of
legislation by congress a state may, in protection of the public safety,
deny an interstate motor carrier the use of an already congested
highway.[]
in exercising its authority over its highways, on the other hand, a
state is limited not merely to the raising of revenue for maintenance
and reconstruction, or to regulations as to the manner in which vehicles
shall be operated, but may also prevent the wear and hazards due to
excessive size of vehicles and weight of load. accordingly, a statute
limiting to , pounds the net load permissible for trucks is not
unreasonable.[] no less constitutional is a municipal traffic
regulation which forbids the operation in the streets of any
[pg ]advertising vehicle, excepting vehicles displaying business notices or
advertisements of the products of the owner and not used mainly for
advertising; and such regulation may be validly enforced to prevent an
express company from selling advertising space on the outside of its
trucks. inasmuch as it is the judgment of local authorities that such
advertising affects public safety by distracting drivers and
pedestrians, courts are unable to hold otherwise in the absence of
evidence refuting that conclusion.[]
any appropriate means adopted to insure compliance and care on the part
of licensees and to protect other highway users being consonant with due
process, a state may also provide that one, against whom a judgment is
rendered for negligent operation and who fails to pay it within a
designated time, shall have his license and registration suspended for
three years, unless, in the meantime, the judgment is satisfied or
discharged.[] by the same token a nonresident owner who loaned his
automobile in another state, by the law of which he was immune from
liability for the borrower's negligence, and who was not in the state at
the time of an accident, is not subjected to any unconstitutional
deprivation by a law thereof, imposing liability on the owner for the
negligence of one driving the car with the owner's permission.[]
compulsory automobile insurance is so plainly valid as to present no
federal question.[]
succession to property
when a new york decedent estate law, effective after , grants for
the first time to a surviving spouse a right of election to take as in
intestacy, and the husband, by executing in  a codicil to his will
drafted in , made this provision operative, his widow,
notwithstanding her waiver in  of any right in her husband's estate,
may avail herself of such right of election. the deceased husband's
heirs cannot contend that the impairment of the widow's waiver by
subsequent legislation deprived his estate of property without due
process of law. rights of succession to property are of statutory
creation. accordingly, new york could have conditioned any further
exercise of testamentary power upon the giving of right of election to
the surviving spouse regardless of any waiver however formally
executed.[]
[pg ]administration of estates.—even after the creation of
testamentary trust, a state retains the power to devise new and
reasonable directions to the trustee to meet new conditions arising
during its administration, especially such as the depression presented
to trusts containing mortgages. accordingly, no constitutional right is
violated by the retroactive application to an estate on which
administration had already begun of a statute which had the effect of
taking away a remainderman's right to judicial examination of the
trustee's computation of income. judicial rules, promulgated prior to
such statute and which were more favorable to the interests of
remaindermen, can be relied upon by the latter only insofar as said
rules were intended to operate retroactively; for the decedent, in whose
estate the remaindermen had an interest, died even before such court
rules were established. if a property right in a particular rule of
income allotment in salvage proceedings vested at all, it would seem to
have done so at the death of the decedent or testator.[]
abandoned property.—as applied to insurance policies on the
lives of new york residents issued by foreign corporations for delivery
in new york, where the insured persons continued to be residents and the
beneficiaries were resident at the maturity date of the policies, a new
york abandoned property law requiring payment to the state of money
owing by life insurers and remaining unclaimed for seven years does not
deprive such foreign companies of property without due process. the
relationship between new york and its residents who abandon claims
against foreign insurance companies, and between new york and foreign
insurance companies doing business therein is sufficiently close to give
new york jurisdiction.[] in standard oil co. v. new jersey,[] a
sharply divided court held recently that due process is not violated by
a statute escheating to the state shares of stock in a domestic
corporation and unpaid dividends declared thereon, even though the
last-known owners were nonresidents and the stock was issued and the
dividends were held in another state. the state's power over the debtor
corporation gives it power to seize the debts or demands represented by
the stock and dividends.
vested rights, remedial rights, political candidacy
inasmuch as the right to become a candidate for state office is a
privilege only of state citizenship, an unlawful denial of such right
[pg ]is not a denial of a right of "property."[] however, an existing
right of action to recover damages for an injury is property, which a
legislature has no power to destroy.[] thus, the retroactive repeal
of a provision which made directors liable for moneys embezzled by
corporate officers, by preventing enforcement of a liability which
already had arisen, deprived certain creditors of their property without
due process of law.[] but while a vested cause of action is property,
a person has no property, in the constitutional sense, in any particular
form of remedy; and is guaranteed only the preservation of a substantial
right to redress by any effective procedure.[] accordingly, a statute
creating an additional remedy for enforcing stockholders' liability is
not, as applied to stockholders then holding stock, violative of due
process.[] nor is a law which lifts a statute of limitations and make
possible a suit, theretofore barred, for the value of certain
securities. "the fourteenth amendment does not make an act of state
legislation void merely because it has some retrospective operation.
*** some rules of law probably could not be changed retroactively
without hardship and oppression, ***, certainly it cannot be said that
lifting the bar of a statute of limitation so as to restore a remedy
lost through mere lapse of time is per se an offense against the
fourteenth amendment."[]
man's best friend
a statute providing that no dog shall be entitled to the protection of
the law unless placed upon the assessment rolls, and that in a civil
action for killing a dog the owner cannot recover beyond the value fixed
by himself in the last assessment preceding the killing is within the
police power of the state.[]
control of local units of government
the fourteenth amendment does not deprive a state of the power to
determine what duties may be performed by local officers, nor whether
they shall be appointed or popularly elected.[] its power over the
rights and property of cities held and used for governmental purposes
was unaltered by the ratification thereof.[] thus, notwithstanding
that it imposes liability irrespective of the power of a city to have
prevented the violence, a statute requiring cities to indemnify owners
of property damaged by mobs or during riots effects no unconstitutional
deprivation of the property of such municipalities.[] likewise, a
person obtaining a judgment against a municipality for damages
[pg ]resulting from a riot is not deprived of property without due process
of law by an act which so limits the municipality's taxing power as to
prevent collection of funds adequate to pay it. as long as the judgment
continues as an existing liability unconstitutional deprivation is
experienced.[]
local units of government obliged to surrender property to other units
newly created out of the territory of the former cannot successfully
invoke the due process clause,[] nor may taxpayers allege any
unconstitutional deprivation as the result of changes in their tax
burden attendant upon the consolidation of contiguous
municipalities.[] nor is a statute requiring counties to reimburse
cities of the first class but not other classes for rebates allowed for
prompt payment of taxes in conflict with the due process clause.[]
in general
it was not contemplated that the adoption of the fourteenth amendment
would restrain or cripple the taxing power of the states.[] rather,
the purpose of the amendment was to extend to the residents of the
states the same protection against arbitrary state legislation affecting
life, liberty, and property as was afforded against congress by the
fifth amendment.[]
public purpose
inasmuch as public moneys cannot be expended for other than public
purposes, it follows that an exercise of the taxing power for merely
private purposes is beyond the authority of the states.[] whether a
use is public or private is ultimately a judicial question, however, and
in the determination thereof the court will be influenced by local
conditions and by the judgments of state tribunals as to what are to be
deemed public uses in any state.[] taxes levied for each of the
following listed purposes have been held to be for a public use: city
coal and fuel yard,[] state bank, warehouse, elevator, flour-mill
system, and homebuilding projects,[] society for preventing cruelty
to animals (dog license tax),[] railroad tunnel,[] books for
school [pg ]children attending private as well as public schools,[] and
relief of unemployment.[]
other considerations affecting validity: excessive burden; ratio of
amount to benefit received
when the power to tax exists, the extent of the burden is a matter for
the discretion of the lawmakers;[] and the court will refrain from
condemning a tax solely on the ground that it is excessive.[] nor can
the constitutionality of the power to levy taxes be made to depend upon
the taxpayer's enjoyment of any special benefit from use of the funds
raised by taxation.[]
estate, gift, and inheritance taxes
the power of testamentary disposition and the privilege of inheritance
being legitimate subjects of taxation, a state may apply its inheritance
tax to either the transmission, or the exercise of the legal power of
transmission, of property by will or descent, or to the legal privilege
of taking property by devise or descent.[] accordingly, an
inheritance tax law, enacted after the death of a testator, but before
the distribution of his estate, constitutionally may be imposed on the
shares of legatees, notwithstanding that under the law of the state in
effect on the date of such enactment, ownership of the property passed
to the legatees upon the testator's death.[] equally consistent with
due process is a tax on an inter vivos transfer of property by deed
intended to take effect upon the death of the grantor.[]
the due process clause places no restriction on a state as to the time
at which an inheritance tax shall be levied or the property valued [pg ]for
purposes of such a tax; and for that reason a graduated tax on the
transfer of contingent remainders, undiminished by the value of an
intervening life estate but not payable until after the death of the
life tenant, is valid.[] also, when a power of appointment has been
granted by deed, transfer tax upon the exercise of the power by will is
not a taking of property without due process of law, even though the
instrument creating the power was executed prior to enactment of the
taxing statute.[] likewise when a transfer tax law did not become
effective until after a deed creating certain remainders had been
executed, but the state court applied the tax on the theory that the
vesting actually occurred after the tax law became operative, no denial
of due process resulted. "***, the statute unquestionably might have
made the tax applicable to this transfer, *** [and the court need]
*** not inquire *** into the reasoning by which ***" the state
held the statute operative.[]
on the other hand, when remainders indisputably vest at the time of the
creation of a trust and a succession tax is enacted thereafter, the
imposition of said tax on the transfer of such remainder is
unconstitutional.[] but where the remaindermen's interests are
contingent and do not vest until the donor's death subsequent to the
adoption of the statute, the tax is valid.[] another example of valid
retroactive taxation is to be found in a new york statute amending a
 estate tax law. the amendment required inclusion in the decedent's
gross estate, for tax computation purposes, of property in respect of
which the decedent exercised after , by will, a nongeneral power of
appointment created prior to that year. the amendment reached such
transfers under powers of appointment as under the previous statute
escaped taxation. in sustaining application of the amendment, the court
held that the inclusion in the gross estate of property never owned by
the decedent, but appointed by her will under a limited power which
could not be exercised in favor of the decedent, her creditors, or her
estate, did not deny due process to those who inherited the decedent's
property, even though, because the tax rate was progressive, the net
amount they inherited was less than it would have been if the appointed
property had not been included in the gross estate.[] in summation,
the court has noted that insofar as retroactive taxation of vested gifts
has been voided, the justification therefor has been that "the nature or
amount of the tax could not reasonably have been anticipated by the
taxpayer at the time of the particular voluntary act which the
[retroactive] statute later made the taxable event *** taxation,
***, of a gift which *** [the donor] might well have [pg ]refrained from
making had he anticipated the tax, *** [is] thought to be so arbitrary
*** as to be a denial of due process."[]
other types of taxes
income taxes.—any attempt by a state to measure a tax on one
person's income by reference to the income of another is contrary to due
process as guaranteed by the fourteenth amendment. thus a husband cannot
be taxed on the combined total of his and his wife's incomes as shown by
separate returns, where her income is her separate property and where,
by reason of the tax being graduated, its amount exceeded the sum of the
taxes which would have been due had their separate incomes been
separately assessed.[] moreover, a tax on income, unlike a gift tax,
is not necessarily unconstitutional, because retroactive. taxpayers
cannot complain of arbitrary action or assert surprise in the
retroactive apportionment of tax burdens to income when that is done by
the legislature at the first opportunity after knowledge of the nature
and amount of the income is available.[]
franchise taxes.—a city ordinance imposing annual license
taxes on light and power companies is not violative of the due process
clause merely because the city has entered the power business in
competition with such companies.[] nor does a municipal charter
authorizing the imposition upon a local telegraph company of a tax upon
the lines of the company within its limits at the rate at which other
property is taxed, but upon an arbitrary valuation per mile, deprive the
company of its property without due process of law, inasmuch as the tax
is a mere franchise or privilege tax.[]
severance taxes.—a state excise on the production of oil which
extends to the royalty interest of the lessor in the oil produced under
an oil lease as well as to the interest of the lessee engaged in the
active work of production, the tax being apportioned between these
parties according to their respective interest in the common venture, is
not arbitrary as regards the lessor, but consistent with due
process.[]
real property taxes (assessment).—the maintenance of a high
assessment in the face of declining value is merely another way of
achieving an increase in the rate of property tax. hence, an
over-assessment constitutes no deprivation of property without due
process [pg ]of law.[] likewise, land subject to mortgage may be taxed
for its full value without deduction of the mortgage debt from the
valuation.[]
real property taxes: special assessments.—a state may defray
the entire expense of creating, developing, and improving a political
subdivision either from funds raised by general taxation, or by
apportioning the burden among the municipalities in which the
improvements are made, or by creating, or authorizing the creation of,
tax districts to meet sanctioned outlays.[] where a state statute
authorizes municipal authorities to define the district to be benefited
by a street improvement and to assess the cost of the improvement upon
the property within the district in proportion to benefits, their action
in establishing the district and in fixing the assessments on included
property, after due hearing of the owners as required by the statute
cannot, when not arbitrary or fraudulent, be reviewed under the
fourteenth amendment upon the ground that other property benefited by
the improvement was not included.[]
it is also proper to impose a special assessment for the preliminary
expenses of an abandoned road improvement, even though the assessment
exceeds the amount of the benefit which the assessors estimated the
property would receive from the completed work.[] likewise a levy
upon all lands within a drainage district of a tax of twenty-five cents
per acre to defray preliminary expenses does not unconstitutionally take
the property of landowners within that district who may not be benefited
by the completed drainage plans.[] on the other hand, when the
benefit to be derived by a railroad from the construction of a highway
will be largely offset by the loss of local freight and passenger
traffic, an assessment upon such railroad is violative of due
process,[] whereas any gains from increased traffic reasonably
expected to result from a road improvement will suffice to sustain an
assessment thereon.[] also the fact that the only use made of a lot
abutting on a street improvement is for a railway right of way does not
make invalid, for lack of benefits, an assessment thereon for grading,
curbing, and paving.[] however, when a high and dry island was
included within the boundaries of a drainage district from which it
could not be benefited directly or indirectly, a tax on such island was
held to be a deprivation of property without due process of law.[]
finally, a state may levy an assessment for special benefits resulting
from an improvement already made[] and may validate an assessment
previously held void for want of authority.[]
[pg ]
land
prior even to the ratification of the fourteenth amendment, it was
settled principle that a state could not tax land situated beyond its
limits; and subsequently elaborating upon that principle the court has
said that "***, we know of no case where a legislature has assumed to
impose a tax upon land within the jurisdiction of another state, much
less where such action has been defended by a court."[] insofar as a
tax payment may be viewed as an exaction for the maintenance of
government in consideration of protection afforded, the logic sustaining
this rule is self-evident.
tangible personalty
as long as tangible personal property has a situs within its borders, a
state validly may tax the same, whether directly through an ad valorem
tax or indirectly through death taxes, irrespective of the residence of
the owner.[] by the same token, if tangible personal property makes
only occasional incursions into other states, its permanent situs
remains in the state of origin, and is taxable only by the latter.[]
the ancient maxim, mobilia sequuntur personam, which had its origin
when personal property consisted in the main of articles appertaining to
the person of the owner, yielded in modern times to the "law of the
place where the property is kept and used." in recent years, the
tendency has been to treat tangible personal property as "having a situs
of its own for the purpose of taxation, and correlatively to ***
exempt [it] at the domicile of its owner."[]the benefit-protection
theory of taxation, upon which the court has in fact relied to sustain
taxation exclusively by the situs state, logically would seem to permit
taxation by the domiciliary state as well as by the nondomiciliary state
in which the tangibles are situate, especially when the former levies
the tax on the owner in terms of the value of the tangibles. thus far,
however, the court has taken the position that when the tangibles have a
situs elsewhere, the domiciliary state [pg ]can neither control such
property nor extend to it or to its owner such measure of protection as
would be adequate to meet the jurisdictional requirements of due
process.
intangible personalty
general.—to determine whether a state, or states, may tax
intangible personal property, the court has applied the fiction,
mobilia sequuntur personam and has also recognized that such property
may acquire, for tax purposes, a business or commercial situs where
permanently located; but it has never clearly disposed of the issue as
to whether multiple personal property taxation of intangibles is
consistent with due process. in the case of corporate stock, however,
the court has obliquely acknowledged that the owner thereof may be taxed
at his own domicile, at the commercial situs of the issuing corporation,
and at the latter's domicile; but, as of the present date,
constitutional lawyers are speculating whether the court would sustain a
tax by all three jurisdictions, or by only two of them, and, if the
latter, which two, the state of the commercial situs and of the issuing
corporation's domicile, or the state of the owner's domicile and that of
the commercial situs.[]
taxes on intangibles sustained.—thus far, the court has
sustained the following personal property taxes on intangibles:
() a debt held by a resident against a nonresidence, evidenced by a
bond of the debtor and secured by a mortgage on real estate in the state
of the debtor's residence.[]
() a mortgage owned and kept outside the state by a nonresident but on
land within the state.[]
() investments, in the form of loans to residents, made by a resident
agent of a nonresident creditor, are taxable to the nonresident
creditor.[]
() deposits of a resident in a bank in another state, where he carries
on a business and from which these deposits are derived, but belonging
absolutely to him and not used in the business, are subject to a
personal property tax in the city of his residence, whether or not they
are subject to tax in the state where the business is carried on. the
tax is imposed for the general advantage of living within the
[pg ]jurisdiction [benefit-protection theory], and may be measured by
reference to the riches of the person taxed.[]
() membership owned by a nonresident in a domestic exchange, known as a
chamber of commerce.[]
() membership by a resident in a stock exchange located in another
state. "double taxation" the court observed "by one and the same state
is not" prohibited "by the fourteenth amendment; much less is taxation
by two states upon identical or closely related property interests
falling within the jurisdiction of both, forbidden."[]
() a resident owner may be taxed on stock held in a foreign corporation
that does no business and has no property within the taxing state. the
court also added that "undoubtedly the state in which a corporation is
organized may ***, [tax] of all its shares whether owned by residents
or nonresidents."[]
() stock in a foreign corporation owned by another foreign corporation
transacting its business within the taxing state. the court attached no
importance to the fact that the shares were already taxed by the state
in which the issuing corporation was domiciled and might also be taxed
by the state in which the issuing corporation was domiciled and might
also be taxed by the state in which the stock owner was domiciled; or at
any rate did not find it necessary to pass upon the validity of the
latter two taxes. the present levy was deemed to be tenable on the basis
of the benefit-protection theory; namely, "the economic advantages
realized through the protection, at the place ***, [of business situs]
of the ownership of rights in intangibles ***"[]
() shares owned by nonresident shareholders in a domestic corporation,
the tax being assessed on the basis of corporate assets and payable by
the corporation either out of its general fund or by collection from the
shareholder. the shares represent an aliquot portion of the whole
corporate assets, and the property right so represented arises where the
corporation has its home, and is therefore within the taxing
jurisdiction of the state, notwithstanding that ownership of the stock
may also be a taxable subject in another state.[]
() a tax on the dividends of a corporation may be distributed ratably
among stockholders regardless of their residence outside the state, the
stockholders being the ultimate beneficiaries of the corporation's
activities within the taxing state and protected by the latter and
subject to its jurisdiction.[] this tax, though collected by the
corporation, is on the transfer to a stockholder of his share of
corporate dividends within the taxing state, and is deducted from said
dividend payments.[]
() stamp taxes on the transfer within the taxing state by one
nonresident to another of stock certificates issued by a foreign
corporation;[] and upon promissory notes executed by a domestic
corporation, although payable to banks in other states.[] these
taxes, [pg ]however, were deemed to have been laid, not on the property, but
upon an event, the transfer in one instance, and execution, in the
latter, which took place in the taxing state.
taxes on intangibles invalidated.—the following personal
property taxes on intangibles have not been upheld:
() debts evidenced by notes in safekeeping within the taxing state, but
made and payable and secured by property in a second state and owned by
a resident of a third state.[]
() a property tax sought to be collected from a life beneficiary on the
corpus of a trust composed of property located in another state and as
to which said beneficiary had neither control nor possession, apart from
the receipt of income therefrom.[] however, a personal property tax
may be collected on one-half of the value of the corpus of a trust from
a resident who is one of the two trustees thereof, notwithstanding that
the trust was created by the will of a resident of another state in
respect of intangible property located in the latter state, at least
where it does not appear that the trustee is exposed to the danger of
other ad valorem taxes in another state.[] the first case, brooke
v. norfolk,[] is distinguishable by virtue of the fact that the
property tax therein voided was levied upon a resident beneficiary
rather than upon a resident trustee in control of nonresident
intangibles. different too is safe deposit and trust co. v.
virginia,[] where a property tax was unsuccessfully demanded of a
nonresident trustee with respect to nonresident intangibles under its
control.
() a tax, measured by income, levied on trust certificates held by a
resident, representing interests in various parcels of land (some inside
the state and some outside), the holder of the certificates, though
without a voice in the management of the property, being entitled to a
share in the net income and, upon sale of the property, to the proceeds
of the sale.[]
[pg ]transfer taxes (inheritance, estate, gift taxes).—being
competent to regulate exercise of the power of testamentary disposition
and the privilege of inheritance, a state may base its succession taxes
upon either the transmission, or an exercise of the legal power of
transmission, of property by will or by descent, or the enjoyment of the
legal privilege of taking property by devise or descent.[] but
whatever may be the justification of their power to levy such taxes,
states have consistently found themselves restricted by the rule,
established as to property taxes in  in union refrigerator transit
co. v. kentucky,[] and subsequently reiterated in frick v.
pennsylvania[] in , which precludes imposition of transfer taxes
upon tangible personal property by any state other than the one in which
such tangibles are permanently located or have an actual situs. in the
case of intangibles, however, the states have been harassed by the
indecision of the supreme court; for to an even greater extent than is
discernible in its treatment of property taxes on intangibles, it has
oscillated in upholding, then rejecting, and again currently sustaining
the levy by more than one state of death taxes upon intangibles
comprising the estate of a decedent.
until , transfer taxes upon intangibles levied by both the
domiciliary as well as nondomiciliary, or situs state, were with rare
exceptions approved. thus, in bullen v. wisconsin,[] the
domiciliary state of the creator of a trust was held competent to levy
an inheritance tax, upon the death of the settlor, on his trust fund
consisting of stocks, bonds, and notes kept and administered in another
state and as to which the settlor reserved the right to control
disposition and to direct payment of income for life, such reserved
powers being equivalent to a fee. cognizance was taken of the fact that
the state in which these intangibles had their situs had also taxed the
trust. levy of an inheritance tax by a nondomiciliary state was
sustained on similar grounds in wheeler v. sohmer, wherein it was held
that the presence of a negotiable instrument was sufficient to confer
jurisdiction upon the state seeking to tax its transfer.[] on the
other hand, the mere ownership by a foreign corporation of property in a
nondomiciliary state was held insufficient to support a tax by that
state on the succession to shares of stock in that corporation owned by
a nonresident decedent.[] also against the trend was blodgett v.
silberman[] wherein the court defeated collection of a transfer tax
by the domiciliary state by treating coins and bank notes deposited by a
decedent in a safe deposit box in another state as tangible property,
albeit it conceded [pg ]that the domiciliary state could tax the transfer of
books and certificates of indebtedness found in that safe deposit box as
well as the decedent's interest in a foreign partnership.
in the course of about two years following the recent depression, the
court handed down a group of four decisions which, for the time being at
any rate, placed the stamp of disapproval upon multiple transfer and—by
inference—other multiple taxation of intangibles. asserting, as it did
in one of these cases, that "practical considerations of wisdom,
convenience and justice alike dictate the desirability of a uniform
general rule confining the jurisdiction to impose death transfer taxes
as to intangibles to the state of the [owner's] domicile; ***"[]
the court, through consistent application of the maxim, mobilia
sequuntur personam, proceeded to deny the right of nondomiciliary
states to tax and to reject as inadequate jurisdictional claims of the
latter founded upon such bases as control, benefit, and protection or
situs. during this interval, -, multiple transfer taxation of
intangibles came to be viewed, not merely as undesirable, but as so
arbitrary and unreasonable as to be prohibited by the due process
clause.
beginning, in , with farmers' loan and trust co. v.
minnesota,[] the court reversed its former ruling in blackstone v.
miller,[] in which it had held that the state in which a debtor was
domiciled or a bank located could levy an inheritance tax on the
transfer of the debt or the deposit, notwithstanding that the creditor
had his domicile in a different state. farmers' loan and trust co. v.
minnesota, strictly appraised, was authority simply for the proposition
that jurisdiction over a debtor, in this instance a state which had
issued bonds held by a nonresident creditor, was inadequate to sustain a
tax by that debtor state on the transfer of such securities. the
securities in question, which had never been used by the creditor in any
business in the issuing state, were located in the state in which the
creditor had his domicile, and were deemed to be taxable only in the
latter. in baldwin v. missouri,[] a nondomiciliary state was
prevented from applying its inheritance tax to bonds, bank deposits, and
[pg ]promissory notes, all physically present within its limits and some of
them secured by lands therein, when the owner thereof was domiciled in
another state. a like result, although on this occasion on grounds of
lack of evidence of any "business situs," was reached in beidler v.
south carolina tax commission,[] in which the court ruled that a
state, upon the death of a nonresident creditor, may not apply its
inheritance tax to a debt [open account] owned by one of its domestic
corporations. finally, in first national bank v. maine,[] which has
since been overruled in state tax commission v. aldrich,[] the
court declared that only the state in which the owner of corporate stock
died domiciled was empowered to tax the succession to the shares by will
or inheritance and that the state in which the issuing corporation was
domiciled could not do so.
without expressly overruling more than one of these four cases
condemning multiple succession taxation of intangibles, the court,
beginning with curry v. mccanless[] in , announced a departure
from the "doctrine, of recent origin, that the fourteenth amendment
precludes the taxation of any interest in the same intangible in more
than one state ***." taking cognizance of the fact that this doctrine
had never been extended to the field of income taxation or consistently
applied in the field of property taxation, where the concepts of
business situs as well as of domiciliary situs had been utilized to
sustain double taxation, especially in connection with shares of
corporate stock, the court declared that a correct interpretation of
constitutional requirements would dictate the following conclusions:
"from the beginning of our constitutional system control over the person
at the place of his domicile and his duty there, common to all citizens,
to contribute to the support of government have been deemed to afford an
adequate constitutional basis for imposing on him a tax on the use and
enjoyment of rights in intangibles measured by their value. *** but
when the taxpayer extends his activities with respect to his
intangibles, so as to avail himself of the protection and benefit of the
laws of another state, in such a way as to bring his person or ***
[his intangibles] within the reach of the tax gatherer there, the reason
for a single place of taxation no longer obtains, *** [however], the
state of domicile is not deprived, by the taxpayer's activities
elsewhere, of its constitutional jurisdiction to tax." in accordance
with this line of reasoning, tennessee, where a decedent died domiciled,
[pg ]and alabama, where a trustee, by conveyance from said decedent, held
securities on specific trusts, were both deemed competent to impose a
tax on the transfer of these securities passing under the will of the
decedent. "in effecting her purposes," the testatrix was viewed as
having "brought some of the legal interests which she created within the
control of one state by selecting a trustee there, and others within the
control of the other state, by making her domicile there." she had found
it necessary to invoke "the aid of the law of both states, and her
legatees" were subject to the same necessity.
these statements represented a belated adoption of the views advanced by
chief justice stone in dissenting or concurring opinions which he filed
in three of the four decisions rendered during -. by the line of
reasoning taken in these opinions, if protection or control was extended
to, or exercised over, intangibles or the person of their owner, then as
many states as afforded such protection or were capable of exerting such
dominion should be privileged to tax the transfer of such property. on
this basis, the domiciliary state would invariably qualify as a state
competent to tax and a nondomiciliary state, so far as it could
legitimately exercise control or could be shown to have afforded a
measure of protection that was not trivial or insubstantial.
on the authority of curry v. mccanless, the court, in pearson v.
mcgraw,[] also sustained the application of an oregon transfer tax to
intangibles handled by an illinois trust company and never physically
present in oregon, jurisdiction to tax being viewed as dependent, not on
the location of the property in the state, but on control over the owner
who was a resident of oregon. in graves v. elliott,[] decided in
the same year, the court upheld the power of new york, in computing its
estate tax, to include in the gross estate of a domiciled decedent the
value of a trust of bonds managed in colorado by a colorado trust
company and already taxed on its transfer by colorado, which trust the
decedent had established while in colorado and concerning which he had
never exercised any of his reserved powers of revocation or change of
beneficiaries. it was observed that "the power of disposition of
property is the equivalent of ownership, *** and its exercise in the
case of intangibles is *** [an] appropriate subject of taxation at the
place of the domicile of the owner of the power. relinquishment at
death, in consequence of the non-exercise in life, of a power to revoke
a trust created by a decedent is likewise an appropriate subject of
taxation."[] consistent application of the principle enunciated in
curry v. mccanless is also discernible in two later cases in which the
court sustained the right of a domiciliary state to tax the transfer of
intangibles kept outside its boundaries, notwithstanding that "in some
instances they may be [pg ]subject to taxation in other jurisdictions, to
whose control they are subject and whose legal protection they enjoyed."
in graves v. schmidlapp[] an estate tax was levied upon the value
of the subject of a general testamentary power of appointment
effectively exercised by a resident donee over intangibles held by
trustees under the will of a nonresident donor of the power. viewing the
transfer of interest in said intangibles by exercise of the power of
appointment as the equivalent of ownership, the court quoted from
mcculloch v. maryland[] to the effect that the power to tax "'is an
incident of sovereignty, and is coextensive with that to which it is an
incident.'" again, in central hanover bank & t. co. v. kelly,[] the
court approved a new jersey transfer tax imposed on the occasion of the
death of a new jersey grantor of an irrevocable trust executed, and
consisting of securities located, in new york, and providing for the
disposition of the corpus to two nonresident sons.
the costliness of multiple taxation of estates comprising intangibles is
appreciably aggravated when each of several states founds its tax not
upon different events or property rights but upon an identical basis;
namely that, the decedent died domiciled within its borders. not only is
an estate then threatened with excessive contraction but the contesting
states may discover that the assets of the estate are insufficient to
satisfy their claims. thus, in texas v. florida,[] the state of
texas filed an original petition in the supreme court, in which it
asserted that its claim, together with those of three other states,
exceeded the value of the estate, that the portion of the estate within
texas alone would not suffice to discharge its own tax, and that its
efforts to collect its tax might be defeated by adjudications of
domicile by the other states. the supreme court disposed of this
controversy by sustaining a finding that the decedent had been domiciled
in massachusetts, but intimated that thereafter it would take
jurisdiction in like situations only in the event that an estate did not
exceed in value the total of the conflicting demands of several states
and that the latter were confronted with a prospective inability to
collect.
corporation taxes
() intangible personal property.—a state in which a foreign
corporation has acquired a commercial domicile and in which it maintains
its general business offices may tax the latter's bank deposits [pg ]and
accounts receivable even though the deposits are outside the state and
the accounts receivable arise from manufacturing activities in another
state.[] similarly, a nondomiciliary state in which a foreign
corporation did business can tax the "corporate excess" arising from
property employed and business done in the taxing state.[] on the
other hand, when the foreign corporation transacts only interstate
commerce within a state, any excise tax on such excess is void,
irrespective of the amount of the tax.[] a domiciliary state,
however, may tax the excess of market value of outstanding capital stock
over the value of real and personal property and certain indebtedness of
a domestic corporation even though this "corporate excess" arose from
property located and business done in another state and was there
taxable. moreover, this result follows whether the tax is considered as
one on property or on the franchise.[] also a domiciliary state,
which imposes no franchise tax on a stock fire insurance corporation,
validly may assess a tax on the full amount of its paid-in capital stock
and surplus, less deductions for liabilities, notwithstanding that such
domestic corporation concentrates its executive, accounting, and other
business offices in new york, and maintains in the domiciliary state
only a required registered office at which local claims are handled.
despite "the vicissitudes which the so-called 'jurisdiction-to-tax'
doctrine has encountered ***," the presumption persists that
intangible property is taxable by the state of origin.[] but a
property tax on the capital stock of a domestic company which includes
in the appraisement thereof the value of coal mined in the taxing state
but located in another state awaiting sale deprives the corporation of
its property without due process of law.[] also void for the same
reason is a state tax on the franchise of a domestic ferry company which
includes in the valuation thereof the worth of a franchise granted to
the said company by another state.[]
() privilege taxes measured by corporate stock.—since the tax
is levied not on property but on the privilege of doing business in
corporate form, a domestic corporation may be subjected to a privilege
tax graduated according to paid up capital stock, even though the
[pg ]latter represents capital not subject to the taxing power of the
state.[] by the same token, the validity of a franchise tax, imposed
on a domestic corporation engaged in foreign maritime commerce and
assessed upon a proportion of the total franchise value equal to the
ratio of local business done to total business, is not impaired by the
fact that the total value of the franchise was enhanced by property and
operations carried on beyond the limits of the state.[] however, a
state, under the guise of taxing the privilege of doing an intrastate
business, cannot levy on property beyond its borders; and, therefore, as
applied to foreign corporations, a license tax based on authorized
capital stock is void,[] even though there be a maximum to the
fee,[] unless apportioned according to some method, as, for example,
a franchise tax based on such proportion of outstanding capital stock as
is represented by property owned and used in business transacted in the
taxing state.[] an entrance fee, on the other hand, collected only
once as the price of admission to do an intrastate business, is
distinguishable from a tax and accordingly may be levied on a foreign
corporation on the basis of a sum fixed in relation to the amount of
authorized capital stock (in this instance, a $, fee on an
authorized capital of $,,).[]
() privilege taxes measured by gross receipts.—a municipal
license tax imposed as a percentage of the receipts of a foreign
corporation derived from the sales within and without the state of goods
manufactured in the city is not a tax on business transactions or
property outside the city and therefore does not violate the due process
clause.[] but a state is wanting in jurisdiction to extend its
privilege tax to the gross receipts of a foreign contracting corporation
for work done outside the taxing state in fabricating equipment later
installed in the taxing state. unless the activities which are the
subject of the tax are carried on within its territorial limits, a state
is not competent to impose such a privilege tax.[]
[pg ]() taxes on tangible personal property.—when rolling stock
is permanently located and employed in the prosecution of a business
outside the boundaries of a domiciliary state, the latter has no
jurisdiction to tax the same.[] vessels, however, inasmuch as they
merely touch briefly at numerous ports, never acquire a taxable situs at
any one of them, and are taxable by the domicile of their owners or not
at all;[] unless, of course, the ships operate wholly on the waters
within one state, in which event they are taxable there and not at the
domicile of the owners.[] only recently airplanes have been treated
in a similar manner for tax purposes. noting that the entire fleet of
airplanes of an interstate carrier were "never continuously without the
[domiciliary] state during the whole tax year," that such airplanes also
had their "home port" in the domiciliary state, and that the company
maintained its principal office therein, the court sustained a personal
property tax applied by the domiciliary state to all the airplanes owned
by the taxpayer. no other state was deemed able to accord the same
protection and benefits as the taxing state in which the taxpayer had
both its domicile and its business situs; and the doctrines of union
refrigerator transit co. v. kentucky,[] as to the taxability of
permanently located tangibles, and that of apportionment, for
instrumentalities engaged in interstate commerce[] were held to be
inapplicable.[]
conversely, a nondomiciliary state, although it may not tax property
belonging to a foreign corporation which has never come within its
borders, may levy on movables which are regularly and habitually used
and employed therein. thus, while the fact that cars are loaded and
reloaded at a refinery in a state outside the owner's domicile does not
fix the situs of the entire fleet in such state, the latter may
nevertheless tax the number of cars which on the average are found to be
present within its borders.[] moreover, in assessing that part of a
railroad within its limits, a state need not treat it as an independent
line, disconnected from the part without, and place upon the property
within the state only a value which could be given to it if operated
separately from the balance of the road. the state may ascertain [pg ]the
value of the whole line as a single property and then determine the
value of the part within on a mileage basis, unless there be special
circumstances which distinguish between conditions in the several
states.[] but no property of an interstate carrier can be taken into
account unless it can be seen in some plain and fairly intelligible way
that it adds to the value of the road and the rights exercised in the
state.[] also, a state property tax on railroads, which is measured
by gross earnings apportioned to mileage, is not unconstitutional in the
absence of proof that it exceeds what would be legitimate as an ordinary
tax on the property valued as part of a going concern or that it is
relatively higher than taxes on other kinds of property.[] the tax
reaches only revenues derived from local operations, and the fact that
the apportionment formula does not result in mathematical exactitude is
not a constitutional defect.[]
income and other taxes
individual incomes.—consistently with due process of law, a
state annually may tax the entire net income of resident individuals
from whatever source received,[] and that portion of a nonresident's
net income derived from property owned, and from any business, trade, or
profession carried on, by him within its borders.[] jurisdiction, in
the case of residents, is founded upon the rights and privileges
incident to domicile; that is, the protection afforded the recipient of
income in his person, in his right to receive the income, and in his
enjoyment of it when received, and, in the case of nonresidents, upon
dominion over either the receiver of the income or the property or
activity from which it is derived, and upon the obligation to contribute
to the support of a government which renders secure the collection of
such income. accordingly, a state may tax residents on income from rents
of land located outside the state and from interest on bonds physically
without the state and secured by mortgage upon lands similarly
situated;[] and the income received by a resident beneficiary from
securities held by a trustee in a trust created and administered in
another state, and not directly taxable to the trustee.[] nor does
the fact that another state has lawfully taxed identical income in the
hands of trustees operating therein necessarily destroy a domiciliary
[pg ]state's right to tax the receipt of said income by a resident
beneficiary. "the taxing power of a state is restricted to her confines
and may not be exercised in respect of subjects beyond them."[]
likewise, even though a nonresident does no business within a state, the
latter may tax the profits realized by the nonresident upon his sale of
a right appurtenant to membership in a stock exchange within its
borders.[]
incomes of foreign corporations.—a tax based on the income of
a foreign corporation may be determined by allocating to the state a
proportion of the total income which the tangible property in the state
bears to the total.[] however, such a basis may work an
unconstitutional result if the income thus attributed to the state is
out of all appropriate proportion to the business there transacted by
the corporation. evidence may always be submitted which tends to show
that a state has applied a method which, albeit fair on its face,
operates so as to reach profits which are in no sense attributable to
transactions within its jurisdiction.[] nevertheless, a foreign
corporation is in error when it contends that due process is denied by a
franchise tax measured by income, which is levied, not upon net income
from intrastate business alone, but on net income justly attributable to
all classes of business done within the state, interstate and foreign,
as well as intrastate business.[] inasmuch as the privilege granted
by a state to a foreign corporation of carrying on local business
supports a tax by that state on the income derived from that business,
it follows that the wisconsin privilege dividend tax, consistently with
the due process clause, may be applied to a delaware corporation, having
its principal offices in new york, holding its meetings and voting its
dividends in new york, and drawing its dividend checks on new york bank
accounts. the tax is imposed on the "privilege of declaring and
receiving dividends" out of income derived from property located and
business transacted in the state, equal to a specified percentage of
such dividends, the corporation being required to deduct the tax from
dividends payable to resident and nonresident shareholders and pay it
over to the state.[]
[pg ]chain store taxes.—a tax on chain stores, at a rate per store
determined by the number of stores both within and without the state, is
not unconstitutional as a tax in part upon things beyond the
jurisdiction of the state.[]
insurance company taxes.—a privilege tax on the gross premiums
received by a foreign life insurance company at its home office for
business written in the state does not deprive the company of property
without due process;[] but a tax is bad when the company has
withdrawn all its agents from the state and has ceased to do business,
merely continuing to be bound to policyholders resident therein and
receiving at its home office the renewal premiums.[] distinguishable
therefrom is the following tax which was construed as having been
levied, not upon annual premiums nor upon the privilege merely of doing
business during the period that the company actually was within the
state, but upon the privilege of entering and engaging in business, the
percentage "on the annual premiums to be paid throughout the life of
the policies issued." by reason of this difference a state may continue
to collect such tax even after the company's withdrawal from the
state.[]
a state which taxes the insuring of property within its limits may
lawfully extend its tax to a foreign insurance company which contracts
with an automobile sales corporation in a third state to insure its
customers against loss of cars purchased through it, so far as the cars
go into possession of purchasers within the taxing state.[] on the
other hand, a foreign corporation admitted to do a local business, which
insures its property with insurers in other states who are not
authorized to do business in the taxing state, cannot constitutionally
be subjected to a % tax on the amount of premiums paid for such
coverage.[] likewise a connecticut life insurance corporation,
licensed to do business in california, which negotiated reinsurance
contracts in connecticut, received payment of premiums thereon in
connecticut, [pg ]and was there liable for payment of losses claimed
thereunder, cannot be subjected by california to a privilege tax
measured by gross premiums derived from such contracts, notwithstanding
that the contracts reinsured other insurers authorized to do business in
california and protected policies effected in california on the lives of
residents therein. the tax cannot be sustained whether as laid on
property, business done, or transactions carried on, within california,
or as a tax on a privilege granted by that state.[]
when policy loans to residents are made by a local agent of a foreign
insurance company, in the servicing of which notes are signed, security
taken, interest collected, and debts are paid within the state, such
credits are taxable to the company, notwithstanding that the promissory
notes evidencing such credits are kept at the home office of the
insurer.[] but when a resident policyholder's loan is merely charged
against the reserve value of his policy, under an arrangement for
extinguishing the debt and interest thereon by deduction from any claim
under the policy, such credit is not taxable to the foreign insurance
company.[] premiums due from residents on which an extension has been
granted by foreign companies also are credits on which the latter may be
taxed by the state of the debtor's domicile;[] and the mere fact that
the insurers charge these premiums to local agents and give no credit
directly to policyholders does not enable them to escape this tax.[]
in general
exactly what due process requires in the assessment and collection of
general taxes has never been decided by the supreme court. while it was
held that "notice to the owner at some stage of the proceedings, as well
as an opportunity to defend, is essential" for imposition of special
taxes, it has also ruled that laws for assessment and collection of
general taxes stand upon a different footing and are to be construed
with the utmost liberality, even to the extent of acknowledging that no
notice whatever is necessary.[] due process of law as applied to
taxation does not mean judicial process;[] neither does it require
the same kind of notice as is required in a suit at law, or even in
proceedings for taking private property under the power of eminent
domain.[] if a taxpayer is given an opportunity to test the validity
of a tax at any time before it is final, whether the [pg ]proceedings for
review take place before a board having a quasi-judicial character, or
before a tribunal provided by the state for the purpose of determining
such questions, due process of law is not denied.[]
notice and hearing in relation to general taxes
"of the different kinds of taxes which the state may impose, there is a
vast number of which, from their nature, no notice can be given to the
taxpayer, nor would notice be of any possible advantage to him, such as
poll taxes, license taxes (not dependent upon the extent of his
business), and generally, specific taxes on things, or persons, or
occupations. in such cases the legislature, in authorizing the tax,
fixes its amount, and that is the end of the matter. if the tax be not
paid, the property of the delinquent may be sold, and he be thus
deprived of his property. yet there can be no question, that the
proceeding is due process of law, as there is no inquiry into the weight
of evidence, or other element of a judicial nature, and nothing could be
changed by hearing the taxpayer. no right of his is, therefore, invaded.
thus, if the tax on animals be a fixed sum per head, or on articles a
fixed sum per yard, or bushel, or gallon, there is nothing the owner can
do which can affect the amount to be collected from him. so, if a person
wishes a license to do business of a particular kind, or at a particular
place, such as keeping a hotel or a restaurant, or selling liquors, or
cigars, or clothes, he has only to pay the amount required by law and go
into the business. there is no need in such cases for notice or hearing.
so, also, if taxes are imposed in the shape of licenses for privileges,
such as those on foreign corporations for doing business in the state,
or on domestic corporations for franchises, if the parties desire the
privilege, they have only to pay the amount required. in such cases
there is no necessity for notice or hearing. the amount of the tax would
not be changed by it."[]
notice and hearing in relation to assessments
"but where a tax is levied on property not specifically, but according
to its value, to be ascertained by assessors appointed for that purpose
upon such evidence as they may obtain, a different principle comes in.
the officers in estimating the value act judicially; and in most of the
states provision is made for the correction of errors committed by them,
through boards of revision or equalization, sitting at designated
periods provided by law to hear complaints respecting the justice of the
assessments. the law in prescribing the time when [pg ]such complaints will
be heard, gives all the notice required, and the proceeding by which the
valuation is determined, though it may be followed, if the tax be not
paid, by a sale of the delinquent's property, is due process of
law."[]
nevertheless, it has never been considered necessary to the validity of
a tax that the party charged shall have been present, or had an
opportunity to be present, in some tribunal when he was assessed.[]
where a tax board has its time of sitting fixed by law and where its
sessions are not secret, no obstacle prevents the appearance of any one
before it to assert a right or redress a wrong; and in the business of
assessing taxes, this is all that can be reasonably asked.[] nor is
there any constitutional command that notice of an assessment as well as
an opportunity to contest it be given in advance of the assessment. it
is enough that all available defenses may be presented to a competent
tribunal during a suit to collect the tax and before the demand of the
state for remittance becomes final.[] a hearing before judgment, with
full opportunity to submit evidence and arguments being all that can be
adjudged vital, it follows that rehearings and new trials are not
essential to due process of law.[] one hearing is sufficient to
constitute due process;[] and the requirements of due process are
also met if a taxpayer, who had no notice of a hearing, does receive
notice of the decision reached thereat, and is privileged to appeal the
same and, on appeal, to present evidence and be heard on the valuation
of his property.[]
notice and hearing in relation to special assessments
however, when assessments are made by a political subdivision, a taxing
board or court, according to special benefits, the property owner is
entitled to be heard as to the amount of his assessments and upon all
questions properly entering into that determination.[] the hearing
need not amount to a judicial inquiry,[] but a mere opportunity to
submit objections in writing, without the right of personal appearance,
is not sufficient.[] if an assessment for a local improvement is made
in accordance with a fixed rule prescribed by legislative act, the
property owner is not entitled to be heard in advance on the question of
benefits.[] on the other hand, if the area of the assessment district
was not determined by the legislature, a landowner does have the right
to be heard respecting benefits to his property [pg ]before it can be
included in the improvement district and assessed; but due process is
not denied if, in the absence of actual fraud or bad faith, the decision
of the agency vested with the initial determination of benefits is made
final.[] the owner has no constitutional right to be heard in
opposition to the launching of a project which may end in assessment;
and once his land has been duly included within a benefit district, the
only privilege which he thereafter enjoys is to a hearing upon the
apportionment; that is, the amount of the tax which he has to pay.[]
nor can he rightfully complain because the statute renders conclusive,
after said hearing, the determination as to apportionment by the same
body which levied the assessment.[]
more specifically, where the mode of assessment resolves itself into a
mere mathematical calculation, there is no necessity for a hearing.[]
statutes and ordinances providing for the paving and grading of streets,
the cost thereof to be assessed on the front foot rule, do not, by their
failure to provide for a hearing or review of assessments, generally
deprive a complaining owner of property without due process of law.[]
in contrast, when an attempt is made to cast upon particular property a
certain proportion of the construction cost of a sewer not calculated by
any mathematical formula, the taxpayer has a right to be heard.[]
[pg ]
sufficiency and manner of giving notice
notice, insofar as it is required, may be either personal, or by
publication, or by statute fixing the time and place of hearing.[] a
state statute, consistently with due process, may designate a
corporation as the agent of a nonresident stockholder to receive notice
and to represent him in proceedings for correcting assessments.[]
also "where the state *** [desires] to sell land for taxes upon
proceedings to enforce a lien for the payment thereof, it may proceed
directly against the land within the jurisdiction of the court, and a
notice which permits all interested, who are 'so minded,' to ascertain
that it is to be subjected to sale to answer for taxes, and to appear
and be heard, whether to be found within the jurisdiction or not, is due
process of law within the fourteenth amendment ***."[] a
description, even though it not be technically correct, which identifies
the land will sustain an assessment for taxes and a notice of sale
therefor when delinquent. if the owner knows that the property so
described is his, he is not, by reason of the insufficient description,
deprived of his property without due process. where tax proceedings are
in rem, owners are bound to take notice thereof, and to pay taxes on
their property, even if assessed to unknown or other persons; and if an
owner stands by and sees his property sold for delinquent taxes, he is
not thereby wrongfully deprived of his property.[]
sufficiency of remedy
when no other remedy is available, due process is denied by a judgment
of a state court withholding a decree in equity to enjoin collection of
a discriminatory tax.[] requirements of due process are similarly
violated by a statute which limits a taxpayer's right to challenge an
assessment to cases of fraud or corruption,[] and by a state tribunal
which prevents a recovery of taxes imposed in violation of the
constitution and laws of the united states by invoking a state law
limiting suits to recover taxes alleged to have been assessed illegally
to taxes paid at the time and in the manner provided by said law.[]
[pg ]
laches
persons failing to avail themselves of an opportunity to object and be
heard, cannot thereafter complain of assessments as arbitrary and
unconstitutional.[] likewise a car company, which failed to report
its gross receipts as required by statute, has no further right to
contest the state comptroller's estimate of those receipts and his
adding thereto the % penalty permitted by law.[]
collection of taxes
to reach property which has escaped taxation, a state may tax the
estates of decedents for a period anterior to death and grant
proportionate deductions for all prior taxes which the personal
representative can prove to have been paid.[] collection of an
inheritance tax also may be expedited by a statute requiring the sealing
of safe deposit boxes for at least ten days after the death of the
renter and obliging the lessor to retain assets found therein sufficient
to pay the tax that may be due the state.[] moreover, with a view to
achieving a like result in the case of gasoline taxes, a state may
compel retailers to collect such taxes from consumers and, under penalty
of a fine for delinquency, to remit monthly the amounts thus
collected.[] likewise, a tax on the tangible personal property of a
nonresident owner may be collected from the custodian or possessor of
such property, and the latter, as an assurance of reimbursement, may be
granted a lien on such property.[] in collecting personal income
taxes, however, most states require employers to deduct and withhold the
tax from the wages of only nonresident employees; but the duty thereby
imposed on the employer has never been viewed as depriving him of
property without due process of law, nor has the adjustment of his
system of accounting and paying salaries which withholding entails been
viewed as an unreasonable regulation of the conduct of his
business.[]
as a state may provide in advance that taxes shall bear interest from
the time they become due, it may with equal validity stipulate that
taxes which have become delinquent shall bear interest from the time the
delinquency commenced. likewise, a state may adopt new remedies for the
collection of taxes and apply these remedies to taxes already
delinquent.[] after liability of a taxpayer has been fixed by
appropriate procedure, collection of a tax by distress and seizure of
his person does not deprive him of liberty without due process of
law.[] [pg ]nor is a foreign insurance company denied due process of law
when its personal property is distrained to satisfy unpaid taxes.[]
the requirements of due process are fulfilled by a statute which, in
conjunction with affording an opportunity to be heard, provides for the
forfeiture of titles to land for failure to list and pay taxes thereon
for certain specified years.[] no less constitutional, as a means of
facilitating collection, is an in rem proceeding, to which the land
alone is made a party, whereby tax liens on land are foreclosed and all
pre-existing rights or liens are eliminated by a sale under a decree in
said proceeding.[] on the other hand, while the conversion of an
unpaid special assessment into both a personal judgment therefor against
the owner as well as a charge on the land is consistent with the
fourteenth amendment,[] a judgment imposing personal liability
against a nonresident taxpayer over whom the state court acquired no
jurisdiction is void.[] apart from such restraints, however, a state
is free to adopt new remedies for the collection of taxes and even to
apply new remedies to taxes already delinquent.[]
historical development
"prior to the adoption of the fourteenth amendment," the power of
eminent domain, which is deemed to inhere in every state and to be
essential to the performance of its functions,[] "was unrestrained by
any federal authority."[] an express prohibition against the taking
of private property for public use without just compensation was
contained in the fifth amendment; but an effort to extend the
application thereof to the states had been defeated by the decision, in
, in barron v. baltimore.[] the most nearly comparable
provision included in the fourteenth amendment, was the prohibition
against a state depriving a person of property without due process of
law. the court was accordingly confronted with the task of determining
whether this restraint on state action, minus the explicit provision for
just compensation found in the fifth amendment, afforded property owners
the same measure of protection as did the latter in its operation as a
limitation on the federal government. the court's initial answer to this
question, as set forth in davidson v. new orleans,[] decided in
, was in the negative; and on the ground of the omission [pg ]of the
clause found in the fifth amendment from the terms of the fourteenth, it
refused to equate the just compensation with due process. within less
than a decade thereafter, however, the court modified its position, and
in chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago,[] seven justices
unequivocally rejected the contention, obviously based on the davidson
case that "the question as to the amount of compensation to be awarded
to the railroad company was one of local law merely, and [insofar as]
that question was determined in the mode prescribed by the constitution
and [state] law, the [property owner] appearing and having full
opportunity to be heard, the requirement of due process of law was
observed." on the contrary, the seven justices maintained that although
a state "legislature may prescribe a form of procedure to be observed in
the taking of private property for public use, *** it is not due
process of law if provision be not made for compensation *** the mere
form of the proceeding instituted against the owner, ***, cannot
convert the process used into due process of law, if the necessary
result be to deprive him of his property without compensation."
public use
while acknowledging that agreement was virtually nonexistent as to "what
are public uses for which the right of compulsory taking may be
employed," the court, until , continued to reiterate "the nature of
the uses, whether public or private, is ultimately a judicial
question."[] but because of proclaimed willingness to defer to local
authorities, especially "the highest court of the state" in resolving
such an issue,[] the court, as early as , was obliged to admit
that, notwithstanding its retention of the power of judicial review, "no
case is recalled where this court has condemned as a violation of the
fourteenth amendment a taking upheld by the state court as a taking for
public uses ***"[] in , however, without endeavoring to
ascertain whether "the scope of the judicial power to determine what is
a 'public use' in fourteenth amendment controversies, [pg ]***" is the
same as under the fifth amendment, a majority of the justices, in a
decision involving the federal government, declared that "it is the
function of *** [the legislative branch] to decide what type of taking
is for a public use ***"[]
necessity for a taking
"once it is admitted or judicially determined that a proposed
condemnation is for a public purpose and within the statutory authority,
a political or judicially nonreviewable question may emerge, to wit, the
necessity or expediency of the condemnation of the particular
property."[] the necessity and expediency of the taking are
legislative questions to be determined by such agency and in such mode
as the state may designate.[]
what constitutes a taking for a public use
to constitute a public use within the law of eminent domain, it is not
essential that an entire community should directly participate in or
enjoy an improvement, and, in ascertaining whether a use is public, not
only present demands of the public but those which may be fairly
anticipated in the future may be considered.[] moreover, it is also
not necessary that property should be absolutely taken, in the narrowest
sense of the word, to bring the case within the protection of this
constitutional provision, but there may be such serious interruption to
the common and necessary use of property as will be equivalent to a
taking. "it would be *** [an] unsatisfactory result, if ***, it
shall be held that if the government refrains from the absolute
conversion of real property to the uses of the public, it can destroy
its value entirely, can inflict irreparable and permanent injury to any
extent, can in effect, subject it to total destruction without [pg ]making
any compensation, because, in the narrowest sense of that word, it [has]
not [been] taken for the public use."[]
takings for a purpose that is public hitherto have been held to comprise
the following: a privately owned water supply system formerly operated
under contract with the municipality effecting the taking;[] a right
of way across a neighbor's land for the enlargement of an irrigation
ditch therein to enable the taker to obtain water for irrigating land
that would otherwise remain valueless;[] a right of way across a
placer mining claim for the aerial bucket line of a mining
corporation;[] land, water, and water rights for the production of
electric power by a public utility;[] water rights by an interurban
railway company for the production of power in excess of current
needs;[] places of historical interest;[] land taken for the
purpose of exchange with a railroad company for a portion of its right
of way, required for widening a highway;[] land by a railway for a
spur track;[] establishment by a municipality of a public hack stand
upon the driveway maintained by a railroad upon its own terminal grounds
to afford ingress and egress to its patrons.[] likewise, damages for
which compensation must be paid are sustained by an upper riparian
proprietor by reason of the erection of a dam by a lower mill owner
under authority of a "mill act."[] on the other hand, even when
compensation is tendered, an owner of property cannot be compelled to
assent to its taking by the state for the private use of another. such a
taking is prohibited, by the due process clause. thus, a state, by law,
could not require a railroad corporation, which had permitted the
erection of two grain elevators by private citizens on its right of way,
to grant upon like terms, a location to another group of farmers
desirous of erecting a third grain elevator for their own benefit.[]
[pg ]
just compensation
"when *** [the] power [of eminent domain] is exercised it can only be
done by giving the party whose property is taken or whose use and
enjoyment of such property is interfered with, full and adequate
compensation, not excessive or exorbitant, but just compensation."[]
however, "there must be something more than an ordinary honest mistake
of law in the proceedings for compensation before a party can make out
that the state has deprived him of his property
unconstitutionally."[] unless, by its rulings of law, the state court
prevented a complainant from obtaining substantially any compensation,
its findings as to the amount of damages will not be overturned on
appeal, even though as a consequence of error therein the property owner
received less than he ought.[] accordingly, when a state court,
expressly recognizing a right of recovery for any substantial damage,
found that none had been shown by the proof, its award of only $ as
nominal damages was held to present no question for review.[] "all
that is essential is that in some appropriate way, before some properly
constituted tribunal, inquiry shall be made as to the amount of
compensation, and when this has been provided there is that due process
of law which is required by the federal constitution."[]
"the general rule is that compensation 'is to be estimated by reference
to the uses for which the property is suitable, having regard to the
existing business and wants of the community, or such as may be
reasonably expected in the immediate future,' *** [but] 'mere possible
or imaginary uses, or the speculative schemes of its proprietor, are to
be excluded.'"[] damages are measured by the loss to the owner, not
by the gain to the taker;[] and attorneys' fees and expenses are not
embraced therein.[] "when the public faith and credit are pledged to
a reasonably prompt ascertainment and payment, [pg ]and there is adequate
provision for enforcing the pledge, *** the requirement of just
compensation is satisfied."[]
uncompensated takings
"it is well settled that 'neither a natural person nor a corporation can
claim damages on account of being compelled to render obedience to a
police regulation designed to secure the common welfare.' ***
uncompensated obedience to a regulation enacted for the public safety
under the police power of the state is not a taking or damaging without
just compensation of private property, ***"[] thus, the flooding
of lands consequent upon private construction of a dam under authority
of legislation enacted to subserve the drainage of lowlands was not a
taking which required compensation to be made, especially since such
flooding could have been prevented by raising the height of dikes around
the lands. "the rule to be gathered from these cases is that where there
is a practical destruction, or material impairment of the value of
plaintiff's lands, there is a taking, which demands compensation, but
otherwise where, as in this case, plaintiff is merely put to some extra
expense in warding off the consequences of the overflow."[]
similarly, when a city, by condemnation proceedings, sought to open a
street across the tracks of a railroad, it was not obligated to pay the
expenses that the railroad would incur in planking the crossing,
constructing gates, and posting gatemen at the crossing. the railway was
presumed to have "laid its tracks subject to the condition necessarily
implied that their use could be so regulated by competent authority as
to insure the public safety."[] also, one who leased oyster beds in
hampton roads from virginia for $ per acre under guaranty of an
"absolute right" to use and occupy them was held to have acquired such
rights subject to the superior power of virginia to authorize newport
news to discharge its sewage into the sea; and, hence could not
successfully contend that the resulting pollution of his oysters
constituted an uncompensated taking without due process of law.[]
consequential damages
"acts done in the proper exercise of governmental powers, and not
directly encroaching upon private property, though their consequences
may impair its use, are universally held not to be a taking within the
meaning of the due process clause."[] accordingly, consequential
damages to abutting property caused by an obstruction in a [pg ]street
resulting from the authorization of a railroad to erect tracks, sheds,
and fences over a portion thereof have been held to effect no
unconstitutional deprivation of property.[] likewise, the erection
over a street of an elevated viaduct, intended for general public travel
and not devoted to the exclusive use of a private transportation
corporation, has been declared to be a legitimate street improvement
equivalent to a change in grade; and, as in the case of a change of
grade, the owner of land abutting on the street has been refused damages
for impairment of access to his land and the lessening of the
circulation of light and air over it.[]
limits to the above rule.—there are limits however, to the
amount of destruction or impairment of the enjoyment or value of private
property which public authorities or citizens acting in their behalf may
occasion without the necessity of paying compensation therefor. thus, in
upholding zoning regulations limiting the height of buildings which may
be constructed in a designated zone, the court has warned that similar
regulations, if unreasonable, arbitrary, and discriminatory, may be held
to deprive an owner of the profitable use of his property and hence to
amount to a taking sufficient to require compensation to be paid for
such invasion of property rights.[] similarly, in voiding a statute
forbidding mining of coal under private dwellings or streets or cities
in places where such right to mine has been reserved in a conveyance,
justice holmes, speaking for his associates, declared if a regulation
restricting the use of private property goes too far, it will be
recognized as a taking for which compensation must be made. "some values
are enjoyed under an implied limitation, and must yield to the police
power. but obviously the implied limitation must have its limits, ***
one fact for consideration in determining such limits is the extent of
the diminution. *** the damage [here] is not common or public. ***
the extent of the taking is great. it purports to abolish what is
recognized in pennsylvania as an estate in land."[]
[pg ]
due process in eminent domain
() notice.—if the owner of property sought to be condemned is
a nonresident, personal notice is not requisite and service may be
effected by publication.[] in fact, "it has been uniformly held that
statutes providing for *** condemnation of land may adopt a procedure
summary in character, and that notice of such proceedings may be
indirect, provided only that the period of notice of the initiation of
proceedings and the method of giving it are reasonably adapted to the
nature of the proceedings and their subject matter." insofar as
reasonable notice is deemed to be essential, that requirement was
declared to have been satisfied by a statute providing that notice of
initiation of proceedings for establishment of a county road be
published on three successive weeks in three successive issues of a
paper published in the county, and that all meetings of the county
condemning agency be public and published in a county newspaper.[]
() hearing.—the necessity and expediency of a taking being
legislative questions irrespective of who may be charged with their
decision, a hearing thereon need not be afforded;[] but the mode of
determining the compensation payable to an owner must be such as to
furnish him with an opportunity to be heard. among several admissible
modes is that of causing the amount to be assessed by viewers, or by a
jury, generally without a hearing, but subject to the right of the owner
to appeal for a judicial review thereof at which a trial on the evidence
may be had. through such an appeal the owner obtains the hearing to
which he is entitled;[] and the fact that after having been
adequately notified of the determination by the condemning authorities,
the former must exercise his right of appeal within a limited period
thereafter, such as  days, has been held not so arbitrary as to
deprive him of property without due process of law.[] nor is there
any "denial of due process in making the findings of fact by the triers
of fact, whether commissioners or a jury, final as to such facts [that
is, conclusive as to the mere value of the property], and leaving open
to the courts simply the inquiry as to whether there was any erroneous
basis adopted by the triers in their appraisal, ***"[]
[pg ]() occupation in advance of condemnation.—due process does
require that condemnation precede occupation by the condemning authority
so long as the opportunity for a hearing as to the value of the land is
guaranteed during the condemnation proceedings. where the statute
contains an adequate provision for assured payment of compensation
without unreasonable delay, the taking may precede compensation.[]
some general criteria
what is due process of law depends on the circumstances.[] it varies
with the subject matter and the necessities of the situation. by due
process of law is meant one which, following the forms of law, is
appropriate to the case, and just to the parties affected. it must be
pursued in the ordinary mode prescribed by law; it must be adapted to
the end to be attained; and whenever necessary to the protection of the
parties, it must give them an opportunity to be heard respecting the
justice of the judgment sought. any legal proceeding enforced by public
authority, whether sanctioned by age or custom or newly devised in the
discretion of the legislative power, which regards and preserves these
principles of liberty and justice, must be held to be due process of
law.[]
ancient usage and uniformity.—what is due process of law may
be ascertained in part by an examination of those settled usages and
modes of proceedings existing in the common and statute law of england
before the emigration of our ancestors, and shown not to have been
unsuited to their civil and political condition by having been acted on
by them after the settlement of this country. if it can show the
sanction of settled usage both in england and in this country, a process
of law which is not otherwise forbidden may be taken to be due process
of law. in other words, the antiquity of a procedure is a fact of weight
in its behalf. however, it does not follow that a procedure settled in
english law at the time of the emigration and brought to this country
and practiced by our ancestors is, or remains, an essential element of
due process of law. if that were so, the procedure of the first half of
the seventeenth century would be fastened upon american jurisprudence
like a strait jacket, only to be unloosed by constitutional amendment.
fortunately, the states are not tied down by any provision of the
constitution to the practice and [pg ]procedure which existed at the common
law, but may avail themselves of the wisdom gathered by the experience
of the country to make changes deemed to be necessary.[]
equality.—if due process is to be secured, the laws must
operate alike upon all, and not subject the individual to the arbitrary
exercise of governmental power unrestrained by established principles of
private rights and distributive justice. where a litigant has the
benefit of a full and fair trial in the state courts, and his rights are
measured, not by laws made to affect him individually, but by general
provisions of law applicable to all those in like condition, he is not
deprived of property without due process of law, even if he can be
regarded as deprived of his property by an adverse result.[]
due process and judicial process.—due process of law does not
always mean a proceeding in court.[] proceedings to raise revenue by
levying and collecting taxes are not necessarily judicial, neither are
administrative and executive proceedings, yet their validity is not
thereby impaired.[] moreover, the due process clause has been
interpreted as not requiring that the judgment of an expert commission
be supplanted by the independent view of judges based on the conflicting
testimony, prophecies, and impressions of expert witnesses when
judicially reviewing a formula of a state regulatory commission for
limiting daily production in an oil field and for proration among the
several well owners.[]
nor does the fourteenth amendment prohibit a state from conferring upon
nonjudicial bodies certain functions that may be called judicial, or
from delegating to a court powers that are legislative in nature. for
example, state statutes vesting in a parole board certain judicial
functions,[] or conferring discretionary power upon administrative
boards to grant or withhold permission to carry on a trade,[] or
vesting in a probate court authority to appoint park commissioners and
establish park districts[] are not in conflict with the due process
clause and present no federal question. whether legislative, executive,
and judicial powers of a state shall be kept altogether distinct and
separate, or whether they should in some particulars be merged is for
the determination of the state.[]
[pg ]
jurisdiction
in general.—jurisdiction may be defined as the power to create
legal interests; but if a state attempts to exercise such power with
respect to persons or things beyond its borders, its action is in
conflict with the fourteenth amendment and is void within as well as
without its territorial limits. the foundation of jurisdiction is
therefore physical power capable of being exerted over persons through
in personam actions and over things, generally through actions in
rem.[] in proceedings in personam to determine liability of a
defendant, no property having been subjected by such litigation to the
control of the court, jurisdiction over the defendant's person is a
condition prerequisite to the rendering of any effective decree.[]
that condition is fulfilled; that is, a state is deemed capable of
exerting jurisdiction over an individual if he is physically present
within the territory of the state, if he is domiciled in the state
although temporarily absent therefrom, or if he has consented to the
exercise of jurisdiction over him. in actions in rem, however, a state
validly may proceed to settle controversies with regard to rights or
claims against property within its borders, notwithstanding that control
of the defendant is never obtained. accordingly, by reason of its
inherent authority over titles to land within its territorial confines,
a state may proceed through its courts to judgment respecting the
ownership of such property, even though it lacks the constitutional
competence to reach claimants of title who reside beyond its
borders.[] by the same token, probate[] and garnishment or foreign
attachment[] proceedings, being in the nature of in rem actions for
the disposition of property, may be prosecuted to conclusion without
requirement of the presence of all parties in interest.[]
how perfected: by voluntary appearance or service of
process.—it is not enough, however, that a state be potentially
capable of exercising control over persons and property. before a state
legitimately can exercise such power to alter private interests, its
[pg ]jurisdiction must be perfected by the employment of an appropriate mode
of serving process deemed effective to acquaint all parties of the
institution of proceedings calculated to affect their rights; for the
interest of no one constitutionally may be impaired by a decree
resulting from litigation concerning which he was afforded neither
notice nor an opportunity to participate.[] voluntary appearance, on
the other hand, may enable a state not only to obtain jurisdiction over
a person who was otherwise beyond the reach of its process; but also, as
in the case of a person who was within the scope of its jurisdiction, to
dispense with the necessity of personal service. when a party
voluntarily appears in a cause and actively conducts his defense, he
cannot thereafter claim that he was denied due process merely because he
was not served with process when the original action was commenced.[]
service of process in actions in personam: individuals, resident and
nonresident.—the proposition being well established that no person
can be deprived of property rights by a decree in a case in which he
neither appeared, nor was served or effectively made a party, it
follows, by way of illustration that to subject property of individual
citizens of a municipality, by a summary proceeding in equity, to the
payment of an unsatisfied judgment against the municipality would be a
denial of due process of law.[] similarly, in a suit against a local
partnership, in which the resident partner was duly served with process
and the nonresident partner was served only with notice, a judgment thus
obtained is binding upon the firm and the resident partner, but is not a
personal judgment against the nonresident and cannot be enforced by
execution against his individual property.[] that the nonresident
partner should have been so protected is attributable to the fact the
process of a court of one state cannot run into another and summon a
party there domiciled to respond to proceedings against him, when
neither his person nor his property is within the jurisdiction of the
court rendering the judgment.[] in the case of a resident, however,
absence alone will not defeat the processes of courts in the state of
his domicile; for domicile is deemed to be sufficient to keep him within
reach of the state courts for purposes of a personal judgment, whether
obtained by means of appropriate, substituted service, or by actual
personal service on the resident at a point outside the state.
amenability to such suit even during sojourns outside is viewed as an
"incident of domicile."[] however, if the defendant, although
technically domiciled therein, has left the state with no intention to
return, service by publication; that is, by advertisement in a local
newspaper, as compared to a summons left [pg ]at his last and usual place of
abode where his family continued to reside, is inadequate inasmuch as it
is not reasonably calculated to give him actual notice of the
proceedings and opportunity to be heard.[]
in the case of nonresident individuals who are domiciled elsewhere,
jurisdiction in certain instances may be perfected by requiring such
persons, as a condition to entering the state, to designate local agents
to accept service of process. although a state does not have the power
to exclude individuals until such formal appointment of an agent has
been made,[] it may, for example, declare that the use of its
highways by a nonresident is the equivalent of the appointment of the
state registrar as agent for receipt of process in suits growing out of
motor vehicle accidents. however, a statute designating a state official
as the proper person to receive service of process in such litigation
must, to be valid, contain a provision making it reasonably probable
that a notice of such service will be communicated to the person sued.
if the statute imposed "either on the plaintiff himself, or upon the
official" designated to accept process "or some other, the duty of
communicating by mail or otherwise with the defendant" this requirement
is met; but if the act exacts no more than service of process on the
local agent, it is unconstitutional, notwithstanding that the defendant
may have been personally served in his own state. not having been
directed by the statute, such personal service cannot supply
constitutional validity to the act or to service under it.[]
[pg ]suits in personam.—restating the constitutional principles
currently applicable for determining whether individuals, resident and
nonresident, are suable in in personam actions, the supreme court in
international shoe co. v. washington,[] recently declared that:
"historically the jurisdiction of courts to render judgments in
personam is grounded on their de facto power over the defendant's
person. hence his presence within the territorial jurisdiction of a
court was prerequisite to its rendition of a judgment personally binding
him. *** but now ***, due process requires only that in order to
subject a defendant to a judgment in personam, if he be not present
within the territory of the forum, he have certain minimum contacts with
it such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend 'traditional
notions of fair play and substantial justice.'"
suability of foreign corporations.—until the enunciation in
 in international shoe co. v. washington[] of a "fair play and
substantial justice" doctrine, the exact scope of which cannot yet be
ascertained, the suability of foreign corporations had been determined
by utilization of the "presence" doctrine. defined in terms no less
abstract than its alleged successor and capable therefore of acquiring
meaning only in cases of specific application, the "presence" doctrine
was stated by justice brandeis as follows: "in the absence of consent, a
foreign corporation is amenable to process to enforce a personal
liability only if it is doing business within the state in such manner
and to such extent as to warrant the inference that it is present
there".[] in a variety of cases the court has considered the measure
of "presence" sufficient to confer jurisdiction and a representative
sample of the classes thereof is set forth below.
with rare exceptions,[] even continuous activity of some sort by a
foreign corporation within a state did not in the past suffice to render
it amenable to suits therein unrelated to that activity. without the
protection of such a rule, it was maintained, foreign corporations would
be exposed to the manifest hardship and inconvenience of defending in
any state in which they happen to be carrying on business suits for
torts wherever committed and claims on contracts wherever made. thus, an
indiana insurance corporation, engaging, without formal admission, in
the business of selling life insurance in pennsylvania, was held not to
be subject in the latter state to a suit filed by a pennsylvania
resident upon an insurance policy executed and delivered in
indiana.[] similarly, a virginia railway corporation, doing business
in new orleans, was declared not to be within the jurisdiction of
louisiana for the purposes of a negligence action instituted [pg ]against it
by a louisiana citizen and based upon injuries suffered in alabama.[]
also, an iowa railway company soliciting freight and passenger business
in philadelphia through a local agent was viewed as exempt therein from
suit brought by a pennsylvania resident to recover damages for personal
injuries sustained on one of the carrier's trains in colorado.[] on
the other hand, when a missouri statute, accepted by a foreign insurance
company and requiring it to designate the state superintendent of
insurance as its agent for service of process, was construed by missouri
courts to apply to suits on contracts executed outside missouri, with
the result that the company had to defend in missouri a suit on a policy
issued in colorado and covering property therein, the court was unable
to discern any denial of due process. the company was deemed to have
consented to such interpretation when it complied with the statute.[]
moreover, even when the cause of action arose in the forum state and
suit was instituted by a corporation chartered therein, a foreign
company retailing clothing in oklahoma was held immune from service of
process on its president when the latter visited new york on one of his
periodic trips there for the purchase of merchandise. notwithstanding
that such business trips were made at regular intervals, the oklahoma
corporation was considered not to be doing business in new york "in such
manner and to such extent as to warrant the inference that it was
present there," especially in view of its having never applied for a
license to do business in new york or consented to suit being brought
against it there, or established therein an office or appointed a
resident agent.[]
nor would the mere presence within its territorial limits of an agent,
officer, or stockholder, upon whom service might readily be had, be
effective without more to enable a state to acquire jurisdiction over a
foreign corporation. consequently, service of process on the president
of a foreign corporation in a state where he was temporarily and
casually present and where the corporation did no business and had no
property was fruitless.[] likewise, service on a new york director
[pg ]of a virginia corporation was not sufficient to bring the corporation
into the new york courts when, at the time of service, the corporation
was not doing business in new york, and the director was not there
officially representing the corporation in its business.[] on
occasion, an officer of a corporation may temporarily be in a state or
even temporarily reside therein; but if he is not there for the purpose
of transacting business for the corporation, or vested with authority by
the corporation to transact business in such state, his presence affords
no basis for the exercise of jurisdiction over such nonresident
employer, and any decree resulting from service upon such officer is
violative of due process.[] however, a foreign insurance corporation
which had ceased to sell insurance in tennessee but which had sent a
special agent there to adjust a loss under a policy previously issued in
that state could not, it was held, constitutionally object when a
judgment on that claim was obtained by service on that agent.[]
inasmuch as a state need not permit a foreign corporation to do domestic
business within its borders, it may condition entry upon acceptance by
the corporation of service of process upon its agents or upon a person
to be designated by the corporation or, failing such designation, upon a
state officer designated by law.[] service on a state officer,
however, is no more effective than service upon an agent in the employ
of a foreign corporation when, as has already been noted, such
corporation is not subject to the jurisdiction of the state; that is,
has not engaged in activities sufficient to render it "present" within
the state, or is subjected to a cause of action unrelated to such
activities and originating beyond the forum state. thus, a foreign
insurance company which, after revocation of its entry license,
continued to collect premiums on policies formerly issued to citizens of
the forum state was in fact continuing to do business in that state
sufficiently to render service on it through the insurance commissioner
adequate to bind it as defendant in a suit by a citizen of said state on
a policy therein issued to him.[] furthermore, a foreign corporation
which, after leaving a state and subsequently dissolving, failed to obey
a statutory requirement of that state that it maintain therein a
resident agent until the period of limitations shall have run, or, in
default thereof, that it consent to service on it through the secretary
of state, could not complain of any denial of due process because that
statute did not oblige the secretary of state to notify it of the
pendency of an action. the burden was on the corporation to make such
arrangement for notice as was thought desirable.[]
[pg ]to what extent these aforementioned holdings have been undermined by the
recent opinion in international shoe co. v. washington[] cannot yet
be determined. in the latter case, a foreign corporation, which had not
been issued a license to do business in washington, but which
systematically and continuously employed a force of salesmen, residents
thereof, to canvass for orders therein, was held suable in washington
for unpaid unemployment compensation contributions in respect to such
salesmen. service of the notice of assessment personally upon one of its
local sales solicitors plus the forwarding of a copy thereof by
registered mail to the corporation's principal office in missouri was
deemed sufficient to apprize the corporation of the proceeding.
to reach this conclusion the court not only overturned prior holdings to
the effect that mere solicitation of patronage does not constitute doing
of business in a state sufficient to subject a foreign corporation to
the jurisdiction thereof,[] but also rejected the "presence" test as
begging "the question to be decided. *** the terms 'present' or
'presence,'" according to chief justice stone, "are used merely to
symbolize those activities of the corporation's agent within the state
which courts will deem to be sufficient to satisfy the demands of due
process. *** those demands may be met by such contacts of the
corporation with the state of the forum as make it reasonable, in the
context of our federal system ***, to require the corporation to
defend the particular suit which is brought there; [and] *** that the
maintenance of the suit does not offend 'traditional notices of fair
play and substantial justice' *** an 'estimate of the inconveniences'
which would result to the corporation from a trial away from its 'home'
or principal place of business is relevant in this connection."[] as
to the scope of application to be accorded this "fair play and
substantial justice" doctrine, the court, at least verbally, conceded
that "*** so far as *** [corporate] obligations arise out of or are
connected with activities within the state, a procedure which requires
the corporation to respond to a suit brought to enforce them can, in
most instances, hardly be said to be undue."[] read literally, these
statements coupled with the terms of the new doctrine may conceivably
lead to a reversal of former decisions which: () nullified the exercise
of jurisdiction by the forum state over actions arising outside said
state and brought by a resident plaintiff against a foreign corporation
doing business therein without having been legally admitted and without
having consented to service of process on a resident agent; and ()
exempted a foreign corporation, which has been licensed by the forum
state to [pg ]do business therein and has consented to the appointment of a
local agent to accept process, from suit on an action not arising in the
forum state and not related to activities pursued therein.
by an extended application of the logic of the last mentioned case, a
majority of the court, in travelers health assn. v. virginia[]
ruled that, notwithstanding that it solicited business in virginia
solely through recommendations of existing members and was represented
therein by no agents whatsoever, a foreign mail order insurance company
had through its policies developed such contacts and ties with virginia
residents that the state, by forwarding notice to the company by
registered mail only, could institute enforcement proceedings under its
blue sky law leading to a decree ordering cessation of business pending
compliance with that act. the due process clause was declared not to
"forbid a state to protect its citizens from such injustice" of having
to file suits on their claims at a far distant home office of such
company, especially in view of the fact that such suits could be more
conveniently tried in virginia where claims of loss could be
investigated.[]
[pg ]
service of process
actions in rem—proceedings against land.—for the purpose of
determining the extent of a nonresident's title to real estate within
its limits, a state may provide any reasonable means of imparting
notice.[] precluded from going beyond its boundaries and serving
nonresident owners personally, states in such cases of necessity have
had recourse to constructive notice or service by publications. this
they have been able to do because of their inherent authority over
titles to lands within their borders. owners, nonresident as well as
resident, are charged with knowledge of laws affecting demands of the
state pertinent to property and of the manner in which such demands may
be enforced.[] accordingly, only so long as the property affected has
been brought under control of the court, will a judgment obtained
thereto without personal notice to a nonresident defendant be effective.
insofar as jurisdiction is thus required over a nonresident, it does not
extend beyond the property involved.[] consistently with such
principles, san francisco, after the earthquake of , had destroyed
nearly all records, permitted titles to be reestablished by parties in
possession by posting summons on the property, serving them on known
claimants, and publishing them against unknown claimants in newspapers
for two weeks.[]
[pg ]actions in rem—attachment proceedings.—in fulfillment of the
protection which a state owes to its citizens, it may exercise its
jurisdiction over real and personal property situated within its borders
belonging to a nonresident and permit an appropriation of the same in
attachment proceedings to satisfy a debt owed by the nonresident to one
of its citizens or to settle a claim for damages founded upon a wrong
inflicted on the citizen by the nonresident. being neither present
within the state nor domiciled therein, the nonresident defendant cannot
be served personally; and consequently any judgment in money obtained
against him would be void and could not thereafter be satisfied either
by execution on the nonresident's property subsequently found within the
state or by suit and execution thereon in another state. in such
instances, the citizen-plaintiff may recover, if at all, only by an in
rem proceeding involving a levy of a writ of attachment on the local
property of the defendant, of which proceeding the nonresident need be
notified merely by publication of a notice within the forum state.
however, any judgment rendered in such proceedings can have no
consequence beyond the property attached. if the attached property be
insufficient to pay the claim, the plaintiff cannot thereafter sue on
such judgment to collect an unpaid balance; and if property owned by the
defendant cannot be found within the state, the attachment proceedings
are, of course, summarily concluded.[]
actions in rem—corporations, estates, trusts, etc.—probate
administration, being in the nature of a proceeding in rem, is one to
which all the world is charged with notice.[] thus, in a proceeding
against an estate involving a suit against an administratrix to
foreclose a mortgage executed by the decedent, the heir, notwithstanding
that the suit presents an adverse claim the disposition of which may be
destructive of his title to land deriving from the decedent, may
properly be represented by the administratrix and is not entitled to
personal notification or summons.[] for like reasons, a statutory
proceeding whereunder a special administrator, having charge of an
[pg ]estate pending a contest as to the validity of the will, is empowered
to have a final settlement of his accounts without notice to the
distributees, is not violative of due process. the executor, or
administrator c.t.a., has an opportunity to contest the final settlement
of the special administrator before giving the latter an acquittance;
and since the former represents all claiming under the will, it cannot
be said the absence of notice to the distributees of the settlement
deprives them of their rights without due process of law.[]
in litigation to determine succession to property by proceedings in
escheat, due process is afforded by personal service of summons upon all
known claimants and constructive notice by publication to all claimants
who are unknown.[] whether a proceeding by the state to compel a bank
to turn over to it unclaimed deposits in quasi in rem or strictly in
rem, the essentials of jurisdiction over the deposit are that there be
a seizure of the res at the commencement of the suit and reasonable
notice and opportunity to be heard. these requirements are met by
personal service on the bank and publication of summons to depositors
and of notice to all other claimants. the fact that no affidavit of
impracticability of personal service on claimants is required before
publication of such notices does not render the latter unreasonable
inasmuch as they are used only in cases where the depositor is not known
to the bank officers to be alive.[] similarly, a kentucky statute
requiring banks to turn over to the state deposits long inactive is not
violative of due process where, although the deposits are taken over
upon published notice only, without any judicial decree of actual
abandonment, they are to be held by the state for the depositor until
such determination and for five years thereafter.[] however, a
procedure is at least partly defective whereby a bank managing a common
trust fund in favor of nonresident as well as resident beneficiaries
may, by a petition, the only notice of which is by publication in a
local [pg ]paper, obtain a judicial settlement of accounts which is
conclusive on all having an interest in the common fund or in any
participating trust. such notice by publication is sufficient as to
beneficiaries whose interests or addresses are unknown to the bank,
since there are no other more practicable means of giving them notice;
but is inadequate as a basis for adjudication depriving of substantial
rights persons whose whereabouts are known, inasmuch as it is feasible
to make serious efforts to notify them at least by mail to their
addresses on record with said bank.[] on the other hand, failure to
make any provision for notice to majority stockholders of a suit by
dissenting shareholders, under a statute which provided that, on a sale
or other disposition of all or substantially all of corporate assets, a
dissenting shareholder shall have the right, after six months, to be
paid the amount demanded, if the corporation makes no counter offer or
does not abandon the sale, does not deny due process; for the majority
stockholders are sufficiently represented by the corporation.[]
actions in rem—divorce proceedings.—the jurisdictional
requirements for rendering a valid decree in divorce proceedings are
considered under the full faith and credit clause. see pp. -.
misnomer of defendant—false return, etc.—an unattainable
standard of accuracy is not imposed by the due process clause. if a
defendant within the jurisdiction is served personally with process in
which his name is misspelled, he cannot safely ignore it on account of
the misnomer. if he fails to appear and plead the misnomer in abatement,
the judgment binds him. in a published notice intended to reach absent
or nonresident defendants, where the name is a principal means of
identifying the person concerned, somewhat different considerations
obtain. the general rule, in case of constructive service of process by
publication, tends to strictness. however, published notice to "albert
guilfuss, assignee," in a suit to partition land, was adequate to render
a judgment binding on "albert b. geilfuss, assignee," the latter not
having appeared.[]
foreclosure of a mortgage made upon process duly issued but which the
sheriff falsely returned as having been duly served, and of which the
owner had no notice, does not deprive said owner of property without due
process of law. a purchaser of the land at the sheriff's sale has a
right to rely on such return; otherwise judicial proceedings could never
be relied upon. the mortgagor must seek his remedy against the sheriff
upon his bond.[]
[pg ]
notice and hearing
legislative proceedings.—while due notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard to present one's claim or defense have been
declared to be two fundamental conditions almost universally prescribed
in all systems of law established by civilized countries,[] there are
certain proceedings appropriate for the determination of various rights
in which the enjoyment of these two privileges has not been deemed to be
constitutionally necessary. thus the constitution does not require
legislative assemblies to discharge their functions in town meeting
style; and it would be manifestly impracticable to accord every one
affected by a proposed rule of conduct a voice in its adoption. advanced
notice of legislation accordingly is not essential to due process of
law; nor need legislative bodies preface their enactment of legislation
by first holding committee hearings thereon. it follows therefore that
persons adversely affected by a specific law can never challenge its
validity on the ground that they were never heard on the wisdom or
justice of its provisions.[]
administrative proceedings.—to what extent notice and hearing
are deemed essential to due process in administrative proceedings,
encompassing as they do the formulation and issuance of general
regulations, the determination of the existence of conditions which have
the effect of bringing such regulations into operation, and the issuance
of orders of specific, limited application, entails a balancing of
considerations as to the desirability of speed in law enforcement and
protection of individual interests. when an administrative agency
engages in a legislative function, as, for example, when, in pursuance
of statutory authorization, it drafts regulations of general application
affecting an unknown number of people, it need not, any more than does a
legislative assembly, afford a hearing prior to promulgation. on the
other hand, if a regulation, sometimes described as an order or action
of an administrative body, is of limited application; that is, affects
the property or interests of specific, named individuals, or a
relatively small number of people readily identifiable by their relation
to the property or interests affected, the question whether notice and
hearing is prerequisite and, if so, whether it must precede such action,
becomes a matter of greater urgency.
but while a distinction readily may be made, for example, between a
regulation establishing a schedule of rates for all carriers in a state,
and one designed to control the charges of only one or two specifically
named carriers, the cases do not consistently sustain the [pg ]withholding
of advance notice and hearing in the first class of regulations and
insist upon its provision in the latter. in fact, the observation has
been made that the judicial disposition to exact the protection of
notice and hearing rises in direct proportion to the extent to which a
regulation affects the finances of business establishments covered
thereunder. accordingly, if a regulation bears only indirectly upon
income and expenses, as for example, a regulation altering insurance
policy forms, less concern for such procedural protection is likely to
be expressed than in the case of the formulation of a minimum wage
schedule, even though the regulations involved in both illustrations are
general and not limited in operation. moreover, if regulations, which
are general in their application, may be readily subjected to judicial
challenge after their promulgation, or if the parties to which they
apply are affected only when they endeavor to comply in the future,
advance notice and hearing is less likely to be viewed as essential to
due process.[]
as to that portion of administrative activity pertaining to the making
of determinations or the issuance of orders of limited or individual
application, the obligation to afford notice and hearing is reasonably
clear; but controversy has been protracted on the question whether this
procedural safeguard, in every instance, must be granted in advance of
such activity. the most frequently litigated types of administrative
action embracing the latter issue have been determinations to withhold
issuance of, or to revoke, an occupational license, or to impound or
destroy property believed to be dangerous to public health, morals, or
safety. apparently in recognition of the fact that few occupations today
can be pursued without a license, the trend of decisions is toward
sustaining a requirement of a hearing before refusal to issue a license
and away from the view that inasmuch as no one is entitled as of right
to engage in a specific profession, the [pg ]issue of a practitioner's
license applicable thereto is in the nature of a gift as to the granting
or withholding of which procedural protection is unnecessary.
revocation, or refusal to renew a license, however, has been
distinguished from issuance of a license; and where a license is
construed to confer something in the nature of a property right rather
than a mere privilege terminable at will, such property right, the
courts have maintained, ought not to be destroyed summarily by
revocation without prior notice and hearing. whether an occupational
license is to be treated as a privilege revocable without a hearing, or
as conferring a property right deserving of greater protection, depends
very largely on prevailing estimates of the social desirability of a
calling. thus, if a business is susceptible of being viewed as injurious
to public health, morals, safety, and convenience, as, for example,
saloons, pool rooms, and dance halls, the licensee is deemed to have
entered upon such line of endeavor with advance knowledge of the state's
right to withdraw his license therefor summarily. prompt protection of
the public in such instances is said to outweigh the advantages of a
slower procedure, retarded by previous notice and hearing, and to
require that the person adversely affected seek his remedy from the
court via a petition to review or to enjoin the decision of the
licensing authorities.[]
for like reasons, the owner of property about to be impounded or
destroyed by officers acting in furtherance of the police power may
justifiably be relegated to post mortem remedies in the form of a suit
for damages against the officer effecting the seizure or destruction,
or, if time permits, a bill in equity for an injunction. thus, due
process of law is not denied the custodian of food in cold storage by
enforcement of a city ordinance under which such food, when unfit for
human consumption, may summarily be seized, condemned, and destroyed
without a preliminary hearing. "if a party cannot get his hearing in
advance of the seizure and destruction he has the right to have it
afterward, *** in an action brought for the destruction of his
property, and in that action those who destroyed it can only
successfully defend if the jury shall find the fact of unwholesomeness
as claimed by them."[] similarly, if the owner of liquor, possession
of which has been made unlawful, can secure a hearing by instituting
injunction proceedings, he is not denied due process by the failure to
grant him a hearing before seizure and destruction of his property.[]
indeed, even when no emergency exists, such as is provided by a
conflagration or threatened epidemic, and the property in question is
not intrinsically harmful, mere use in violation of a valid police power
regulation has been held to justify summary destruction. thus, in the
much criticized case of lawton v. steele,[] the destruction,
without prior notice and hearing, of fishing nets set in violation [pg ]of a
conservation law defining them to be a nuisance was sustained on the
ground that the property was not "of great value." conceding that "it is
not easy to draw the line between cases where property illegally used
may be destroyed summarily and where judicial proceedings are necessary
for its condemnation," the court acknowledged that "if the property were
of great value, as, for instance, if it were a vessel employed for
smuggling or other illegal purposes, it would be *** dangerous ***
to permit *** [an officer] to sell or destroy it as a public nuisance,
*** but where the property is of trifling value, *** we think it is
within the power of the legislature to order its summary
abatement."[]
statutory proceedings.—"it is not an indispensable requirement
of due process that every procedure affecting the ownership or
disposition of property be exclusively by judicial proceeding. statutory
proceedings affecting property rights, which, by later resort to the
courts, secure to adverse parties an opportunity to be heard, suitable
to the occasion, do not deny due process."[] thus, a procedure under
which a state banking superintendent, after having taken over a closed
bank and issued notices to stockholders of their assessment, may issue
execution for the amounts due, subject to the right of each stockholder,
by affidavit of illegality, to contest his liability for such an
assessment, does not in effect authorize an execution and creation of a
lien before and without any judicial proceeding. the fact that the
execution is issued in the first instance by an agent of the state and
not from a court, followed by personal notice and a right to take the
case into court, is open to no objection. the statute authorizing this
procedure is itself notice to stockholders that on becoming such they
assumed the liability on which they are to be held.[]
judicial proceedings.—consistently with the due process
clause, a state may not enforce a judgment against a party named in the
proceedings without an opportunity to be heard at sometime before final
judgment is entered.[] as to the presentation of every available
defense, however, the requirements of due process do not entail
affording an opportunity to do so before entry of judgment. a hearing by
an appeal may suffice. accordingly, a surety company, objecting to the
entry of a judgment against it on a supersedeas bond, without notice and
an opportunity of a hearing on the issue of liability thereon, [pg ]was not
denied due process where the state practice provided the opportunity for
such hearing by an appeal from the judgment so entered. nor could the
company found its claim of denial upon the fact that it lost this
opportunity for a hearing by inadvertently pursuing the wrong procedure
in the state courts.[] on the other hand, where a state supreme court
reversed a trial court and entered a final judgment for the defendant, a
plaintiff who had never had an opportunity to introduce evidence in
rebuttal to certain testimony which the trial court deemed immaterial
but which the appellate court considered material, was held to have been
deprived of his rights without due process of law.[]
sufficiency of notice and hearing.—although the supreme court
has wavered on the question whether the granting of notice in
administrative proceedings, in cases in which the authorizing statute
does not expressly provide therefor, will satisfy the requirements of
due process,[] in judicial proceedings it has almost consistently
declared that notice must be provided as an essential part of the
statutory provision and not as a mere matter of favor or grace.[]
also, the notice afforded must be adequate for the purpose. thus, a
texas statute providing for service of process by giving five days'
notice was held to be an insufficient notice to a virginian who would
(at that time) have required four days' traveling to reach the place
where the court was held. nor would this insufficiency of notice on a
nonresident be cured by the fact that under local practice there would
be several additional days before the case would be called for trial or
that the court would probably set aside a default judgment and permit a
defense when the nonresident arrived.[] on the other hand, a statute
affording ten days' notice of the time for settlement of the account of
a personal representative in probate proceedings is not wanting in due
process of law as to a nonresident.[] adequacy, moreover, is no less
an essential attribute of a hearing than it is of notice; and, as the
preceding discussion has shown, unless a person involved in
administrative as well as judicial proceedings has received a hearing
that is both sufficient and fair and has been subjected to rulings amply
supported by the evidence introduced thereat, he will not be considered
to have been accorded due process.[]
[pg ]
generally
the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment does not control mere
forms of procedure in state courts or regulate practice therein.[] a
state "is free to regulate the procedure of its courts in accordance
with its own conception of policy and fairness unless in so doing it
offends some principle of justice so rooted in the traditions and
conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental."[] pursuant
to such plenary power, states have regulated the manner in which rights
may be enforced and wrongs remedied,[] and, in connection therewith,
have created courts and endowed them with such jurisdiction as, in the
judgment of their legislatures, seemed appropriate.[] whether
legislative action in such matters is deemed to be wise or proves
efficient, whether it works a particular hardship on a particular
litigant, or perpetuates or supplants ancient forms of procedure are
issues which can give rise to no conflict with the fourteenth amendment;
for the latter's function is negative rather than affirmative and in no
way obligates the states to adopt specific measures of reform.[]
pleading and practice
commencement of actions.—a state may impose certain conditions
on the right to institute litigation. thus, access to the courts may be
denied to persons instituting stockholders' derivative actions [pg ]unless
reasonable security for the costs, and fees incurred by the corporation
is first tendered. nor is the retroactive application of this statutory
requirement to actions pending at the time of its adoption violative of
due process as long as no new liability for expenses incurred before
enactment is imposed thereby, and the only effect thereof is to stay
such proceedings until the security is furnished.[] moreover, when a
nonresident files suit in a local court, the state, as the price of
opening its tribunals to such plaintiff, may exact the condition that
the former stand ready to answer all cross-actions filed and accept any
in personam judgments obtained by a resident defendant through service
of process or appropriate pleading upon the plaintiff's attorney of
record.[] for similar reasons, the requirements, without excluding
other evidence, of a chemical analysis as a condition precedent to a
suit to recover damages resulting to crops from allegedly deficient
fertilizers is not deemed to be arbitrary or unreasonable.[]
pleas in abatement.—state legislation which forbids a
defendant to come into court and challenge the validity of service upon
him in a personal action without thereby surrendering himself to the
jurisdiction of the court, but which does not restrain him from
protecting his substantive rights against enforcement of a judgment
rendered without service of process, is constitutional and does not
deprive him of property without due process of law. such a defendant, if
he please, may ignore the proceedings as wholly ineffective, and set up
the invalidity of the judgment if and when an attempt is made to take
his property thereunder. however, if he desires to contest the validity
of the proceedings in the court in which it is instituted, so as to
avoid even semblance of a judgment against him, it is within the power
of a state to declare that he shall do this subject to the risk of being
obliged to submit to the jurisdiction of the court to hear and determine
the merits, if the objection raised by him as to its jurisdiction over
his person shall be overruled.[]
defenses.—just as the state may condition the right to
institute litigation, so may it establish its terms for the
interposition of certain defenses. thus, by statute a state validly may
provide that one sued in a possessory action cannot bring an action to
try title until after judgment shall have been rendered in the
possessory action, and until he shall have paid the judgment, if the
decision shall have so awarded.[] likewise, a nonresident defendant
in a suit begun by foreign attachment, even though he has no resources
or credit other than the property attached, cannot successfully
challenge the validity [pg ]of a statute which requires him to give bail or
security for the discharge of the seized property before permitting him
an opportunity to appear and defend. "the condition imposed has a
reasonable relation to the conversion of a proceeding quasi in rem
into an action in personam; [and] ordinarily *** is not difficult to
comply with—***"[]
amendments and continuances.—amendment of pleadings is largely
within the discretion of the trial court, and unless a gross abuse of
discretion is shown, there is no ground for reversal; accordingly, where
the defense sought to be interposed is without merit, a claim that due
process would be denied by rendition of a foreclosure decree without
leave to file a supplementary answer is utterly without foundation.[]
costs, damages, and penalties.—what costs are allowed by law
is for the court to determine; and an erroneous judgment of what the law
allows does not deprive a party of his property without due process of
law.[] nor does a statute providing for the recovery of reasonable
attorney's fees in actions on small claims subject unsuccessful
defendants to any unconstitutional deprivation.[] equally consistent
with the requirements of due process is a statutory procedure whereby a
prosecutor of a case is adjudged liable for costs, and committed to jail
in default of payment thereof, whenever the court or jury, after
according him an opportunity to present evidence of good faith, finds
that he instituted the prosecution without probable cause and from
malicious motives.[] also, as a reasonable incentive for prompt
settlement without suit of just demands of a class admitting of special
legislative treatment, such as common carriers and insurance companies
together with their patrons, a state through the exercise of its police
power may permit harassed litigants to recover penalties in the form of
attorney's fees or damages.[] similarly, to deter careless
destruction of human life, a state by law may allow punitive damages to
be assessed in actions against employers for deaths caused by the
negligence of their employees.[] likewise, by virtue of its plenary
power to prescribe the character of the sentence which shall be awarded
against those found guilty of crime, [pg ]a state may provide that a public
officer embezzling public money shall, notwithstanding that he has made
restitution, suffer not only imprisonment but also pay a fine equal to
double the amount embezzled, which shall operate as a judgment for the
use of persons whose money was embezzled. whatever this fine be called,
whether it be a penalty, or punishment, or civil judgment, it comes to
the convict as the result of his crime.[]
statutes of limitation
a statute of limitations does not deprive one of property without due
process of law, unless, in its application to an existing right of
action, it unreasonably limits the opportunity to enforce that right by
suit. by the same token, a state may shorten an existing period of
limitation, provided a reasonable time is allowed for bringing an action
after the passage of the statute and before the bar takes effect. what
is a reasonable period, however, is dependent on the nature of the right
and particular circumstances.[]
thus, an interval of only one year is not so unreasonable as to be
wanting in due process when applied to bar actions relative to the
property of an absentee in instances when the receiver for such property
has not been appointed until  years after the former's
disappearance.[] likewise, when a state, by law, suddenly prohibits,
unless brought within six months after its passage, all actions to
contest tax deeds which have been of record for two years, no
unconstitutional deprivation is effected.[] no less valid is a
statute, applicable to wild lands, which provides that when a person has
been in possession under a recorded deed continuously for  years, and
had paid taxes thereon during the same, the former owner in that
interval paying nothing, no action to recover such land shall be
entertained unless commenced within  years, or before the expiration
of five years following enactment of said provision.[] similarly, an
amendment to a workmen's compensation act, limiting to three years the
time within which a case may be reopened for readjustment of
compensation on account of aggravation of a disability, does not deny
due process to one who sustained his injury at a time when the statute
contained no limitation. a limitation is deemed to affect the remedy
only, and the period of its [pg ]operation in this instance was viewed as
neither arbitrary nor oppressive.[]
moreover, as long as no agreement of the parties is violated, a state
may extend as well as shorten the time in which suits may be brought in
its courts and may even entirely remove a statutory bar to the
commencement of litigation. as applied to actions for personal debts, a
repeal or extension of a statute of limitations effects no
unconstitutional deprivation of property of a debtor-defendant in whose
favor such statute had already become a defense. "a right to defeat a
just debt by the statute of limitation *** [not being] a vested
right," such as is protected by the constitution, accordingly no offense
against the fourteenth amendment is committed by revival, through an
extension or repeal, of an action on an implied obligation to pay a
child for the use of her property,[] or a suit to recover the
purchase price of securities sold in violation of a blue sky law,[]
or a right of an employee to seek, on account of the aggravation of a
former injury, an additional award out of a state administered
fund.[] however, as respects suits to recover real and personal
property, when the right of action has been barred by a statute of
limitations and title as well as real ownership have become vested in
the defendant, any later act removing or repealing the bar would be void
as attempting an arbitrary transfer of title.[] also unconstitutional
is the application of a local statute of limitation declaring invalid
any contractual limitation of the right to sue to a period shorter than
two years to an insurance contract made and to be performed outside the
forum state and containing a stipulation that suit thereon must be
brought within one year from the date of loss. "when the parties to a
contract have expressly agreed upon a time limit on their obligation, a
statute which invalidates *** [said] agreement and directs enforcement
of the contract after *** [the agreed] time has expired ***"
unconstitutionally imposes a burden in excess of that contracted.[]
evidence and presumptions
the establishment of presumptions and rules respecting the burden of
proof is clearly within the domain of state governments.[] [pg ]as long
as a presumption is not unreasonable and is not conclusive of the rights
of the person against whom raised, it does not violate the due process
clause. legislative fiat may not take the place of fact, however, in the
determination of issues involving life, liberty, or property, and a
statute creating a presumption which is entirely arbitrary and which
operates to deny a fair opportunity to repel it or to present facts
pertinent to one's defense is void. on the other hand, if there is a
rational connection between what is proved and what is to be inferred,
legislation declaring that the proof of one fact or group of facts shall
constitute prima facie evidence of a main or ultimate fact will be
sustained.[]
on the ground that the connection between the fact proven and that
presumed was not sufficient and that reasoning did not lead from one to
the other, the following statutory presumptions have been voided. thus,
a statute which treated a breach of a contract to labor as prima facie
evidence of an intent to defraud an employer of money paid by him in
advance was found to be constitutionally defective because the trial
court was permitted to disregard evidence rationally bearing upon fraud
and to decide upon evidence pertaining to an unrelated breach of
contract, with the consequence that an adequate hearing upon fraud was
not afforded.[] also, since "inference of crime and guilt may not
reasonably be drawn from mere inability [of a bank] to pay demand
deposits and other debts as they mature," a statute making proof of
insolvency prima facie evidence of fraud on the part of bank directors
was deemed wholly arbitrary.[] similarly, negligence by one or all
the participants in a grade crossing collision not being inferable from
the latter occurrence, the court voided a georgia statute which declared
that a railroad shall be liable in damages to person or property by the
running of trains unless the company shall make it appear that its
agents exercised ordinary diligence, the presumption in all cases being
against the company, and which was construed by state courts as
permitting said presumption of evidence to be weighed against opposing
testimony and to prevail unless such testimony is found by a jury to be
preponderant.[] on the other hand, a south carolina statute which
raised a presumption of negligence against a railroad upon proof of
failure to give prescribed warning signals was sustained because the
presumption [pg ]therein established gave rise merely to a temporary
inference which might be rebutted by contrary evidence and which is
thereafter to be excluded in determining proximate cause.[]
presumptions sustained as constitutionally tenable include those set out
in statutes providing that when distillery apparatus is found upon the
premises of an individual, such discovery shall be prima facie
evidence of actual knowledge of the presence of the same;[] that the
flowing, release, or escape of natural gas into the air shall constitute
prima facie evidence of prohibited waste,[] and that prior
conviction of a felony shall be conclusive evidence of bad character
justifying refusal to issue a license to practice medicine.[] upheld,
consistently with the former, were two sections of the california alien
land law; one, which specified that the taking of title in the name of a
person eligible to hold land, where the consideration is furnished by
one ineligible to acquire agricultural land, shall raise a prima facie
presumption that the conveyance is made to evade the law;[] and a
second, which cast upon a japanese defendant the burden of proving
citizenship by birth after the state endeavored to prove that he
belonged to a race ineligible for naturalization.[] in contrast with
the latter result, however, is a subsequent decision of the court
holding unconstitutional another section of the same california law
providing that when an indictment alleges alienage and ineligibility to
united states citizenship of a defendant, the burden of proving
citizenship or eligibility thereto shall devolve upon the
defendant.[] as a basis for distinguishing these last two decisions
the court observed that while "the decisions are manifold that within
[the] limits" of fairness[] and reason the burden of proof may be
shifted to the defendant even in criminal prosecutions, nevertheless, to
be justified, "the evidence held to be inculpatory *** [must have had]
at least a sinister significance ***, or if this at times be lacking,
there must be in any event a manifest disparity in convenience of proof
and opportunity for knowledge, ***" whereas, accordingly, under the
terms of the section previously upheld, the defendant could prove his
citizenship without trouble, and the state, if forced to disprove his
claim, could be relatively helpless, the background of the accused party
being known probably only to himself and close relatives, the alleged
japanese defendant, in the last mentioned case, would have suffered
hardship and injustice if compelled to prove non-japanese origin,
especially since ineligibility renders criminal conduct otherwise
lacking in "sinister significance" (occupation of land under lease from
an american codefendant).[] on the other hand, it was held in a
recent [pg ]case, that oregon was entitled to require that one pleading
insanity as a defense against a criminal charge should prove same beyond
a reasonable doubt, and to make "morbid propensity" no defense.[]
jury trials: dispensing with jury trials
trial by jury has not been considered essential to due process, and
since the fourteenth amendment guarantees no particular form or method
of procedure, states have been free to retain or abolish juries.[]
conformably to the constitution, states, in devising their own
procedures, eliminated juries in proceedings to enforce liens,[]
inquiries for contempt,[] mandamus[] and quo warranto
actions,[] and in eminent domain[] and equity proceedings.[]
states are equally free to adopt innovations respecting the selection
and number of jurors. verdicts rendered by ten out of twelve jurors may
be substituted for the requirement of a unanimous verdict,[] and
petit juries containing eight rather than the conventional twelve
members may be established.[]
general
in the following pages the requirements of the due process clause of
amendment xiv in criminal cases will be dealt with in approximately the
order in which questions regarding them arise in the course of a
prosecution.
[pg ]
indefinite statutes: right of accused to knowledge of offense
"a statute so vague and indefinite, in form and as interpreted, ***
[as to fail] to give fair notice of what acts will be punished, ***,
violates an accused's rights under procedural due process *** [a penal
statute must set up] ascertainable standards of guilt. [so that] men of
common intelligence *** [are not] required to guess at *** [its]
meaning," either as to persons within the scope of the act or as to
applicable tests to ascertain guilt.[]
defective by these tests and therefore violative of due process is a
statute providing that any person not engaged in any lawful occupation,
known to be a member of any gang consisting of two or more persons, who
has been convicted at least three times of being a disorderly person, or
who has been convicted of any crime in this or any other state, is a
gangster and subject to fine or imprisonment. pointing to specific
shortcomings of this act, the supreme court observed that "*** neither
[at] common law, *** nor anywhere in the language of the law is there
[to be found any] definition of the word, *** 'gang'." the state
courts, in adopting dictionary definitions of that term, were not to be
viewed as having intended to give "gangster" a meaning broad enough to
include anyone who had not been convicted of a specified crime or of
disorderly conduct as set out in the statute, or to limit its meaning to
the field covered by the words that they found in a dictionary ("roughs,
thieves, criminals"). application of the latter interpretation would
include some obviously not within the statute and would exclude some
plainly covered by it. moreover, the expression, "known to be a member,"
is ambiguous; and not only permits a doubt as to whether actual or
putative association is meant, but also fails to indicate what
constitutes membership or how one may join a gang. in conclusion, the
supreme court declared that if on its face a challenged statute is
repugnant to the due process clause, specification of details of the
offense intended to be charged would not serve to validate it; for it is
the statute, not the accusation under it, that prescribes the rule to
govern conduct and warns against transgression.[] in contrast, the
court sustained as neither too vague nor indefinite a state law which
provided for commitment of a psychopathic personality by probate action
akin to a lunacy proceeding, and which was construed by the state court
as including those persons who, by habitual course of misconduct in
sexual matters, have evidenced utter lack of power to control their
sexual impulses and are likely to inflict injury. the underlying
conditions, i.e., habitual course of misconduct in sex matters and lack
of power to control impulses, and likelihood of attack on others, were
viewed as calling for evidence of past conduct pointing to probable
consequences and as [pg ]being as susceptible of proof as many of the
criteria constantly applied in criminal prosecutions.[]
abolition of the grand jury
an indictment or presentment by a grand jury, as known to the common law
of england, is not essential to due process of law even when applied to
prosecutions for felonies. substitution for a presentment or indictment
by a grand jury of the proceeding by information, after examination and
commitment by a magistrate, certifying to the probable guilt of the
defendant, with the right on his part to the aid of counsel, and to the
cross-examination of the witnesses produced for the prosecution is due
process of law.[] furthermore, due process does not require that the
information filed by the prosecuting attorney should have been preceded
by the arrest or preliminary examination of the accused.[] even when
an information is filed pending an investigation by the coroner, due
process has not been violated.[] but when the grand jury is retained
it must be fairly constituted. thus, in the leading case, an indictment
by a grand jury in a county of alabama in which no member of a
considerable negro population had ever been called for jury service, was
held void, although the alabama statute governing the matter did not
discriminate between the two races.[]
the right to counsel
whatever previously may have been recognized as constituting the
elements of procedural due process in criminal cases, it was not until
[] that the supreme court acknowledged that the right "to have
the assistance of counsel for *** [one's] defense," guaranteed as
against the national government by the sixth amendment, was of such
fundamental character as to be embodied in the concept of due process of
law as set forth in the fourteenth amendment. later in , it effected
this incorporation by way of expansion of the term, "liberty," rather
than, "due process," and conceded that the right to counsel was
"implicit in the concept of ordered liberty."[]
[pg ]for want of adequate enjoyment of the right to counsel, the court, in
powell v. alabama,[] overturned the conviction of negroes who had
received sentences of death for rape, and asserted that, at least in
capital cases, where the defendant is unable to employ counsel and is
incapable adequately of making his own defense because of ignorance,
illiteracy, or the like, it is the duty of the court, whether requested
or not, to assign counsel for him as a necessary requisite of due
process of law. the duty is not discharged by an assignment at such time
or under such circumstances as to preclude the giving of effective aid
in preparation and trial of the case. under certain circumstances (e.g.,
ignorance and illiteracy of defendants, their youth, public hostility,
imprisonment and close surveillance by military forces, fact that
friends and families are in other states, and that they stand in deadly
peril of their lives), the necessity of counsel is so vital and
imperative that the failure of a trial court to make an effective
appointment of counsel is a denial of due process of law.[]
by its explicit refusal in powell v. alabama to consider whether
denial of counsel in criminal prosecutions for less than capital
offenses or under other circumstances[] was equally violative of the
due process clause, the court left undefined the measure of the
protection available to defendants; and its first two pertinent
decisions rendered thereafter, contributed virtually nothing to correct
that deficiency. in avery v. alabama,[] a state trial court was
sustained in its refusal to continue a murder case upon request of
defense counsel appointed by said court only three days before the
trial, who contended that they had not had sufficient time to prepare a
defense, and in its subsequent rejection of a motion for a new trial
which was grounded in part on the contention that the denial of the
continuance was a deprivation of the prisoner's rights under the
fourteenth amendment. apart from an admission that "where denial of the
constitutional right to assistance of counsel is asserted, its peculiar
sacredness demands that we scrupulously review the record," a unanimous
court proffered only the following vague appraisal of the application of
the fourteenth amendment: "in determining whether petitioner has been
denied his constitutional right ***, we must remember that the
fourteenth amendment does not limit the power of the states to try and
deal with crimes committed within their borders, and was not intended to
bring to the test of a decision of this court every ruling made in the
course of a state trial. consistently with the preservation of
constitutional balance between state and federal sovereignty, this court
must respect and is reluctant to interfere with the states'
determination of local social policy."[] one year later, the court
made another inconclusive observation in smith v. o'grady,[] in
which it stated that if true, allegations in a petition for habeas
corpus showing that the [pg ]petitioner, although an uneducated man and
without prior experience in court, was tricked into pleading guilty to a
serious crime of burglary, and was tried without the requested aid of
counsel would void the judgment under which he was imprisoned.
conceding that the above mentioned opinions "lend color to the
argument," though they did not actually so rule, that "in every case,
whatever the circumstances, one charged with crime, who is unable to
obtain counsel, must be furnished counsel by the state," the court, in
betts v. brady,[] decided in , not only narrowed the scope of
the right of the accused to the "assistance of counsel," but also set at
rest any question as to the constitutional source from which the right
was derived. offering state courts the following vague guide for
determining when provision of counsel is constitutionally required, the
court declared that "the fourteenth amendment prohibits the conviction
and incarceration of one whose trial is offensive to the common and
fundamental ideas of fairness and right, and while want of counsel in a
particular case may result in a conviction lacking in such fundamental
fairness, we cannot say that the amendment embodies an inexorable
command that no trial for any offense, or in any court, can be fairly
conducted and justice accorded a defendant who is not represented by
counsel *** asserted denial of due process is to be tested by an
appraisal of the totality of facts in a given case. that which may, in
one setting, constitute a denial of fundamental fairness, shocking to
the universal sense of justice, may, in other circumstances, and in the
light of other considerations, fall short of such denial."[]
accordingly, an indigent farm laborer was deemed not to have been denied
due process of law when he was convicted of robbery by a maryland county
court, sitting without a jury, which was not required by statute[] to
honor his request for counsel and whose "practice," in fact was to
afford counsel only in murder and rape cases. finally, the court
emphatically rejected the notion, suggested, however faintly by the
older decisions, that the fourteenth amendment "incorporates the
specific guarantees found in the sixth [pg ]amendment, although it
recognized that a denial of the rights stipulated in the latter
amendment may in a given case amount to a deprivation of due
process."[]
having thus construed the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment
as not inclusive of the sixth amendment and as requiring no more than a
fair trial which, on occasion, may necessitate the protection of
counsel, the court, in succeeding decisions rendered during the
interval, -, proceeded to subject betts v. brady to the
"silent treatment." in williams v. kaiser[] and tomkins v.
missouri[] two defendants pleaded guilty without counsel to the
commission in missouri of capital offenses, one, to robbery with a
deadly weapon, and the second, to murder. defendant, williams contended
that, notwithstanding his request, the trial court did not appoint
counsel, whereas defendant, tomkins alleged that he was ignorant of his
right to demand counsel under the missouri statute. in ruling that the
defendants' petitions for habeas corpus should not have been rejected
by missouri courts without a hearing, the supreme court relied almost
entirely upon the quotations from powell v. alabama[] previously
set forth herein; and reiterated that the right to counsel in felony
cases being protected by the fourteenth amendment, the failure of a
state court to appoint counsel is a denial of due process. "a layman,"
the court added, "is usually no match for the skilled prosecutor whom he
confronts in the court room. he needs the aid of counsel lest he be the
victim of overzealous prosecutors, of the law's complexity, or of his
own ignorance or bewilderment."[]
nor was betts v. brady mentioned in the following pertinent decisions.
in house v. mayo,[] the supreme court held that the action [pg ]of a
trial court in compelling a defendant to plead to an information
charging burglary without opportunity to consult with his counsel is a
denial of the constitutional right to counsel; and in hawk v.
olson[] the court repeated this assertion, in connection with the
denial to a defendant accused of a murder of the same opportunity during
the critical period between his arraignment and the impaneling of the
jury. both these opinions cited with approval the two previously
discussed williams and tomkins cases; and in house v. mayo the court
declared without any explanation: "compare betts v. brady with
williams v. kaiser and tomkins v. missouri."[] a similar
performance by the court is also discernible in rice v. olson,[] in
which it ruled that a defendant, who pleads guilty to a charge of
burglary, is incapable adequately of making his own defense, and does
not understandingly waive counsel; he is entitled to the benefit of
legal aid, and a request therefor is not necessary. also, on the basis
of unchallenged facts contradicting a prisoner's allegation that he had
been denied counsel; namely, that after his arraignment and plea of
guilty to a charge of robbery, counsel had noted an appearance for him
two days before the date of sentencing and had actively intervened in
his behalf on the latter date, a majority of the court, in canizio v.
new york,[] ruled that the right to counsel had not been withheld.
without mentioning betts v. brady by name, the court, in ,
returned to the fair trial principle enunciated therein when it held
that no deprivation of the constitutional right to the aid of counsel
was disclosed by the record in carter v. illinois.[] that record
included only the indictment, the judgment on the plea of guilty to a
charge of murder, the minute entry bearing on the sentence, and the
sentence, together with a lengthy recital in the judgment to the effect
that when the defendant expressed a desire to plead guilty the court
explained to him the consequence of such plea, his rights in the
premises, especially, his rights to have a lawyer appointed to defend
him and to be tried before a jury, and the degree of proof required for
an acquittal under a not guilty plea, but that the defendant persisted
in his plea of guilty. emphasizing that this record was entirely wanting
in facts bearing upon the maturity or capacity of comprehension of the
prisoner, or upon the circumstances under which the plea of guilty was
tendered and accepted, the supreme court concluded that no inference of
lack of understanding, or ability to make an intelligent waiver of
counsel, could be drawn from the fact that the [pg ]trial court did assign
counsel when it came to sentencing.[] applying the same doctrine, and
on this occasion at least citing betts v. brady, the court, in de
meerleer v. michigan,[] unanimously declared that the arraignment,
trial, conviction of murder, and sentence to life imprisonment, all on
the same day, of a seventeen-year old boy who was without legal
assistance, and was never advised of his right to counsel, who received
from the trial court no explanation of the consequences of his plea of
guilty, and who never subjected the state's witnesses to
cross-examination, effected a denial of constitutional "rights essential
to a fair hearing."
even more conclusive evidence of the revival of the fair trial doctrine
of betts v. brady is to be found in the majority opinions contained in
foster v. illinois[] and gayes v. new york.[] in the former
the court ruled that where it appears that the trial court, before
accepting pleas of guilty to charges of burglary and larceny by
defendants, aged  and  respectively, advised each of his rights of
trial and of the consequences of such a plea, the fact that the record
reveals no express offer of counsel would not suffice to show that the
accused were deprived of rights essential to the fair hearing required
by the due process clause. reiterating that the absolute right to
counsel accorded by the sixth amendment does not apply in prosecutions
in state courts, five of the justices declared that all the due process
clause of the fourteenth amendment "exacts from the states is a
conception of fundamental justice" which is neither "satisfied by merely
formal procedural correctness, nor *** confined by any absolute rule
such as that which the sixth amendment contains in securing to an
accused [in the federal courts] 'the assistance of counsel for his
defense.'"[] on the same day, four justices, with justice burton
concurring only in the result, held in gayes v. new york,[] that
one sentenced in  as a second offender under a charge of burglary
was not entitled to vacation of a judgment rendered [pg ]against him in
, when charged with the first offense, on the ground that when
answering in the negative the trial court's inquiry as to whether he
desired the aid of counsel, he did not understand his constitutional
rights. on his subsequent conviction in , which took into account
his earlier sentence of , the defendant was deemed to have had full
opportunity to contest the constitutionality of his earlier sentence.
consistently with these two cases, the court in marino v. ragen,[]
decided later in the same year, held that the absence of counsel, in
conjunction with the following set of facts, operated to deprive a
defendant of due process. in this latter decision, the accused, an
-year-old italian immigrant, unable to understand the english
language, was convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment on
a plea of guilty when, notwithstanding a recital in the record that he
was arraigned in open court and advised through interpreters, one of
whom was the arresting officer, of the meaning and effect of a "guilty"
plea, and that he signed a statement waiving a jury trial and pleading
guilty, the waiver was not in fact signed by him and no plea of guilty
actually had been entered.
in disposing of more recent cases embracing right to counsel as an
issue, the court, either with or without citation of betts v. brady,
has consistently applied the fair trial doctrine. thus, the absence of
counsel competent to advise a -year-old negro boy of his rights was
one of several factors operating in haley v. ohio[] to negative the
propriety of admitting in evidence a confession to murder and
contributing to the conclusion that the boy's conviction had resulted
from proceedings that were unfair. dividing again on the same issues in
which they were in disagreement in foster v. illinois;[] namely,
the applicability of amendment six to state criminal prosecutions and
[pg ]the merits of the fair trial doctrine as expounded in betts v. brady,
five justices in bute v. illinois[] ruled that the due process
clause of the fourteenth amendment does not require a state court to
tender assistance of counsel, before accepting a plea of guilty to a
charge of indecent liberties with female children, the maximum penalty
for which is  years, from a -year-old man who was not a lawyer and
who received from the court an explanation of the consequences and
penalties resulting from such plea. unanimity was subsequently regained
in wade v. mayo[] in which the justices had before them the plight
of an -year-old boy, convicted on the charge of breaking and entering,
who was described by a federal district court as not a stranger in
court, having been convicted of prior offenses, but as still unfamiliar
with court procedure and not capable of representing himself adequately.
on the strength of these and other findings, the supreme court held that
where one charged with crime is by reason of age, ignorance, or mental
incapacity incapable of defending himself, even in a prosecution of a
relatively simple nature, the refusal of a state trial court to appoint
counsel at his request is a denial of due process, even though the law
of the state does not require such appointment.
[pg ]dissents were again registered in the following brace of decision which
a minority of the justices declared their inability to reconcile. in the
first, gryger v. burke,[] the court held that when one, sentenced
to life imprisonment as a fourth offender under a state habitual
criminal act, had been arrested eight times for crimes of violence,
followed by pleas of guilty or conviction, and in two of such former
trials had been represented by counsel, the state's failure to offer or
to provide counsel for him on his plea to a charge of being a fourth
offender does not render his conviction and sentence as such invalid,
even though the court may have misconstrued the statute as making a life
sentence mandatory rather than discretionary. emphasizing that there
were "no exceptional circumstances *** present," the majority asserted
that "it rather overstrains our credulity to believe that [such a
defendant would be ignorant] of his right [to request and] to engage
counsel." in the second, townsend v. burke,[] the supreme court
declared that although failure of a state court to offer or to assign
counsel to one charged with the noncapital offenses of burglary and
robbery, or to advise him of his right to counsel before accepting a
plea of guilty may not render his conviction invalid for lack of due
process, the requirement is violated when, while disadvantaged by lack
of counsel who might have corrected the court's errors, defendant is
sentenced on the basis of materially untrue assumptions concerning his
criminal record.[]
concordant as to the results reached, if not always as to the reasoning
supporting them, are the court's latest rulings. in uveges v.
pennsylvania,[] it was held that inasmuch as the record showed that a
state court did not attempt to make a -year-old youth understand the
consequences of his plea of guilty to four separate indictments
[pg ]charging burglary, for which he could be given sentences aggregating 
years, and that the youth was neither advised of his right to counsel
nor offered counsel at any time between arrest and conviction, due
process was denied him. likewise, in gibbs v. burke[] was
overturned, as contrary to due process, the conviction for larceny of a
man in his thirties who conducted his own defense, having neither
requested, nor having been offered counsel. on the authority of the
uveges case, accused's failure to request counsel, since it could be
attributed to ignorance of his right thereto, was held not to constitute
a waiver. moreover, had the accused been granted the protection of
counsel, the latter might have been able to prevent certain prejudicial
rulings; namely, the introduction without objection of considerable
hearsay testimony, the error of the trial judge in converting a
prosecution witness into a defense witness, and finally, the injection
of biased statements into the judge's comments to the jury. and of the
same general pattern is the holding in palmer v. ashe,[] another
pennsylvania case, involving a petitioner who alleged that, as a youth
and former inmate at a mental institution, he was railroaded into prison
for armed robbery without benefit of counsel, on the representation that
he was charged only with breaking and entering. reversing the state
court's denial of petitioner's application for a writ of habeas corpus,
the court remanded the case, asserting that if petitioner's allegations
were proven, he was entitled to counsel. on the other hand, it was held
in quicksall v. michigan,[] a state in which capital punishment
does not exist, that a defendant who had received a life sentence on a
plea of guilty entered without benefit of counsel, had "failed to
sustain the burden of proving such disregard of fundamental fairness
*** as alone would *** invalidate his sentence," not having
convinced the state court that he was ignorant of his right to counsel,
or that he had requested same, or that the consequences of his plea had
been misrepresented to him. also, in gallegos v. nebraska,[] in
which the petitioner had been convicted of manslaughter on a homicide
charge, a similar conclusion was reached in the face of the petitioner's
claim that the confession on the strength of which he was convicted had
been obtained from him by mistreatment, prior to the assignment of
counsel to him. said the court: "the federal constitution does not
command a state to furnish defendants counsel as a matter of course.
*** lack of counsel at state noncapital trials denies federal
constitutional protection only when the absence results in a denial to
accused of the essentials of justice."[]
[pg ]by way of summation, the court in uveges v. pennsylvania[] offered
the following comment on the conflicting views advanced by its members
on this issue of right to counsel. "some members [minority] of the court
think that where serious offenses are charged, failure of a court to
offer counsel in state criminal trials deprives an accused of rights
under the fourteenth amendment. they are convinced that the services of
counsel to protect the accused are guaranteed by the constitution in
every such instance. see bute v. illinois,  u.s. , dissent,
-. only when the accused refuses counsel with an understanding of
his rights can the court dispense with counsel.[] others of us
[majority] think that when a crime subject to capital punishment is not
involved, each case depends on its own facts. see betts v. brady,
 u.s. , . where the gravity of the crime and other
factors—such as the age and education of the defendant,[] the
conduct of the court or the prosecuting officials,[] and the
complicated nature of the offense charged and the possible defenses
thereto[]—render criminal proceedings without counsel so apt to
result in injustice as to be fundamentally unfair, the latter group
[majority] holds that the accused must have legal assistance under the
amendment whether he pleads guilty or elects to stand trial, whether he
requests counsel or not. only a waiver of counsel, understandingly made,
justifies trial without counsel. the philosophy behind both of these
views is that the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment ***
requires counsel for all persons charged with serious crimes, when
necessary for their adequate defense, in order that such persons may be
advised how to conduct their trials. the application of the rule varies
***" it would appear nevertheless that the statement quoted in the
previous paragraph from the gallegos case weakens this doctrine
somewhat. nor is the court's reply to the contention that such variation
in application "leaves the state prosecuting authorities uncertain as to
whether to offer counsel to all accused who are without adequate funds
and under serious charges," very reassuring: "we cannot offer a panacea
for the difficulty. *** the due process clause is not susceptible of
reduction to a mathematical formula."[]
[pg ]
right to trial by jury
the contention that a right to trial by a common law jury of twelve men
in criminal cases was guaranteed by amendment xiv was first rejected in
maxwell v. dow[] on the basis of hurtado v. california,[]
where it was denied that the due process clause itself incorporated all
the rules of procedural protection having their origin in english legal
history. accordingly, so long as all persons are made liable to be
proceeded against in the same manner, a state statute dispensing with
unanimity,[] or providing for a jury of eight instead of twelve, in
noncapital criminal cases[] is not unconstitutional; nor is one
eliminating employment of a jury when the defendant pleads guilty to no
less than a capital offense;[] or permitting a defendant generally to
waive trial by jury.[] in short, jury trials are no longer [pg ]viewed as
essential to due process, even in criminal cases, and may be abolished
altogether.[]
inasmuch as "the purpose of criminal procedure is not to enable the
defendant to select jurors, but to secure an impartial jury," a trial of
a murder charge by a "struck" jury, chosen in conformity with a statute
providing that the court may select from the persons qualified to serve
as jurors  names, from which the prosecutor and defendant may each
strike , and that the remainder of which shall be put in the jury box,
out of which the trial jury shall be drawn in the usual way, is not
violative of due process. such a method "is certainly a fair and
reasonable way of securing an impartial jury," which is all that the
defendant constitutionally may demand.[] likewise, the right to
challenge being the right to reject, not to select, a juror, a defendant
who is subjected at a single trial to two indictments, each charging
murder, cannot complain when the state limits the number of his
peremptory challenges to ten on each indictment instead of the twenty
customarily allowed at a trial founded upon a single indictment.[]
also, a defendant who has been convicted by a special, or "blue ribbon,"
jury cannot validly contend that he was thereby denied due process of
law.[] in ruling that the defendant had failed to sustain his
contention that such a jury was defective as to its composition, the
court conceded that "a system of exclusions could be so manipulated as
to call a jury before which defendants would have so little chance of a
decision on the evidence that it would constitute a denial of due
process" and would result in a trial which was a "sham or pretense." a
defendant is deemed entitled, however, to no more than "a neutral jury"
and "has no constitutional right to friends on the jury."[] in fact,
the due process clause does not prohibit a state from excluding from the
jury certain occupational groups such as lawyers, preachers, doctors,
dentists, and enginemen and firemen of railroad trains. such exclusions
may be justified on the ground that the continued attention to duty by
members of such occupations is beneficial to the community.[]
[pg ]
self-incrimination—forced confessions
in , in twining v. new jersey,[] the court ruled that neither
the historical meaning nor the current definition of the due process
clause of the fourteenth amendment included protection against
self-incrimination, which was viewed as unworthy of being rated "an
immutable principle of justice" or as a "fundamental right." the fifth
amendment embodying this privilege was held to operate to restrain only
the federal government; whereas the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment was deemed to permit a state even to go so far as to
substitute the criminal procedure of the civil law, in which the
privilege against self-incrimination is unknown, for that of the common
law. accordingly, new jersey was within her rights in permitting a trial
judge, in a criminal proceeding, to instruct a jury that they might draw
an unfavorable inference from the failure of a defendant to comment on
the prosecutor's evidence.
[pg ]apart from a recent ineffectual effort of a minority of the justices to
challenge the interpretation thus placed upon the due process clause of
the fourteenth amendment, the court has yet to register any departure
from its ruling in twining v. new jersey.[] in two subsequent
opinions the court reasserted obiter that "the privilege against
self-incrimination may be withdrawn and the accused put upon the stand
as a witness for the state." no "principle of justice so rooted in the
traditions and conscience of our people as to be ranked as
fundamental"[] is violated by abolition of such privilege; nor is its
complete destruction likely to outrage students of our penal system,
many of whom "look upon *** [this] immunity as a mischief rather than
a benefit, ***"[]
in subsequently disposing of similarly challenged state criminal
proceedings, the court has applied almost exclusively the fair trial
doctrine. with only casual consideration of the intention of the framers
of the fourteenth amendment, or of the rejected proposition that the due
process clause thereof had imposed upon the states all the restraints
which the bill of rights had imposed upon the federal government, the
court has simply endeavored to ascertain whether the accused enjoyed all
the privileges essential to a fair trial. thus, without even admitting
that the privilege against self-incrimination was involved, all the
justices agreed, in brown v. mississippi,[] that the use of a
confession extorted by brutality and violence (undenied strangulation
and whipping by the sheriff aided by a mob) was a denial of due process,
even though coercion was not established until after the confession had
been admitted in evidence and defense counsel did not thereafter move
for its exclusion. although compulsory processes of justice may be used
to call the accused as a witness and to require him to testify,
"compulsion by torture to extort a confession is a different matter.
*** the rack and torture chamber may not be substituted for the
witness stand."[] again, in chambers v. florida[] the court,
with no mention of the privilege against self-incrimination, proclaimed
that due process is denied when convictions of murder are obtained in
state courts by the use of confessions extorted under the following
conditions: dragnet methods of arrest on [pg ]suspicion without warrant and
protracted questioning (on the last day, from noon until sunset) in a
fourth floor jail where the prisoners were without friends or
counselors, and under circumstances calculated to break the strongest
nerves and stoutest resistance. affirming that the supreme court is not
concluded by the finding of a jury in a state court that a confession in
a murder trial was voluntary, but determines that question for itself
from the evidence, the justices unanimously declared that the
constitution proscribes lawless means irrespective of the end, and
rejected the argument that the thumbscrew, the wheel, solitary
confinement, protracted questioning, and other ingenious means of
entrapment are necessary to uphold our laws.[] procuring a conviction
for a capital crime by use of a confession extracted by protracted
interrogation conducted in a similar manner was, on the authority of
chambers v. florida, condemned in white v. texas;[] and in
lisenba v. california,[] a case rendered inconclusive by
conflicting testimony, the court remarked, by way of dictum, that "the
concept of due process would void a trial in which, by threats or
promises in the presence of court and jury, a defendant was induced to
testify against himself," or in which a confession is used which is
"procured *** by fraud, collusion, trickery and subornation or
perjury."
in conformity with these rulings, the court, in ward v. texas,[]
set aside a conviction based upon a confession obtained, by methods of
coercion and duress, from a defendant who had been arrested illegally,
without warrant, by the sheriff of another county, and removed to a
county more than a hundred miles away, and who for three days, while
being driven from county to county, was questioned continuously by
various officers and falsely informed by them of threats of mob
violence. similarly, in ashcraft v. tennessee,[] the use in a state
court of a confession obtained near the end of a -hour period of
practically continuous questioning, under powerful electric lights, by
relays of officers, experienced investigators, and highly trained
lawyers was held to be violative of constitutional right by [pg ]reason of
the inherently coercive character of such interrogation. justice
jackson, joined by justices frankfurter and roberts, dissented on the
ground that the accused not only denied that the protracted questioning
"had the effect of forcing an involuntary confession from him" but that
he had ever confessed at all, a contention which reputable witnesses
contradicted. referring to justice holmes's warning against "the ever
increasing scope given to the fourteenth amendment in cutting down ***
the constitutional rights of the states."[] justice jackson protested
that "interrogation per se is not, ***, an outlaw"; and that
inasmuch as all questioning is "'inherently coercive' ***, the
ultimate question *** [must be] whether the confessor was in
possession of his own will and self-control at the time of [his]
confession."[]
this dissent was not without effect. in june , in lyons v.
oklahoma,[] the court finally handed down a ruling calculated
definitely to arrest the suspicion that had been developing that the use
of any confession made after arrest would render a trial
constitutionally defective. here, six justices refused to overturn a
holding of the oklahoma criminal court of appeals which labelled as
voluntary and usable a second confession obtained by other than coercive
means within twelve hours after the defendant had made a confession
admittedly under duress. the vice of coerced confessions, these justices
asserted, was that they offended "basic standards of justice, not
because the victim had a legal grievance against the police, but because
declarations procured by torture are not premises from which a civilized
forum will infer guilt."[] in malinski v. new york,[] however,
although in the opinion of four justices there was conflicting evidence
as to the involuntary character of the confessions used, the court
nevertheless overturned a conviction sustained by new york
tribunals.[] without finding it necessary to determine whether
succeeding oral and written confessions were the product of the coercion
"admittedly" applied in extracting an initial oral confession,[] the
court held that, even though other evidence might have sufficed to
convict the accused and notwithstanding the fact that the initial oral
confession was never put in evidence, the repeated indirect reference to
its content at the trial plus the failure to warn the jury not to
consider it as evidence[] invalidated the proceeding giving rise to
the verdict.[]
[pg ]of the remaining cases involving the issue of self-incrimination,
adamson v. california[] is especially significant because it
represents the high water mark of dissent in support of the contention
that the bill of rights, originally operative only against the federal
government, became limitations on state action by virtue of their
inclusion within the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment.
here, the court, speaking through justice reed, declared that the
california law which provides that if an accused elects to take the
witness stand and testify, he must then be prepared to undergo
impeachment of his testimony, through disclosure of his previous
convictions, and which [pg ]also permits him to avoid such disclosure by
remaining silent, subject to comment on his failure to testify by the
court and prosecuting counsel, does not involve such a denial of due
process as to invalidate a conviction in a state court. inasmuch as
california law "does not involve any presumption, rebuttable or
irrebuttable, either of guilt or of the truth of any fact," and does not
alter the burden of proof, which rests upon the state, nor the
presumption of innocence in favor of the accused, it does not prevent
the accused from enjoying a fair trial, which is all that the due
process clause of the fourteenth amendment guarantees. relying upon
twining v. new jersey[] and palko v. connecticut,[] the court
reiterated that the "due process clause of the fourteenth amendment,
however, does not draw all the rights of the federal bill of rights
under its protection."[]
in a concurring opinion concerning the scope of the protection afforded
by this clause of the fourteenth amendment, justice frankfurter
contended that further argument thereon is foreclosed by twining v.
new jersey, a precedent, on which he commented as follows: "decisions of
this court do not have equal intrinsic authority. the twining case
shows the judicial process at its best—comprehensive briefs and
powerful arguments on both sides, followed by long deliberation,
resulting in an opinion by mr. justice moody which at once gained and
has ever since retained recognition as one of the outstanding opinions
in the history of the court. after enjoying unquestioned prestige for
forty years, the twining case should not now be diluted, even
unwittingly, either in its judicial philosophy or in its particulars. as
the surest way of keeping the twining case intact, i would affirm this
case on its authority."
in dismissing as historically untenable the position adopted by justice
black, justice frankfurter further declared that: "the notion that the
fourteenth amendment was a covert way of imposing upon the states all
the rules which it seemed important to eighteenth century statesmen to
write into the federal amendments, was rejected by judges who were
themselves witnesses of the process by which the fourteenth amendment
became part of the constitution. arguments that may now be adduced to
prove that the first eight amendments were concealed within the historic
phrasing of the fourteenth amendment were not unknown at the time of its
adoption. a surer estimate of their bearing was possible for judges at
the time than distorting distance is likely to vouchsafe. any evidence
of design or purpose not contemporaneously known could hardly have
influenced those who ratified the amendment. remarks of a particular
proponent of the amendment, no matter how influential, are not [pg ]to be
deemed part of the amendment. what was submitted for ratification was
his proposal, not his speech. *** the due process clause of the
fourteenth amendment has an independent potency, precisely as does the
due process clause of the fifth amendment in relation to the federal
government. it ought not to require argument to reject the notion that
due process of law meant one thing in the fifth amendment and another in
the fourteenth. the fifth amendment specifically prohibits prosecution
of an 'infamous crime' except upon indictment; it forbids double
jeopardy; it bars compelling a person to be a witness against himself in
any criminal case; it precludes deprivation of 'life, liberty, or
property, without due process of law ***' are madison and his
contemporaries in the framing of the bill of rights to be charged with
writing into it a meaningless clause? to consider 'due process of law'
as merely a shorthand statement of other specific clauses in the same
amendment is to attribute to the authors and proponents of this
amendment ignorance of, or indifference to, a historic conception which
was one of the great instruments in the arsenal of constitutional
freedom which the bill of rights was to protect and strengthen." warning
that "a construction which *** makes of" the due process clause of the
fourteenth amendment "a summary of specific provisions of the bill of
rights would, ***, tear up by the roots much of the fabric of the law
in the several states," justice frankfurter, in conclusion, offers his
own appraisal of this clause. to him, the due process clause "expresses
a demand for civilized standards of law, [and] it is thus not a stagnant
formulation of what has been achieved in the past but a standard for
judgment in the progressive evolution of the institutions of a free
society." accordingly "judicial judgment in applying the due process
clause must move within the limits of accepted notions of justice and
*** [should] not be based upon the idiosyncrasies of a merely personal
judgment. *** an important safeguard against such merely individual
judgment is an alert deference to the judgment of the state court under
review."[]
in dissenting justice black, who was supported by justice douglas,
attached to his opinion "an appendix which contains *** [his] resume,
***, of the amendment's history." it is his judgment "that history
conclusively demonstrates that the language of the first section of the
fourteenth amendment, taken as a whole, was thought by those responsible
for its submission to the people, and by those who opposed its
submission, sufficiently explicit to guarantee that thereafter no state
could deprive its citizens of the privileges and protections of the bill
of rights." a majority of the court, he acknowledges resignedly, has
declined, however, "to appraise the relevant historical evidence of the
intended scope of the first section of the [pg ]amendment." in the instant
case, the majority opinion, according to justice black, "reasserts a
constitutional theory spelled out in twining v. new jersey, *** that
this court is endowed by the constitution with boundless power under
'natural law' periodically to expand and contract constitutional
standards to conform to the court's conception of what at a particular
time constitutes 'civilized decency' and 'fundamental liberty and
justice.' *** [this] 'natural law' formula, [he further contends]
*** should be abandoned as an incongruous excrescence on our
constitution. *** [the] formula [is] itself a violation of our
constitution, in that it subtly conveys to courts, at the expense of
legislatures, ultimate power over public policies in fields where no
specific provision of the constitution limits legislative power." in
conclusion, justice black expresses his fears as to "the consequences of
the court's practice of substituting its own concepts of decency and
fundamental justice for the language of the bill of rights ***"[]
in all but one of the remaining cases, the court sided with the accused
and supported his contention that the confession on which his conviction
was based had been procured by methods contrary to the requirements of
due process. the conviction of murder of a negro boy of fifteen was
reversed by five justices in haley v. ohio[] on the ground that his
confession, which contributed to the verdict, was involuntary, having
been obtained by the police after several hours of questioning
immediately after the boy was arrested, during which interval the youth
was without friends or legal counsel. after having had his confession
reduced to writing, the boy continued to be held incommunicado for
three days before being arraigned. "the age of petitioner, the
[midnight] hours when he was grilled, the duration of his quizzing, the
fact that he had no friend or counsel to advise him, [pg ]the callous
attitude of the police towards his rights combine to convince us," the
court declared, "that this was a confession wrung from a child by means
which the law should not sanction."[] the application of duress being
indisputed, a unanimous court, in lee v. mississippi,[] citing as
authority all the preceding cases beginning with brown v. mississippi,
held that "a conviction resulting from such use of a coerced confession,
however, is no less void because the accused testified at some point in
the proceeding that he had never in fact confessed, voluntarily or
involuntarily. ***, inconsistent testimony as to the confession ***
cannot preclude the accused from raising *** the issue *** [that]
the fourteenth amendment *** [voids a] conviction grounded *** upon
a confession which is the product of other than reasoned and voluntary
choice." in taylor v. alabama,[] however, a majority of the
justices sustained the denial by a state appellate court, in which a
conviction had been affirmed, of leave to file in a trial court a
petition for a writ of error coram nobis grounded upon the contention
that confessions and admissions introduced into evidence at the trial
had been obtained by coercion.[] five justices declared that such
denial was not such arbitrary action as in itself to amount to a
deprivation of due process of law where the circumstances tended to show
that the petitioner's allegations of mistreatment, none of which were
submitted during the trial or the appeal,[] were highly
improbable.[]
[pg ]finally, in three decisions rendered on june , , the court
reversed three convictions of murder on the ground that they had been
founded entirely upon coerced confessions. the defendant in the first
case, watts v. indiana,[] was held without arraignment, without the
aid of counsel or friends, and without advice as to his constitutional
rights from wednesday until the following friday, when he confessed.
during this interval, he was held much of the time in solitary
confinement in a cell with no place to sit or sleep except the floor,
and was subjected to interrogation daily, sunday excepted, by relays of
police officers for periods ranging in duration from three to nine and
one-half hours. his incarceration without a prompt preliminary hearing
also was a violation of indiana law. similarly in conflict with state
law was the arrest without warrant and detention without arraignment for
five days of the accused in turner v. pennsylvania,[] the second
case. during this period, turner was not permitted to see friends,
relatives, or counsel, was never informed of his right to remain silent,
and was interrogated daily, though for briefer intervals than in the
preceding case. at his trial, the prosecuting attorney "admitted that a
hearing was withheld until interrogation had produced a confession." in
the third and last case of this group, harris v. south carolina,[]
the defendant, an illiterate negro, was apprehended in tennessee on a
friday on a warrant alleging no more than a theft of a pistol, and taken
to south carolina on a sunday. without being informed of the contents of
the warrant or of the charge of murder on which he was being held,
without arraignment or advice as to his rights and without access to
family or counsel, the defendant was questioned daily by officers for
periods as long as  hours. in addition, he was warned that his mother
also might be arrested for handling stolen property.
in each of these cases there was dissent, and in none was the majority
able to record its views in a single opinion. justice murphy and justice
rutledge joined justice frankfurter, who filed a separate opinion in all
three cases, in declaring that "a confession by which life becomes
forfeit must be the expression of free choice. *** when a suspect
speaks because he is overborne, it is immaterial whether he has been
subjected to a physical or a mental ordeal. *** if *** [his
confession] is the product of sustained pressure by the police it does
not issue from a free choice."[] on the [pg ]authority of chambers v.
florida[] and ashcraft v. tennessee,[] justice black supported
the judgments reached in all three cases; but justice douglas, in
concurring, advocated the disposition of these cases in conformity with
a broader rule; namely that, "any confession obtained during *** [a]
period of *** unlawful detention"; that is during a period of custody
between arrest and arraignment, should be outlawed.[] justice
jackson, who wrote an opinion applicable to all three cases, concurred
in the result in watts v. indiana, presumably on the basis of that
part of justice frankfurter's opinion therein which was founded "on the
state's admissions as to the treatment of watts."[] emphasizing the
merit of deferring to the findings of trial court and jury on the issue
of the "voluntariness" of confessions on the ground that they have "the
great advantage of hearing and seeing the confessor and also the
officers whose conduct and bearing toward him is in question," justice
jackson dissented in turner v. pennsylvania[] and harris v. south
carolina.[] "if the right of interrogation be admitted," he declared,
"then *** we must leave it to trial judges and juries and state
appellate courts to decide individual cases, unless they show some want
of proper standards of decision."[] without explanatory opinion,
chief justice vinson and justices burton and reed dissented in all three
cases.
unreasonable searches and seizures
in national safe deposit co. v. stead,[] decided in , the court
unequivocally declared that an unreasonable search and seizure committed
by state and local officers presented no federal question, inasmuch as
the fourth amendment does not apply to the states. prior to that date,
the court has passed upon this question obliquely in only a few
decisions,[] in one of which it conceded for the sake of argument,
but without so deciding, that the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment embraces in its generic terms a prohibition against
unreasonable searches. in two of these earlier cases the court sustained
as consistent with due process the power of a state, [pg ]in investigating
the conduct of corporations doing business within its limits, to demand
the production of corporate books and papers. the call for such papers
was deemed not to have been rendered unreasonable because, at the time
of the demand therefor, the corporation affected either temporarily or
permanently kept such documents in another jurisdiction. nor was the
validity of the order to produce such materials viewed as having been
impaired by the fact that it sought to elicit proof not only as to the
liability of the corporation but also, evidence in its possession
relevant to its defense.
in its most recent opportunity to review the question whether the due
process clause of the fourteenth amendment precludes admission in a
state court of relevant evidence obtained by an unreasonable search and
seizure,[] the court apparently ruled in the negative; but justice
frankfurter, speaking for the majority, did not limit himself to a
repetition of the conclusions stated by him in adamson v.
california;[] namely, that the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment did not incorporate the first eight amendments of the
constitution, and, conformably to palko v. connecticut,[] exacts no
more from a state than is "implicit in 'the concept of ordered
liberty.'" he also proclaimed that: "the security of one's privacy
against arbitrary intrusion by the police—which is at the core of the
fourth amendment—is basic to a free society. it is therefore implicit
in 'the concept of ordered liberty' and as such enforceable against the
states through the due process clause."[] such language appears to
effect the very absorption into the fourteenth amendment which justice
frankfurter rejects in the adamson case; but he concluded by adding that
as long as "a state [does not] affirmatively *** sanction ***
[arbitrary] police incursion into privacy"; that is, as long as its
police are deterred from making searches without authority of law by
virtue of such internal discipline as an alert public opinion may induce
and by reason of the statutory or common law remedies which the victims
of such illegal searches may invoke, a state, without running counter to
the due process clause, may employ at a trial incriminating evidence
obtained by unlawful search and seizure. the fact that most of the
english-speaking world, including  states and the british commonwealth
of nations, does not regard the exclusion of evidence thus obtained, as
vital to the protection of the right of privacy is interpreted by the
justice as lending abundant support to the merit of his position.[]
[pg ]without departing from his previously adopted position which he
restated in his dissenting opinion in adamson v. california;[]
namely, that the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment embraces
the fourth amendment's prohibition of unreasonable searches and
seizures, justice black concurred in the result on the ground that the
exclusionary rule, whereby evidence procured in an illegal search and
seizure is not admissible in a federal court, is "not a command of the
fourth amendment but is a judicially created rule of evidence which
congress might negate."[] justices douglas, murphy, and rutledge, in
separate dissenting opinions, all declared that the fourth amendment was
applicable to the states and that "evidence obtained in violation of it
must be excluded in state prosecutions as well as in federal
prosecutions, ***."[] attacking justice frankfurter's method of
approach, justice murphy declared that the court should not "decide due
process questions by simply taking a poll of the rules in various
jurisdictions, ***" and agreed with justice rutledge that unless
illegally obtained evidence is excluded, no effective sanction "exists
to deter violations of the search and seizure clause."
in two recent cases, both argued the same day, a nearly unanimous court
reached opposite results.[] in the first the outcome of the wolf case
was repeated. the court, speaking by justice frankfurter, refused to
enjoin the use, in state criminal proceedings against them in new jersey
of evidences claimed to have been obtained by unlawful search by state
police. said justice frankfurter, [pg ]"if we were to sanction this
intervention, we would expose every state criminal prosecution to
insupportable disruption. every question of procedural due process of
law—with its far flung and undefined range—would invite a flanking
movement against the system of state courts by resort to the federal
forum ***"[] the facts in the second case were as follows: state
officers, on the basis of "some information" that petitioner was selling
narcotics, entered his home and forced their way into his wife's
bedroom. when asked about two capsules lying on a bedroom table,
petitioner put them into his mouth and swallowed them. he was then taken
to a hospital, where an emetic was forced into his stomach with the
result that he vomited them up. later they were offered in evidence
against him. again justice frankfurter spoke for the court, while
reiterating his preachments regarding the tolerance claimable by the
states under the fourteenth amendment[] he held that methods
offensive to human dignity were ruled out by the due process
clause.[] justices black and douglas concurred in opinions in which
they seized the opportunity to reiterate once more their position in
adamson v. california.[]
conviction based on perjured testimony
when a conviction is obtained by the presentation of testimony known to
the prosecuting authorities to have been perjured, the constitutional
requirement of due process is not satisfied. that requirement "cannot be
deemed to be satisfied by mere notice and hearing if a state has
contrived a conviction through the pretense of a trial which in truth is
but used as a means of depriving a defendant of liberty through a
deliberate deception of court and jury by the presentation of testimony
known to be perjured. such a contrivance *** is as inconsistent with
the rudimentary demands of justice as is the obtaining of a like result
by intimidation."[] this principle, as originally announced, was no
more than a dictum uttered by the court in disposing of tom mooney's
application for a writ of habeas corpus, filed almost eighteen years
after his conviction, and founded upon the contention that the verdict
of his guilt was made possible solely by perjured testimony knowingly
employed by the prosecutor who "deliberately suppressed evidence which
would have impeached and refuted the testimony thus given against
him."[]
[pg ]on the authority of the preceding case, and without qualification, the
court subsequently applied this principle in hysler v. florida,[]
pyle v. kansas[] and white v. ragen.[] in the first case, the
supreme court concurred in the judgment of the florida appellate court
denying a petition for leave to apply to a trial court for a writ of
coram nobis. supporting the petition filed by hysler, the accused,
were affidavits signed by one of two codefendants on the eve of his
execution for participation in the same crime and stating that the two
codefendants had testified falsely against hysler because they had been
"'coerced, intimidated, beaten, threatened with violence and otherwise
abused and mistreated' by the police and were 'promised immunity from
the electric chair' by the district attorney." having made "an
independent examination of the affidavits upon which *** [hysler's]
claim was based," a majority of the justices concluded that the florida
appellate court's finding that hysler's proof was insubstantial and did
not make out a prima facie case was justified. "that in the course of
*** years witnesses die or disappear, that memories fade, that a sense
of responsibility may become attenuated, that [recantation] *** on the
eve of execution *** [is] not unfamiliar as a means of relieving
others or as an irrational hope for self *** are relevant" to the
determination by the florida court that "such a belated disclosure" did
not spring "from the impulse for truth-telling" and was "the product of
self-delusion *** [and] artifice prompted by the instinct of
self-preservation."[]
[pg ]relying largely on the failure of the state to answer allegations in a
prisoner's application for a write of habeas corpus, which application
recited that persons named in supporting affidavits and documents were
coerced to testify falsely, and that testimony of certain other persons
material to the prisoner's defense was suppressed under threat and
coercion by the state, the court, in pyle v. kansas[] reversed the
kansas court's refusal to issue the writ. inasmuch as the record of the
prisoner's conviction did "not controvert the charges that perjured
evidence was used, and that favorable evidence was suppressed with the
knowledge" of the authorities, the case was remanded in order that the
prisoner might enjoy that to which he was entitled; namely, a
determination of the verity of his allegations. similarly, in white v.
ragen,[] the court declared that since a prisoner's petition to a
state court for release on habeas corpus had been dismissed without
requiring the state to answer allegations supporting the petition;
namely, that the conviction was obtained by the use of false testimony
procured by bribery of two witnesses by the prosecutor, must be assumed
to be true. accordingly, the petitioner's contentions were deemed
sufficient to make out a prima facie case of violation of
constitutional rights and adequate to entitle him to invoke corrective
process in a state court.
confrontation; presence of the accused; public trial
on the issue whether the privileges of presence, confrontation and
cross-examination face to face, assured to a defendant in a federal
trial by the sixth amendment, are also guaranteed in state criminal
proceedings, the court thus far has been unable to formulate an enduring
and unequivocal answer. at times it has intimated, as in the following
utterance, that the enjoyment of all these privileges is essential to
due process. "the personal presence of the accused, from the beginning
to the end of a trial for felony, involving life or liberty, as well as
at the time final judgment is rendered against him, may be, and must be
assumed to be, vital to the proper conduct of his defence, and cannot be
dispensed with."[] notwithstanding this early assumption, [pg ]the
supreme court, fourteen years later, sustained a kentucky court which
approved the questioning, in the absence of the accused and his counsel,
of a juror whose discharge before he was sworn had been demanded.[]
inasmuch as no injury to substantial rights of the defendant was deemed
to have been inflicted by his occasional absence during a trial, no
denial of due process was declared to have resulted from the acceptance
by the state court of the defendant's waiver of his right to be present.
in harmony with the latter case is felts v. murphy,[] which
contains additional evidence of an increasing inclination on the part of
the court to treat as not fundamental the rights of presence,
confrontation, and cross-examination face to face. the defendant in
felts v. murphy proved to be so deaf that he was unable to hear any of
the testimony of witnesses, and had never had the evidence repeated to
him. while regretting that the trial court has not had the testimony
read or repeated to the accused, the supreme court held that a deaf
person is not deprived of due process of law because he had not heard a
word of the evidence. it also did not overlook the fact the defendant
"made no objection, asked for nothing, and permitted his counsel to take
his own course."
that the presence of the accused may be dispensed with at various stages
of criminal proceedings was further conceded by the court in frank v.
mangum,[] wherein it held that the presence of the defendant when the
verdict is rendered is not essential, and, accordingly, that a rule of
practice allowing the accused to waive it and which bound him by that
waiver did not effect any unconstitutional deprivation. enumerating many
departures from common law procedure respecting jury trials, including
provisions waiving the presence of an accused during portions of a
trial, the court emphasized that none of these changes had been
construed as conflicting with the fourteenth amendment. more recently,
the court, sustained, by only a five-to-four vote, however, a conviction
for murder where the trial court rejected the defendant's request that
he be present at a view of the scene of the murder to which the jury had
been taken.[] acknowledging that it had never squarely held, though
it now assumed, that "the privilege to confront one's accusers and
cross-examine them face to face" in state court prosecutions "is
reinforced by the fourteenth amendment," the majority devised the
following standard for [pg ]disposing of similar cases in the future. "in a
prosecution for a felony," five justices declared, "the defendant has
the privilege under the fourteenth amendment to be present in his own
person whenever his presence has a relation, reasonably substantial, to
the fulness of his opportunity to defend against the charge. *** the
fourteenth amendment does not assume to a defendant the privilege to be
present [when] *** presence would be useless, or the benefit but a
shadow. *** the presence of a defendant is a condition of due process
to the extent that a fair and just hearing would be thwarted by his
absence, and to that extent only." employing this standard of appraisal,
the majority therefore concluded that no harm or damage had been done to
the accused by reason of his failure to be present when the jury viewed
the site of the murder.[]
to what extent, consistently with due process, states may authorize the
conduct, after conviction and sentence, of nonadversary proceedings from
which the accused has been excluded and denied the privilege of
confrontation and cross-examination, has been examined by the court in
two recent cases. in williams v. new york,[] the supreme court
rejected the contention that the due process clause requires that a
person convicted of murder be permitted to cross-examine probation
officers as to his prior criminal record when the trial judge, in the
exercise of discretion vested in him by law, considers such information,
obtained outside the courtroom, in determining whether to abide by a
jury's recommendation of life imprisonment or to impose a death
sentence. emphasizing the distinction between evidentiary rules
applicable to the conduct of criminal trials, which are confined to the
narrow issue of guilt, and sentencing procedures which pertain to the
determination of the type and extent of punishment after the issue of
guilt has been decided, the court disposed of the petitioner's appeal by
declaring that, "modern concepts individualizing punishment have made it
all the more necessary that a [pg ]sentencing judge not be denied an
opportunity to obtain pertinent information by a requirement of rigid
adherence to restrictive rules of evidence properly applicable to the
trial."[] by a similar process of reasoning, in solesbee v.
balkcom,[] the court sustained a georgia statutory procedure granting
the governor discretionary authority, with the aid of physicians
appointed by himself, to determine, without opportunity for an adversary
hearing or for judicial review, whether a condemned convict has become
insane and, if so, whether he should be committed to an insane asylum.
likening the function thus vested in the governor to the power of
executive clemency, the supreme court reiterated that "trial procedure
safeguards are not applicable to the process of sentencing," and
concluded with the observation that the georgia procedure is amply
supported by "the universal common-law principle that upon a suggestion
of insanity after sentence, the tribunal charged with responsibility
must be vested with broad discretion in deciding whether evidence shall
be heard. *** the heart of the common-law doctrine has been that a
suggestion of insanity after sentence is an appeal to the conscience and
sound wisdom of the particular tribunal which is asked to postpone
sentence."[]
when employed in the conduct of the trial, however, summary procedures
such as those examined in the preceding two decisions invariably elicit
judicial condemnation. thus, when a michigan judge proceeding as a
one-man grand jury concluded that a witness had given false and evasive
testimony, not on the basis of anything inherent in the testimony
itself, but at least in part upon its inconsistency with other testimony
given by a preceding witness, and immediately thereupon suspended his
investigation, and committed the witness to jail for contempt, such
summary commitment, in the absence of a showing that it was necessary to
prevent demoralization of the judge's authority, was held to constitute
a denial of due process. the guaranty of that clause forbids the
sentencing of an accused person to prison without a public trial; that
is, without a day in court, reasonable notice of the charges, and an
opportunity to be heard in one's defense [pg ]by cross-examining other
witnesses, or by summoning witnesses to refute the charges against
him.[]
on the other hand, when the alleged contempt is committed, not within
the confines of a secret grand jury proceeding, but in open court, is
readily observable by the presiding judge, and constitutes an open and
immediate threat to orderly judicial procedure and to the court's
authority, the offended tribunal is constitutionally empowered summarily
to punish without notice, testimony, or hearing. thus in fisher v.
pace,[] albeit with the concurrence of only five justices, the court
sustained a texas court's conviction for contempt, with progressive
increase of penalty from a $ to $ to $ fine plus three days in
jail, of a trial attorney who, despite judicial admonition, persisted in
conveying to the jury, in a workmen's compensation case, information not
for their consideration. conceding that "there must be adequate facts to
support an order for contempt," the majority declared that the texas
appellate court's finding in the affirmative, after evaluation of the
facts, should not be overturned inasmuch as the supreme court, in
examining the transcript of the record, could not derive therefrom an
adequate picture of the courtroom scene nor discern therein "such
elements of misbehavior as expression, manner of speaking, bearing, and
attitude of *** [the attorney]." the fact that the bench was guilty of
"mildly provocative language" was deemed insufficient to excuse the
conduct of the attorney.[]
[pg ]
trial by impartial tribunal
inasmuch as due process implies a tribunal both impartial and mentally
competent to afford a hearing, it follows that the subjection of a
defendant's liberty or property to the decision of a court, the judge of
which has a direct, personal, substantial pecuniary interest in
rendering a verdict against him, is violative of the fourteenth
amendment.[] compensating an inferior judge for his services only
when he convicts a defendant may have been a practice of long-standing,
but such a system of remuneration, the court declared, never became "so
embedded by custom in the general practice either at common law or in
this country that it can be regarded as due process of law. ***"[]
however, a conviction before a mayor's court does not become
constitutionally defective by reason of the fact that the fixed salary
of the mayor is paid out of the fund to which the fines imposed by him
contribute.[]
obviously, the attribute of impartiality is lacking whenever the judge
and jury are dominated by a mob. "if the jury is intimidated and the
trial judge yields, and so that there is an actual interference with the
course of justice, there is, in that court, a departure from due process
of law. ***"[] but "if *** the whole proceeding is a mask—***
[if the] counsel, jury and judge *** [are] swept to the fatal end by
an irresistible wave of public passion, and *** [if] the state courts
failed to correct the wrong, neither perfection in the machinery for
correction nor the possibility that the trial court and counsel saw no
other way of avoiding an immediate outbreak of the mob can prevent"
intervention by the supreme court to secure the constitutional rights of
the defendant.[]
insofar as a criminal trial proceeds with a jury, it is part of the
american tradition to contemplate not only an impartial jury but one
drawn from a cross-section of the community. this has been construed as
requiring that prospective jurors be selected by court officials without
systematic and intentional exclusion of any group, even though it is not
necessary that every jury contain representatives of all the economic,
social, religious, racial, political, and geographical groups of the
community.[]
[pg ]
other attributes of a fair trial
"due process of law," the supreme court has observed, "requires that the
proceedings shall be fair, but fairness is a relative, not an absolute
concept. *** what is fair in one set of circumstances may be an act of
tyranny in others."[] conversely, "as applied to a criminal trial,
denial of due process is the failure to observe that fundamental
fairness essential to the very concept of justice. in order to declare a
denial of it *** [the court] must find that the absence of that
fairness fatally infected the trial; the acts complained of must be of
such quality as necessarily prevents a fair trial."[] and on another
occasion the court remarked that "the due process clause," as applied in
criminal trials "requires that action by a state through any of its
agencies must be consistent with the fundamental principles of liberty
and justice which lie at the base of our civil and political
institutions, [and] which not infrequently are designated as 'the law of
the land.'"[]
basic to the very idea of free government and among the immutable
principles of justice which no state of the union may disregard is the
necessity of due "notice of the charge and an adequate opportunity to be
heard in defense of it."[] consequently, when a state appellate court
affirms a conviction on the ground that the information charged, and the
evidence showed a violation of sec.  of a penal law of the state,
notwithstanding that the language of the information and the
construction placed upon it at the trial clearly show that an offense
under sec.  of such law was charged, that the trial judge's
instructions to the jury were based on sec. , and that on the whole
case it was clear that the trial and conviction in the lower court were
for the violation of sec. , not sec. , such appellate court in effect
is convicting the accused of a charge on which he was never tried, which
is as much a violation of due process as a conviction upon a charge that
was never made.[] on the other hand, a prisoner who, after having
been indicted on a charge of receiving stolen goods, abides by the
prosecutor's suggestion and pleads guilty to the lesser offense of
attempted second degree grand larceny, cannot later contend that a
judgment of guilty of the latter offense was lacking in due process in
that it amounted to a conviction of a crime for which he had never been
indicted. in view of the "close kinship between the offense of larceny
and that of receiving stolen property ***, when related to the same
stolen goods, the two crimes may fairly be said 'to be connected with
the same transaction.'" it would be therefore, the court concluded, "an
exaltation of technical precision to an [pg ]unwarranted degree to say that
the indictment here did not inform the petitioner that he was charged
with the substantial elements of the crime of larceny." under these
circumstances he must be deemed to have been given "reasonable notice
and information of the specific charge against him and a fair hearing in
open court."[]
excessive bail, cruel and unusual punishment, sentence
the commitment to prison of a person convicted of crime, without giving
him an opportunity pending an appeal, to furnish bail, does not violate
the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment.[] likewise, a
state, notwithstanding the limitations of that clause, retains a wide
discretion in prescribing penalties for violation of its laws.
accordingly, a sentence of fourteen years' imprisonment for the crime of
perjury has not been viewed as excessive nor as effecting any
unconstitutional deprivation of the defendant's liberty;[] nor has
the imposition of successively heavier penalties upon "repeaters" been
considered as partaking of a "cruel and unusual punishment."[]
[pg ]in an older decision, ex parte kemmler,[] rendered in , the
supreme court rejected the suggestion that the substance of the eighth
amendment had been incorporated into the due process clause of the
fourteenth amendment, but did intimate that the latter clause would
invalidate punishments which would involve "torture or a lingering
death," such "as burning at the stake, crucifixion, breaking on the
wheel, and the like." holding that the infliction of the death penalty
by electrocution was comparable to none of the latter, the court refused
to interfere with the judgment of the state legislature that such a
method of executing the judgment of a court was humane. more recently,
in louisiana ex rel. francis v. resweber,[] five members of the
court reached a similar conclusion as to the restraining effect of the
due process clause of the fourteenth amendment when, assuming, "but
without so deciding" that violations of the eighth amendment as to cruel
and unusual punishments would also be violative of that clause, they
upheld a subsequent proceeding to execute a sentence of death by
electrocution after an accidental failure of equipment had rendered an
initial attempt unsuccessful.[]
[pg ]
double jeopardy
in none of the pertinent cases considered prior to  was the supreme
court able to discern the existence of any factual situation amounting
to double jeopardy, and accordingly it was never confronted with the
necessity of determining whether the guarantee that no person be put
twice in jeopardy of life or limb, expressed in the fifth amendment as a
limitation against the federal government, had been absorbed in the due
process clause of the fourteenth amendment. thus, in dreyer v.
illinois,[] after declaring that a retrial after discharge of a hung
jury did not subject a defendant to double jeopardy, the court concluded
as follows: if "*** what was said in united states v. perez [(
wheat.  ()) embracing a similar set of facts], *** is adverse
to the contention of the accused that he was put twice in jeopardy,"
then "we need not now express an opinion" as to whether the fourteenth
amendment embraces the guarantee against double jeopardy. similarly, in
murphy v. massachusetts[] and shoener v. pennsylvania[] the
court held that where the original conviction of the prisoner was, on
appeal, construed by the state tribunal to be legally defective and
therefore a nullity, a subsequent trial, conviction, and sentence of the
accused deprived him of no constitutional right, notwithstanding the
fact that under the invalidated original conviction, the defendant had
spent time in prison. in both instances the court found it unnecessary
to discuss "any question of a federal nature." with like dispatch, "the
propriety of inflicting severer punishment upon old offenders" was
sustained on the ground that they were not being "punished *** [a]
second time for the earlier offense, but [that] the repetition of
criminal conduct aggravates their guilt and justifies heavier penalties
when they are again convicted."[]
[pg ]in palko v. connecticut,[] however, the court appeared to have
been presented with issues, the disposition of which would preclude
further avoidance of a decision as to whether the double jeopardy
provision of the fifth amendment had become operable as a restraint upon
the states by reason of its incorporation into the due process clause of
the fourteenth amendment. by the terms of the connecticut statute at
issue, the state was privileged to appeal any question of law arising
out of a criminal prosecution, and did appeal a conviction of second
degree murder and sentence to life imprisonment of one palko, who had
been charged with first degree murder. obtaining a reversal, the state
prosecuted palko a second time and won a conviction of first degree
murder and sentence to death. in response to the petitioner's
contentions that a retrial under one indictment would subject him to
double jeopardy in violation of the fifth amendment, if the prosecution
were one on behalf of the united states and "that whatever is forbidden
by the fifth amendment is forbidden by the fourteenth also,"[] eight
justices[] replied that the state statute did not subject him to
double jeopardy "so acute and shocking that our polity will not endure
it"; nor did "it violate those 'fundamental principles of liberty and
justice which lie at the base of all our civil and political'
institutions.'" consistently with past behavior, the court thus refused
to assert that the defendant had been subjected to treatment of the type
prohibited by the double jeopardy clause of the fifth amendment; nor did
it, on the other hand, repudiate the possibility of situations in which
the fourteenth amendment would prevent the states from inflicting double
jeopardy. whether a state is prohibited by the latter amendment, after a
trial free from error, from trying the accused over again or from
wearing out the accused "by a multitude of cases with accumulated
trials" were questions which the court reserved for future disposition.
subsequently, in louisiana ex rel. francis v. resweber,[] a
majority of the court assumed, "but without so deciding, that violation
of the principles of the fifth amendment ***, as to double jeopardy
***, would be violative of the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment," and then concluded that the palko case was decisive, there
being "no difference from a constitutional point of view between a new
trial for error of law at the instance of the state that results in a
death sentence instead of imprisonment for life and an execution" by
electrocution that follows after "an accidental failure in equipment had
rendered a previous attempt at execution ineffectual."
[pg ]
rights of prisoners
access to the courts.—a state prison regulation requiring that
all legal papers sought to be filed in court by inmates must first be
submitted to the institution for approval and which was applied so as to
obstruct efforts of a prisoner to petition a federal court for a writ of
habeas corpus is void. whether a petition for such writ is properly
drawn and what allegations it must contain are questions which a federal
court alone determines.[] equally subject to condemnation is the
practice of the warden of a state penitentiary who denied prisoners
access to the courts unless they procured counsel to represent
them.[]
appeals; corrective process.—rehearing, new trials, and
appeals are not considered to be essential to due process; and a state
is forbidden by no provision of the constitution from vesting in one
tribunal the final determination of legal questions. consequently, a
review by an appellate court of a final judgment in a criminal case,
irrespective of the gravity of the offense, is wholly within the
discretion of the state to allow or not to allow;[] and, if granted,
may be accorded by the state upon such terms as in its wisdom may be
deemed proper.[] "wide discretion must be left to the states for the
manner of adjudicating a claim that a conviction is unconstitutional;
*** and so long as the rights under the *** constitution may be
pursued, it is for a state and not for *** [the supreme] court [of the
united states] to define the mode by which they may be vindicated. ***
a state may decide whether to have direct appeals ***, and if so under
what circumstances *** may [pg ]provide that the protection of
[constitutional] rights *** be sought through the writ of habeas
corpus or coram nobis, [or] *** may afford remedy by a simple
motion brought either in the court of original conviction or at the
place of detention."[]
however, if the tribunal of first instance fails to accord due process
such as occurs when the court in which a conviction is obtained is
dominated by a mob, the state must supply corrective process. moreover,
when such process is made available, the corrective proceedings in the
reviewing or appellate tribunal being no less a part of the process of
law under which a defendant is held in custody, become subject to
scrutiny on the occasion of any determination of an alleged
unconstitutional deprivation of life or liberty.[] such examination
may lead unavoidably to substantial federal intervention in state
judicial proceedings, and sensitive, no doubt, to the propriety
thereof,[] the supreme court, almost until brown v.
mississippi,[] decided in , manifested an unusual reluctance to
indulge in an adverse appraisal of the adequacy of a state's corrective
process.
prior to the latter date, the court was content to assume as it did in
frank v. mangum,[] decided in , that inasmuch as the
proceedings in the state appellate court formally appeared to be
sufficient to correct errors committed by a trial court alleged to have
been intimidated by a mob, the conclusion by that appellate court that
the trial court's sentence of execution should be affirmed was ample
assurance that life would not be forfeited without due process of law.
apparently in observance of a principle of comity, whereunder a state
appellate court's holding, though acknowledged as not binding, was
deemed entitled to utmost respect, the court persisted in its refusal to
make an independent examination of allegations of a denial of due
process. eight years later, in moore v. dempsey,[] a case involving
similar allegations of mob domination, the court, on this occasion
speaking through justice holmes who had dissented in the preceding
decision, ordered the federal district court, in which the defendants
had petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus and which had [pg ]sustained
the state of arkansas's demurrer thereto, to make an independent
investigation of the facts, notwithstanding that the arkansas appellate
court had ruled that, in view of the legally sufficient evidence on
which the verdict was based and the competent counsel defending the
accused, the allegations of mob domination did not suffice to void the
trial.
indubitably, moore v. dempsey marked the abandonment of the supreme
court's deference, founded upon considerations of comity, to decisions
of state appellate tribunals on issues of constitutionality and the
proclamation of its intention no longer to treat as virtually conclusive
pronouncements by the latter that proceedings in a trial court were
fair. however, the enduring character of this precedent was depreciated
by the court's insistence that moore v. dempsey was decided
consistently[] with frank v. mangum; and it was not until the later
holding in brown v. mississippi in  and the numerous decisions
rendered conformably thereto in the decade following that all
uncertainty was dispelled as to the supreme court's willingness to
engage in its own independent examination of the constitutional adequacy
of trial court proceedings.
appeals
in every case a point is reached where litigation must cease; and what
that point is can best be determined by the state legislature. the power
to render a final judgment must be lodged somewhere; and there is no
provision in the federal constitution which forbids a state from
granting to a tribunal, whether called a court or an administrative
board, the final determination of a legal question. neither in
administrative nor judicial proceedings does the due process clause
require that the participants be entitled as of right to rehearings, new
trials, or appeals.[]
[pg ]
federal review of state procedure
the fourteenth amendment does not impair the authority of the states to
determine finally, according to their settled usages and established
modes of procedure, issues which do not involve any right secured by the
constitution, an act of congress, or a treaty. as long as a local
tribunal acts in consonance with the constitution, laws and procedure of
its own state and as long as said constitution and laws are so
interpreted as not to violate due process, it is only in exceptional
circumstances that the supreme court would feel justified in
intervening. neither by intention nor by result has the fourteenth
amendment transformed the supreme court into a court of general review
to which questions of general justice or equitable consideration arising
out of the taking of property may be brought for final
determination.[]
insofar as mere irregularities or errors in matters of practice under
state procedure do not affect constitutional right,[] they are
matters solely for consideration by the appropriate state tribunal.[]
the constitution does not guarantee that the decisions of state courts
shall be free from error;[] nor does the due process clause give the
supreme court jurisdiction to review mere mistakes of law concerning
nonfederal matters alleged to have been committed by a state court.[]
accordingly, when statutes authorizing the form of the indictment used
are not obviously violative of fundamental constitutional principles,
any question as to the sufficiency of the indictment employed is for a
state court to determine.[] likewise, the failure of a state to
establish a county appellate court as required by the state constitution
cannot support any appeal founded upon a denial of due process.[]
moreover, if a state court errs in deciding what the common law is,
without, however, denying any constitutional right, the litigant
adversely affected is not deprived of any liberty or property without
due process of law.[] also, whenever a wrong judgment is rendered,
property is taken when it should not have been; yet whatever the ground
may be, if the mistake is not so gross as to be impossible in a rational
administration of justice, it is no more than the imperfection of man,
not a denial of constitutional rights.[] in conclusion, the decision
of a state court upon a question of local law, however wrong, is not an
infraction of the fourteenth amendment merely because it is wrong. it is
not for the supreme court to determine whether there has been an
erroneous construction of a state [pg ]statute or the common law; nor does
the constitution impose any impediment to the correction or modification
by a state court of erroneous or older constructions of local law
embraced in previous decisions.[]
equal protection of the laws
what constitutes state action
the inhibition against denial of equal protection of the laws has
exclusive reference to state action. it means that no agency of the
state, legislative, executive or judicial,[] no instrumentality of
the state, and no person, officer or agent exerting the power of the
state shall deny equal protection to any person within the jurisdiction
of the state. the clause prohibits "discriminating and partial
legislation *** in favor of particular persons as against others in
like condition."[] but it also has reference to the way the law is
administered. "though the law itself be fair on its face and impartial
in appearance, yet, if it is applied and administered by public
authority with an evil eye and an unequal hand, so as practically to
make unjust and illegal discriminations between persons in similar
circumstances, material to their rights, the denial of equal justice is
still within the prohibition of the constitution."[] this was said
in a case where a chinese subject had been convicted of operating a
laundry in violation of a municipal ordinance which made it unlawful to
engage in such business (except in a building constructed of brick or
stone) without the consent of the board of supervisors. permission had
been withheld from petitioner and  other chinese subjects but had
been granted to  others to carry on the same business under similar
conditions. this discrimination solely on the basis of nationality was
held illegal. for an unlawful administration of a valid statute to
constitute a violation of constitutional rights, purposeful
discrimination must be shown. an erroneous performance of a statutory
duty, although a violation of the statute, is not without more a denial
of equal protection of the laws.[] this clause is also violated by
the withholding of equal access to the courts,[] or by inequality of
treatment [pg ]in the courts.[] in shelley v. kraemer[] the use of
judicial power to enforce private agreements of a discriminatory
character was held unconstitutional. holding that restrictive covenants
prohibiting the sale of homes to negroes could not be enforced in the
courts, chief justice vinson said: "these are not cases, as has been
suggested, in which the states have merely abstained from action,
leaving private individuals free to impose such discriminations as they
see fit. rather, these are cases in which the states have made available
to such individuals the full coercive power of government to deny to
petitioners, on the grounds of race or color, the enjoyment of property
rights in premises which petitioners are willing and financially able to
acquire and which the grantors are willing to sell. the difference
between judicial enforcement and nonenforcement of the restrictive
covenants is the difference to petitioners between being denied rights
of property available to other members of the community and being
accorded full enjoyment of those rights on an equal footing."[] the
action of the curators of a state university in refusing admission to an
applicant on account of race is regarded as state action.[] a state
cannot avoid the impact of the clause by the delegation of
responsibility to a private body. after a period of vacillation, the
supreme court has determined that the action of a political party in
excluding negroes from membership is unlawful when such membership is an
essential qualification for voting in a primary conducted pursuant to
state law.[]
"persons"
in the case in which it was first called upon to interpret this clause
the court expressed doubt whether "any action of a state not directed by
way of discrimination against the negroes as a class, or on account of
their race, will ever be held to come within the purview of this
provision."[] that view was soon abandoned. in  it took
jurisdiction of a series of cases, popularly known as the granger cases,
in which railroad corporations sought protection under the due process
and equal protection clauses.[] although every case was decided
against the corporations on its merits, there was no expression of any
doubt that the corporations were entitled to invoke the protection of
the amendment. nine years later the issue was settled [pg ]definitely by an
announcement from the bench by chief justice waite that the court would
not hear argument on the question whether the equal protection clause
applies to corporations, adding: "we are all of opinion that it
does."[] at the same term the court gave the broadest possible
meaning to the word "person"; it held that: "these provisions are
universal in their application, to all persons within the territorial
jurisdiction, without regard to any differences of race, of color, or of
nationality; ***"[] the only qualification of the meaning of
"person" is that introduced by subsequent decisions holding that a
municipal corporation cannot invoke the amendment against its
state.[]
"within its jurisdiction"
it is persons "within its jurisdiction" that are entitled to equal
protection from a state. largely because article iv, section , has from
the beginning entitled "citizens of each state" to the "privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several states," the court has never
construed the phrase, "within its jurisdiction," in relation to natural
persons.[] the cases interpretive of this expression consequently
all concern corporations. in , the court laid down the rule that a
foreign corporation not doing business in a state under conditions that
subjected it to process issuing from the courts of the state at the
instance of suitors was not "within the jurisdiction," and could not
complain of the preference granted resident creditors in the
distribution of the assets of an insolvent corporation.[] that
principle was subsequently qualified, over the dissent of justices
brandeis and holmes, by a holding that a foreign corporation which sued
in a court of a state in which it was not licensed to do business to
recover possession of property wrongfully taken from it in another state
was "within the jurisdiction" and could not be subjected to unequal
burdens in the maintenance of the suit.[] the test of amenability to
service of process within the state was ignored in a recent case dealing
with discriminatory assessment of property belonging to a [pg ]nonresident
individual. in holding that a federal court had jurisdiction to
entertain a suit for a declaratory judgment to invalidate the tax, the
supreme court specifically mentioned the equal protection clause as the
source of the federal right, but took no account of the plaintiff's
status as a nonresident, beyond a passing reference to the existence of
diversity of citizenship.[] when a state has admitted a foreign
corporation to do business within its borders, that corporation is
entitled to equal protection of the laws, but not necessarily to
identical treatment with domestic corporations.[] a foreign
corporation licensed to do business within a state upon payment of an
annual license tax is subject to the power of the state to change at any
time the conditions of admission for the future. if it fails to pay an
increased license tax as a prerequisite to doing business, it is not
"within the jurisdiction" and unequal burdens may be laid upon it as
compared with other foreign corporations.[]
"equal protection of the laws"
equal protection of the laws means the protection of equal laws.[]
it forbids all invidious discrimination but does not require identical
treatment for all persons without recognition of differences in relevant
circumstances. it requires "that equal protection and security should be
given to all under like circumstances in the enjoyment of their personal
and civil rights; that all persons should be equally entitled to pursue
their happiness and acquire and enjoy property; that they should have
like access to the courts of the country for the protection of their
persons and property, the prevention and redress of wrongs, and the
enforcement of contracts; that no impediment should be interposed to the
pursuits of anyone except as applied to the same pursuits by others
under like circumstances; that no greater burdens should be laid upon
one than are laid upon others in the same calling and condition, and
that in the administration of criminal justice no different or higher
punishment should be imposed upon one than such as is prescribed to all
for like offenses."[] the amendment was not "designed to interfere
with the power of the state, sometimes termed its 'police power,' to
prescribe regulations to promote the health, peace, morals, education,
and good order of the people, and to legislate so as to increase the
industries of the state, develop its resources, and add to its wealth
and prosperity *** regulations for these purposes may press with more
or less weight upon one than upon another, [pg ]but they are designed, not
to impose unequal or unnecessary restrictions upon anyone, but to
promote, with as little individual inconvenience as possible, the
general good. though, in many respects, necessarily special in their
character they do not furnish just ground of complaint if they operate
alike upon all persons and property under the same circumstances and
conditions."[] the due process and equal protection clauses overlap
but the spheres of protection they offer are not coterminous. the due
process clause "tends to secure equality of law in the sense that it
makes a required minimum of protection for everyone's right of life,
liberty, and property, which the congress or the legislature may not
withhold. *** the guaranty [of equal protection] was aimed at undue
favor and individual or class privilege, on the other hand, and at
hostile discrimination or the oppression of inequality, on the
other."[]
legislative classifications
although the equal protection clause requires laws of like application
to all similarly situated, the legislature is allowed wide discretion in
the selection of classes.[] classification will not render a state
police statute unconstitutional so long as it has a reasonable
basis;[] its validity does not depend on scientific or marked
differences in things or persons or in their relations. it suffices if
it is practical.[] while a state legislature may not arbitrarily
select certain individuals for the operation of its statutes, a
selection is obnoxious to the equal protection clause only if it is
clearly and actually arbitrary and not merely possibly so.[] a
substantial difference, in point of harmful results, between two methods
of operation, justifies a classification and the burden is on the
attacking party to prove it unreasonable.[] there is a strong
presumption that discriminations in state legislation are based on
adequate grounds.[] every state of facts sufficient to sustain a
classification which can reasonably be conceived of as having existed
when the law was adopted will be assumed.[]
there is no doctrinaire requirement that legislation should be couched
in all-embracing terms.[] a police statute may be confined to [pg ]the
occasion for its existence.[] the equal protection clause does not
mean that all occupations that are called by the same name must be
treated in the same way.[] the legislature is free to recognize
degrees of harm; a law which hits the evil where it is most felt will
not be overthrown because there are other instances to which it might
have been applied.[] the state may do what it can to prevent what is
deemed an evil and stop short of those cases in which the harm to the
few concerned is thought less important than the harm to the public that
would ensue if the rules laid down were made mathematically exact.[]
exceptions of specified classes will not render the law unconstitutional
unless there is no fair reason for the law that would not equally
require its extension to the excepted classes.[] incidental
individual inequality does not violate the fourteenth amendment.[]
one who is not discriminated against cannot attack a statute because it
does not go further; and if what it commands of one it commands of all
others in the same class, that person cannot complain of matter which
the statute does not cover.[]
at the outset, the court did not regard the equal protection clause as
having any bearing on taxation.[] before long, however, it took
jurisdiction of cases assailing specific tax laws under this
provision.[] in  it conceded cautiously that "clear and hostile
discriminations against particular persons and classes, especially such
as are of an unusual character, unknown to the practice of our
governments, might be obnoxious to the constitutional
prohibition."[] in succeeding years the clause has been invoked but
sparingly to invalidate state levies. in the field of property taxation,
inequality has been condemned only in two classes of cases: ()
intentional discrimination in assessments; and () discrimination
against foreign corporations. in addition, there are a handful of cases
invalidating, because of inequality, state laws imposing income, gross
receipts, sales and license taxes.
[pg ]
classifications for the purpose of taxation
the power of the state to classify for purposes of taxation is "of wide
range and flexibility."[] the constitution does not prevent it "from
adjusting its system of taxation in all proper and reasonable ways. it
may, if it chooses, exempt certain classes of property from any taxation
at all, such as churches, libraries, and the property of charitable
institutions. it may impose different specific taxes upon different
trades and professions, and may vary the rates of excise upon various
products; it may tax real estate and personal property in a different
manner; it may tax visible property only, and not tax securities for
payment of money; it may allow deductions for indebtedness, or not allow
them. all such regulations, and those of like character, so long as they
proceed within reasonable limits and general usage, are within the
discretion of the state legislature, ***"[] a state may adjust
its taxing system in such a way as to favor certain industries or forms
of industry,[] and may tax different types of taxpayers differently,
despite the fact that they compete.[] it does not follow that
because "some degree of inequality from the nature of things must be
permitted, gross inequality must also be allowed."[] classification
may not be arbitrary; it must be based on a real and substantial
difference,[] but the difference need not be great or
conspicuous;[] but there must be no discrimination in favor of one
as against another of the same class.[] also, discriminations of an
unusual character are scrutinized with especial care.[] a gross
sales tax graduated at increasing rates with the volume of sales,[]
a heavier license tax on each unit in a chain of stores where the owner
has stores located in more than one county,[] and a gross receipts
tax levied on corporations operating taxicabs, but not on
individuals,[] have been held to be repugnant to the equal
protection clause. but it is not the function of the court to consider
the propriety or justness of the tax, to seek for the motives and
criticize the public policy which prompted the adoption of the
statute.[] if the evident intent and general operation of the tax
legislation is to adjust the burden with a fair and reasonable degree of
equality, the constitutional requirement is satisfied.[] one not
within the class claimed to be discriminated against cannot raise the
question of constitutionality of a statute on the ground that it denies
equal protection of the law.[][pg ] if a tax applies to a class which may
be separately taxed, those within the class may not complain because the
class might have been more aptly defined, nor because others, not of the
class, are taxed improperly.[]
[pg ]
foreign corporations
the equal protection clause does not require identical taxes upon all
foreign and domestic corporations in every case.[] in , a
pennsylvania corporation previously licensed to do business in new york
challenged an increased annual license tax imposed by that state in
retaliation for a like tax levied by pennsylvania against new york
corporations. this tax was held valid on the ground that the state,
having power to exclude entirely, could change the conditions of
admission for the future, and could demand the payment of a new or
further tax, as a license fee.[] later cases whittled down this rule
considerably. the court decided that "after its admission, the foreign
corporation stands equal and is to be classified with domestic
corporations of the same kind,"[] and that where it has acquired
property of a fixed and permanent nature in a state, it cannot be
subjected to a more onerous tax for the privilege of doing business than
domestic corporations.[] a state statute taxing foreign corporations
writing fire, marine, inland navigation and casualty insurance on net
receipts, including receipts from casualty business was held invalid
under the equal protection clause where foreign companies writing only
casualty insurance were not subject to a similar tax.[] recently,
the doctrine [pg ]of fire asso. of philadelphia v. new york was revived to
sustain an increased tax on gross premiums which was exacted as an
annual license fee from foreign but not from domestic
corporations.[] even though the right of a foreign corporation to do
business in a state rests on a license, yet the equal protection clause
is held to insure it equality of treatment, at least so far as ad
valorem taxation is concerned.[]
income taxes
a state law which taxes the entire income, including that derived
without the state, of domestic corporations which do business in the
state, while exempting entirely the income received outside the state by
domestic corporations which do no local business, is arbitrary and
invalid.[] in taxing the income of a nonresident, there is no denial
of equal protection in limiting the deduction of losses to those
sustained within the state, although residents are permitted to deduct
all losses, wherever incurred.[] a retroactive statute imposing a
graduated tax at rates different from those in the general income tax
law, on dividends received in a prior year which were deductible from
gross income under the law in effect when they were received, is not
obnoxious to the equal protection clause.[]
inheritance taxes
in inheritance taxation, there is no denial of equal protection in
prescribing different treatment for lineal relations, collateral kindred
and strangers of the blood, or in increasing the proportionate burden of
the tax progressively as the amount of the benefit increases.[] a
tax on life estates where the remainder passes to lineal heirs is valid
despite the exemption of life estates where the remainder passes to
collateral heirs;[] there is no arbitrary classification in taxing
the transmission of property to a brother or sister, while exempting
that to a son-in-law or a daughter-in-law.[] vested and contingent
remainders may be treated differently.[] the exemption of property
bequeathed to charitable or educational institutions may be limited to
those within the state.[] in computing the tax collectible from a
nonresident decedent's property within the state, a state may apply the
pertinent rates to the [pg ]whole estate wherever located, and take that
proportion thereof which the property within the state bears to the
total; the fact that a greater tax may result than would be assessed on
an equal amount of property if owned by a resident,[] does not
invalidate the result.
motor vehicle taxes
in demanding compensation for the use of highways, a state may exempt
certain types of vehicles, according to the purpose for which they are
used, from a mileage tax on carriers.[] a state maintenance tax act,
which taxes vehicle property carriers for hire at greater rates than
similar vehicles carrying property not for hire is reasonable, since the
use of roads by one hauling not for hire generally is limited to
transportation of his own property as an incident to his occupation and
is substantially less than that of one engaged in business as a common
carrier.[] a property tax on motor vehicles used in operating a
stage line that makes constant and unusual use of the highways may be
measured by gross receipts and be assessed at a higher rate than taxes
on property not so employed.[] common motor carriers of freight
operating over regular routes between fixed termini may be taxed at
higher rates than other carriers, common and private.[] a fee for
the privilege of transporting motor vehicles on their own wheels over
the highways of the state for purpose of sale, does not violate the
equal protection clause as applied to cars moving in caravans.[] the
exemption from a tax for a permit to bring cars into the state in
caravans of cars moved for sale between zones in the state is not an
unconstitutional discrimination where it appears that the traffic
subject to the tax places a much more serious burden on the highways
than that which is exempt.[] the exemption of small vehicles from
graduated registration fees on carriers for hire,[] and of persons
whose vehicles haul passengers and farm products between points not
having railroad facilities or hauling farm and dairy products for a
producer from a vehicle license tax on private motor carriers, has been
upheld.[]
[pg ]
poll taxes
a poll tax statute exempting women, the aged and minors, does not make
an arbitrary classification[].
property taxes
the state's latitude of discretion is notably wide in the classification
of property for purposes of taxation and the granting of partial or
total exemption on the grounds of policy,[] whether the exemption
results from the terms of the statute or the conduct of a state official
under it.[] a provision for the forfeiture of land for nonpayment of
taxes is not invalid because the conditions to which it applies exist
only in a part of the state.[] intentional and systematic
undervaluation by state officials of other taxable property in the same
class contravenes the constitutional right of one taxed upon the full
value of his property;[] but mere errors in judgment resulting in
unequal overvaluation or undervaluation, not intentional or systematic,
will not support a claim of discrimination.[] differences in the
basis of assessment are not invalid where the person or property
affected might properly be placed in a separate class for purposes of
taxation.[] an owner aggrieved by discrimination is entitled to have
his assessment reduced to the common level.[] equal protection is
denied if a state does not itself remove the discrimination; it cannot
impose upon the person against whom the discrimination is directed the
burden of seeking an upward revision of the assessment of other members
of the class.[] a corporation whose valuations were accepted by the
assessing commission cannot complain that it was taxed
disproportionately, as compared with others, if the commission did not
act fraudulently.[]
special assessment
a special assessment is not discriminatory because apportioned on an ad
valorem basis, nor does its validity depend upon the receipt of some
special benefit as distinguished from the general benefit to the
community.[] railroad property may not be burdened for local
improvements upon a basis so wholly different from that used for
[pg ]ascertaining the contribution demanded of individual owners as
necessarily to produce manifest inequality.[] a special highway
assessment against railroads based on real property, rolling stock and
other personal property is unjustly discriminatory when other
assessments for the same improvement are based on real property
alone.[] a law requiring the franchise of a railroad to be
considered in valuing its property for apportionment of a special
assessment, is not invalid where the franchises were not added as a
separate personal property value to the assessment of the real
property.[] in taxing railroads within a levee district on a mileage
basis, it is not necessarily arbitrary to fix a lower rate per mile for
those having less than  miles of main line within the district than
for those having more.[]
classification
justice holmes once called the equal protection clause the "usual last
refuge of constitutional arguments."[] when state action is attacked
under the due process clause, the assailant usually charges also that he
is denied the equal protection of the laws. except where discrimination
on the basis of race or nationality is shown, few police regulations
have been found unconstitutional on this ground.[] the court has
condemned a statute which forbade stock insurance companies to act
through agents who were their salaried employees, but permitted mutual
companies to operate in this manner.[] a law which required private
motor vehicle carriers to obtain certificates of convenience and
necessity and to furnish security for the protection of the public was
held invalid by reason of the exemption of carriers of fish, farm and
dairy products.[] discrimination among milk dealers without well
advertised trade names, giving those who entered business before a
specified date the benefit of a price differential denied to those who
commenced operations thereafter, is arbitrary and unlawful.[] a
statute providing for the sterilization of defectives in state
institutions was sustained;[] but a similar act applicable to triple
offenders was held void.[]
[pg ]
administrative discretion
a municipal ordinance which vests in supervisory authorities a naked and
arbitrary power to grant or withhold consent to the operation of
laundries in wooden buildings, without consideration of the
circumstances of individual cases, constitutes a denial of equal
protection of the law when consent is withheld from certain persons
solely on the basis of nationality.[] but a city council may reserve
to itself the power to make exceptions from a ban on the operation of a
dairy within the city,[] or from building line restrictions.[]
written permission of the mayor or president of the city council may be
required before any person shall move a building on a street.[] the
mayor may be empowered to determine whether an applicant has a good
character and reputation and is a suitable person to receive a license
for the sale of cigarettes.[] in a recent case[] the court held
that the unfettered discretion of officer river pilots to select their
apprentices, which was almost invariably exercised in favor of their
relatives and friends, was not a denial of equal protection to persons
not selected despite the fact that such apprenticeship was requisite for
appointment as a pilot.
alien laws
the fourteenth amendment prohibits purely arbitrary discrimination
against aliens.[] where alien race and allegiance bear a reasonable
relation to a legitimate object of legislation, it may be made the basis
of classification. thus, legislation has been upheld under which aliens
were forbidden to conduct pool rooms[] or to take game or possess
shotguns.[] a discrimination between citizens and aliens in the
matter of employment on public works is not unconstitutional.[] a
state cannot, however, deny to aliens the right to earn a living in
ordinary occupations. consequently, a statute requiring that employers
of more than five workers employ not less than eighty percent qualified
electors or natural born citizens denies equal protection of the
law.[] likewise a state law forbidding the issuance of commercial
fishing licenses to aliens ineligible for citizenship has been held
void.[] state laws forbidding aliens to own real estate, have been
upheld in the past.[] a less sympathetic attitude toward such
legislation was indicated in oyama v. california, in .[] there
the state of california sought to escheat land owned by an american-born
son of a japanese father under a provision of its alien land law which
made payment by an alien of the consideration for a transfer of land to
a third person prima facie evidence of intent to evade the statute.
the court held that the burden of proof imposed upon the son, an
american [pg ]citizen, by reason of his parent's country of origin, was an
unlawful discrimination, but it did not pass upon the constitutionality
of the alien land law itself. in concurring opinions four justices took
the position that the law was incompatible with the fourteenth
amendment.[]
labor relations
objections to labor legislation on the ground that the limitation of
particular regulations to specified industries was obnoxious to the
equal protection clause, have been consistently overruled. statutes
limiting hours of labor for employees in mines, smelters,[] mills,
factories,[] or on public works[] have been sustained. so also
was a statute forbidding persons engaged in mining and manufacturing to
issue orders for payment of labor unless redeemable at face value in
cash.[] the exemption of mines employing less than ten persons from
a law pertaining to measurement of coal to determine a miner's wages is
not unreasonable.[] all corporations,[] or public service
corporations,[] may be required to issue to employees who leave
their service letters stating the nature of the service and the cause of
leaving even though other employers are not.
industries may be classified in a workmen's compensation act according
to the respective hazards of each;[] the exemption of farm laborers
and domestic servants does not render such an act invalid.[] a
statute providing that no person shall be denied opportunity for
employment because he is not a member of a union does not offend the
equal protection clause.[]
[pg ]women, or particular classes of women, may be singled out for special
treatment, in the exercise of the state's protective power, without
violation of the fourteenth amendment. classification may be based on
differences either in their physical characteristics or in the social
conditions which surround their employment. restrictions on conditions
of employment in particular occupations are not invalid because the law
might have been made broader.[] one of the earliest pieces of social
legislation to be sustained was a ten-hour law for women employed in
laundries.[] a law limiting hours of labor for women in hotels is
not rendered unconstitutional by reason of the exemption of certain
railroad restaurants.[] night work by women in restaurants may be
prohibited.[] reversing earlier decisions, the supreme court upheld
a minimum wage law for women in , saying that their unequal
bargaining position justified a law applicable only to them.[]
women may be forbidden to engage in an occupation where their employment
may create special moral and social problems. a state statute forbidding
women to act as bartenders, but making an exception in favor of wives
and daughters of the male owners of liquor establishments was sustained
over the objection, which three justices found persuasive, that the act
denied the equal protection of the law to female owners of such
establishments.[] said justice frankfurter for the majority: "the
fact that women may now have achieved the virtues that men have long
claimed as their prerogatives and now indulge in vices that men have
long practiced, does not preclude the states from drawing a sharp line
between the sexes, certainly in such matters as the regulation of the
liquor traffic. *** the constitution does not require legislatures to
reflect sociological insight, or shifting social standards, any more
than it requires them to keep abreast of the latest scientific
standards."[]
[pg ]
monopolies
on the principle that the law may hit the evil where it is most felt,
state antitrust laws applicable to corporations but not to
individuals,[] or to vendors of commodities but not to vendors of
labor,[] have been upheld. contrary to its earlier view, the court
now holds that an antitrust act which exempts agricultural products in
the hands of the producer is valid.[] diversity with respect to
penalties also has been sustained. corporations violating the law may be
proceeded against by bill in equity, while individuals are indicted and
tried.[] a provision, superimposed upon the general antitrust law,
for revocation of the licenses of fire insurance companies which enter
into illegal combinations, does not violate the equal protection
clause.[] a grant of monopoly privileges, if otherwise an
appropriate exercise of the police power, is immune to attack under that
clause.[]
punishment for crime
equality of protection under the law implies that in the administration
of criminal justice no person shall be subject to any greater or
different punishment than another in similar circumstances.[]
comparative gravity of criminal offenses is a matter for the state to
determine, and the fact that some offenses are punished with less
severity than others does not deny equal protection.[] heavier
penalties may be imposed upon habitual criminals for like
offenses,[] even after a pardon for an earlier offense,[] and
such persons may be made ineligible for parole.[] a state law
doubling the sentence on prisoners attempting to escape does not deny
equal protection in subjecting prisoners who attempt to escape together
to different sentences depending on their original sentences.[]
infliction of the death penalty for assaults with intent to kill by life
term convicts is not unconstitutional because not applicable to convicts
serving lesser terms.[] the fourteenth amendment does not preclude
the commitment of persons who, by an habitual course of misconduct, have
evidenced utter lack of power to control sexual impulses, and are likely
to inflict injury.[] a statute prohibiting a white person and a
negro from living together in adultery or fornication is not invalid
because it prescribes penalties more severe than those to which the
parties would be subject were they both of the same race.[] the
equal protection clause does not [pg ]prevent the execution of a prisoner
after the accidental failure of the first attempt.[] it does,
however, render invalid a statute requiring sterilization of persons
convicted of various offenses, including larceny by fraud, but exempting
embezzlers.[]
segregation
laws designed to segregate persons of different races in the location of
their homes, in the public schools and on public conveyances have been a
prolific source of litigation under the equal protection clause. an
ordinance intended to segregate the homes of white and colored races is
invalid.[] private covenants forbidding the transfer of real
property to persons of a certain race or color have been held
lawful,[] but the enforcement of such agreements by a state through
its courts would constitute a denial of equal protection of the
laws.[] a statute providing for separate but equal accommodations on
railroads for white and colored persons has been held not to deny equal
protection of the law,[] but a separate coach law which permits
carriers to provide sleeping and dining cars only for white persons, is
invalid notwithstanding recognition by the legislature that there would
be little demand for them by colored persons.[] fifty years ago the
action of a local board of education in suspending temporarily for
economic reasons a high school for colored children was held not to be a
sufficient reason for restraining the board from maintaining an existing
high school for white children, when the evidence did not indicate that
the board had proceeded in bad faith or had acted in hostility to the
colored race.[] a child of chinese ancestry, who is a citizen of the
united states, is not denied equal protection of law by being assigned
to a public school provided for colored children, when equal facilities
for education are offered to both races.[]
[pg ]although the principle that separate but equal facilities satisfy
constitutional requirements has not been reversed, the court in recent
years has been inclined to review more critically the facts of cases
brought before it to ascertain whether equality has, in fact, been
offered. in missouri v. canada[] it held that the state was
denying equal protection of the law in failing to provide a legal
education within the state for negroes comparable to that afforded white
students. pursuant to a policy of segregating negro and white students,
the state had established a law school at the state university for white
applicants. in lieu of setting up one at its negro university, it
authorized the curators thereof to establish such a school whenever in
their opinion it should be necessary and practicable to do so, and
pending such development, to arrange and pay for the legal education of
the state's negroes at schools in other states. this was found
insufficient; the obligation of the state to afford the protection of
equal law can be performed only where its laws operate, that is to say,
within its own jurisdiction. it is there that equality of rights must be
maintained. in a later case the court held that the state of oklahoma
was obliged to provide legal education for a qualified negro applicant
as soon as it did for applicants of any other group.[] to comply
with this mandate a state court entered an order requiring in the
alternative the admission of a negro to the state-maintained law school
or non-enrollment of any other applicant until a separate school with
equal educational facilities should be provided for negroes. over the
objection of two justices the supreme court held this order did not
depart from its mandate.[] after a close examination of the facts,
the court concluded, in sweatt v. painter,[] that the legal
education offered in a separate law school for negroes was inferior to
that afforded by the university of texas law school and hence that the
equal protection clause required that a qualified applicant be admitted
to the latter. in mclaurin v. oklahoma state regents[] the court
held that enforced segregation of a negro student admitted to a state
university was invalid because it handicapped him in the pursuit of
effective graduate instruction.
[pg ]
in conjunction with the fifteenth amendment the equal protection clause
has played an important role in cases involving various expedients
devised to deprive negro citizens of the right of suffrage. attempts
have also been made, but thus far without success, to invoke this clause
against other forms of political inequality. the principal devices
employed to prevent voting by negroes have been grandfather clauses,
educational qualifications, registration requirements and restrictions
on membership in a political party. grandfather clauses exempting
persons qualified as electors before  and their descendants from
requirements applicable to other voters, were held to violate the
fifteenth amendment.[] educational qualifications which did not on
their face discriminate between white and negro voters were sustained in
the absence of a showing that their actual administration was
evil.[] in  in a suit charging that the registration procedure
prescribed by statute was fraudulently designed to prevent negroes from
voting, the court, in an opinion written by justice holmes, refused to
order the registration of an allegedly qualified negro, on the whimsical
ground that to do so would make the court a party to the fraudulent
plan.[] the opinion was careful to state that "we are not prepared
to say that an action at law could [pg ]not be maintained on the facts
alleged in the bill." such an action was brought some years later in
oklahoma under a registration law enacted after its "grandfather"
statute had been held unconstitutional. registration was not necessary
for persons who had voted at the previous election under the invalid
statute. other persons were required to register during a twelve day
period or be forever disfranchised. a colored citizen who was refused
the right to vote in  because of failure to register during the
prescribed period in , was held to have a cause of action for
damages against the election officials under the civil rights act of
. in the opinion of the court reversing a judgment for the
defendants, justice frankfurter said:[] "the amendment nullifies
sophisticated as well as simple minded modes of discrimination. it hits
onerous procedural requirements which effectively handicap exercise of
the franchise by the colored race although the abstract right to vote
may remain unrestricted as to race."
as the selection of candidates by primary elections became general, the
denial of the right to vote in the primary assumed dominant importance.
for many years the court hesitated to hold that party primaries were
elections within the purview of the constitution. during that period the
equal protection clause was relied upon to invalidate discrimination
against negroes. under the clause, it is necessary to find that
inequality is perpetrated by the state.[] the court had no
difficulty in holding that a state statute which forbade voting by
negroes in a party primary was obnoxious to the fourteenth
amendment.[] the same conclusion was reached with respect to
exclusion by action of a party executive committee pursuant to authority
conferred by statute.[] but at first it refused to extend this rule
to a restriction on membership imposed without statutory authority by
the state convention of a party.[] the latter case was soon
overruled; having, in the meanwhile, decided that a primary is an
integral part of the electoral machinery,[] the court ruled in smith
v. allwright,[] that a restriction on party membership imposed by
a state convention was invalid under the fifteenth amendment, where such
membership was a prerequisite for voting in the primary.
failure has attended the few attempts which have been made to strike
down other alleged discriminations in election laws or in their
[pg ]administration. nearly fifty years ago the court rejected a claim that
an act forbidding the registration of a voter until one year after his
intent to become a legal voter shall have been recorded was a denial of
equal protection.[] in snowden v. hughes,[] it held that an
alleged erroneous refusal of a state primary canvassing board to certify
a person as a successful candidate in a party primary was not, in the
absence of a showing of purposeful discrimination, a denial of a
constitutional right which would justify a suit for damages against
members of the board. three recent attacks on inequalities in the
effective voting power of persons residing in different geographical
areas were likewise unsuccessful. the court refused, in colegrove v.
green,[] to interfere to prevent the election of representatives in
congress by districts in illinois, because of unequal apportionment. two
years later, in macdougall v. green[] it held that a state law
requiring candidates of a new political party to obtain a minimum number
of signatures on their nominating petitions in each of  counties did
not withhold equal justice from the overwhelming majority of the voters
who resided in the  most populous counties. over the dissent of
justices black and douglas it affirmed the action of a federal district
court in dismissing a complaint challenging the validity of georgia's
county unit election system, under which the votes of residents of the
most populous county have on the average but one-tenth the weight of
those in other counties.[]
general doctrine
the equal protection clause does not exact uniformity of procedure.
state legislatures may classify litigation and adopt one type of
procedure for one class and a different type for another. the procedure
followed in condemnation suits brought by a state need not be the same
as in a suit started by a private corporation.[] procedural rules
may vary in different geographic subdivisions of the state; the state
may be given a larger number of peremptory challenges to jurors in
capital cases in cities having more than , inhabitants than in
other areas.[] a state may require that disputes on the amount of
loss under fire insurance policies be submitted to arbitration.[] it
may prescribe the evidence which shall be received and the effect which
shall be given it; proof of one fact, or of several [pg ]facts taken
collectively, may be made prima facie evidence of another fact, so
long as it is not a mere arbitrary mandate and does not discriminate
invidiously between different persons in substantially the same
situations.[] a plaintiff in a stockholder's derivative suit may be
required to give security if he does not own a specified amount of
stock; the size of his financial interest may reasonably be considered
as some measure of his good faith and responsibility in bringing the
suit.[]
access to courts
the legislature may provide for diversity in the jurisdiction of its
several courts, both as to subject matter and finality of decision, if
all persons within the territorial limits of the respective jurisdiction
have an equal right in like cases to resort to them for redress.[]
there is no denial of equal protection of the law by reason of the fact
that in one district the state is allowed an appeal and in another
district it is not.[] the legislative discretion to grant or
withhold equitable relief in any class of cases must, under the equal
protection clause, be so exercised as not to grant equitable relief to
one, and to deny it to another under like circumstances and in the same
territorial jurisdiction. a state law forbidding injunctions in labor
disputes is invalid where injunctive relief is available in other
similar controversies.[] the action of prison officials in
suppressing a prisoner's appeal documents during the statutory period
for appeal constitutes a denial of equal protection by refusing him
privileges of appeal that were available to others.[]
corporations
a statute permitting suits against domestic corporations to be brought
in any county in which the cause of action arose, is not void as denying
equal protection.[] neither is a statute applicable only to
corporations requiring the production of books and papers upon notice,
with punishment for contempt upon neglect or refusal to comply.[]
where, however, actions against domestic corporations may be brought
[pg ]only in counties where they may have places of business or where a
chief officer resides, a statute authorizing action against a foreign
corporation in any county is discriminatory and invalid.[] so also
is a statute, applicable only to foreign corporations, which requires
the corporation, as a condition precedent to maintenance of an action,
to send its officer into the state, with papers and books bearing on the
matter in controversy, for examination before trial, where nonresident
individuals, as well as individuals and corporations within the state,
were subject to less onerous requirements.[]
expenses of litigation
a statute which directs that life and health insurance companies who
default in payments of their policies shall pay  per cent damages,
together with reasonable attorney's fees, does not deny the equal
protection of the law in failing to impose the same conditions on fire,
marine, and inland insurance companies, and on mutual benefit and relief
associations.[] costs may be allowed to a person who has been
subjected to malicious prosecution, with provision for commitment of the
prosecutor until paid.[] statutes providing for recovery of
reasonable attorney's fees in action on small claims against all classes
of defendants, individual and corporate,[] in mandamus
proceedings,[] or in actions against railroads for damages caused by
fires[] have been upheld. but a statute, applicable only to railway
corporations, providing for recovery of attorney's fees and costs in
actions for certain small claims was found to be repugnant to the equal
protection clause.[]
selection of jury
exercising the authority conferred by section  of the fourteenth
amendment, congress has expressly forbidden the exclusion of any citizen
from service as a grand or petit juror in any federal or state court, on
the ground of race or color.[] jury commissioners are under the duty
"not to pursue a course of conduct in the administration of their office
which would operate to discriminate in the selection of jurors on racial
grounds."[] an accused does not, however, have a [pg ]legal right to a
jury composed in whole or in part of members of his own race.[] mere
inequality in the numbers of persons selected from different races is
not conclusive; discrimination is unlawful only if it is purposeful and
systematic.[] but where it appeared that no negro had served on a
grand or petit jury for thirty years in a county in which  per cent of
the adult population was colored, the inference of systematic exclusion
was not repelled by a showing that few negroes fulfilled the requirement
that a juror must be a qualified elector.[]
to what extent, if at all, the equal protection clause prevents the
exclusion from jury service of any class of persons on any basis other
than race or color is a still unsettled problem of constitutional
interpretation. the selection of jurors may be confined to males, to
citizens, to qualified electors, to persons within certain ages, or to
persons having prescribed educational qualifications.[] certain
occupational groups, such as lawyers, preachers, ministers, doctors,
dentists, and engineers and firemen of railroad trains may be excluded
from jury service.[] an issue of even greater consequence is raised
by differentiation in the qualifications of persons selected to try
different kinds of cases. this was the question on which the supreme
court divided five to four in fay v. new york[] where it upheld a
conviction by a "blue ribbon" jury. in that case defendants, officials
of certain labor unions, were convicted of extortion, by collecting
large sums from contractors for assisting them in avoiding labor
troubles. from a "blue ribbon" jury certain categories of persons
qualified for ordinary jury duty are excluded; and on this ground
defendants claimed that in being tried by such a jury they had been
denied "equal protection of the law" and deprived of "due process of
law," but especially the former, alleging that such juries had a higher
record of conviction than ordinary juries and that their sympathies were
"conservative." the court, speaking by justice jackson, answered that "a
state is not required to try all offenses to the same forum," but
conceded that "a discretion, even if vested in the court, to shunt a
defendant before a jury so chosen as greatly to lessen his chances while
others accused of a like offense are tried by a jury so drawn as to be
more favorable to them, would hardly be 'equal protection of the
laws.'"[] however, he asserted that the new york statute authorizing
"blue ribbon" juries "does not exclude, or authorize the clerk to
exclude, any person or class because of race, creed, color or
occupation. it imposes no qualification of an economic [pg ]nature beyond
that imposed by the concededly valid general panel statute. each of the
grounds of elimination is reasonably and closely related to the juror's
suitability for the kind of service the special panel requires or to his
fitness to judge the kind of cases for which it is most frequently
utilized. not all of the grounds of elimination would appear relevant to
the issues of the present case. but we know of no right of defendants to
have a specially constituted panel which would include all persons who
might be fitted to hear their particular and unique case."[] he held
further that defendants had failed to shoulder the necessary burden of
proof in support of their allegations of discrimination, and added: "at
most, the proof shows lack of proportional representation and there is
an utter deficiency of proof that this was the result of a purpose to
discriminate against this group as such. the uncontradicted evidence is
that no person was excluded because of his occupation or economic
status. all were subjected to the same tests of intelligence,
citizenship and understanding of english. the state's right to apply
these tests is not open to doubt even though they disqualify, especially
in the conditions that prevail in new york, a disproportionate number of
manual workers. a fair application of literacy, intelligence and other
tests would hardly act with proportional equality on all levels of life.
the most that the evidence does is to raise, rather than answer, the
question whether there was an unlawful disproportionate representation
of lower income groups on the special jury."[] then, as to the due
process clause, he pointed out that the jury had had a long and varied
history in the course of which it has assumed many forms, and that for
that matter the court "*** has construed it to be inherent in the
independent concept of due process that condemnation shall be rendered
only after a trial, in which the hearing is a real one, not a sham or
pretense. *** trial must be held before a tribunal not biased by
interest in the event. *** undoubtedly a system of exclusions could be
so manipulated as to call a jury before which defendants would have so
little chance of a decision on the evidence that it would constitute a
denial of due process. a verdict on the evidence, however, is all an
accused can claim; he is not entitled to a set-up that will give a
chance of escape after he is properly proven guilty. society also has a
right to a fair trial. the defendant's right is a neutral jury. he has
no constitutional right to friends on the jury."[]
[pg ]
section . representatives shall be apportioned among the
several states according to their respective numbers, counting the whole
number of persons in each state, excluding indians not taxed. but when
the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for
president and vice president of the united states, representatives in
congress, the executive and judicial officers of a state, or the members
of the legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of
such state, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the united
states, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion,
or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in
the proportion which [pg ]the number of such male citizens shall bear to the
whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such state.
in general
the effect of this section in relation to negroes was indicated in elk
v. wilkins.[] "slavery having been abolished, and the persons
formerly held as slaves made citizens, this clause fixing the
apportionment of representatives has abrogated so much of *** [article
i, §, cl. ] of the *** original constitution as counted only
three-fifths of such persons."
"indians not taxed"
although one authority on the legal status of the american indian
observed that this "*** phrase [was] never *** more explicitly
defined, but probably *** [meant] *** indians resident on
reservations, that is, on land not taxed by the states,"[] the
united states attorney general, in , commented as follows upon the
difficulty of arriving at any satisfactory construction of these words:
"whether the phrase 'indians not taxed' refers () to indians not
actually paying taxes or only to those who are not subject to taxation
and () to indians not taxed or subject to taxation by any taxing
authority or only to those not taxed or subject to taxation by the
states in which they reside *** [presents] questions *** [which
have] been discussed in a number of court decisions but the issue has
never been squarely raised in any of the decided cases. some of the
cases and some statements appearing in the debates in the constitutional
convention lend support to the view that since all indians are now
subject to the federal income-tax laws [superintendent v.
commissioner,  u.s.  ()] there are no longer any indians not
taxed within the meaning of the constitutional phrase. on the other
hand, other decided cases and other statements appearing in the debates
in the convention equally support the contrary view. ***, the answer
to *** [these questions] is not free from doubt."[]
as to the latest construction which congress has given to this phrase in
apportioning seats in the house of representatives, it is pertinent to
note that the apportionment act of , at last amended in ,[]
excludes "indians not taxed" from the computation of the total
population of each state. however, in reliance on the above-mentioned
decision that all indians are now subject to federal income taxation,
the director of the census included all indians in the [pg ] tabulation
of total population in each state, and congress took no action to alter
the effects which such inclusion had upon the number of seats
distributed to the several states.[]
right to vote
the right to vote intended to be protected refers to the right to vote
as established by the laws and constitution of the state; subject,
however, to the limitation that the constitution, in article i, section
, adopts as qualifications for voting for members of congress those
qualifications established by the states for voting for the most
numerous branch of their legislatures.
to the latter extent the right to vote for members of congress has been
declared to be fundamentally based upon the constitution and as never
having been intended to be left within the exclusive control of the
states.[]
reduction of state's representation
"questions relating to the apportionment of representatives among the
several states are political in their nature and reside exclusively
within the determination of congress ***" consequently, a united
states district court was obliged to dismiss an action for damages
against the virginia secretary of state for the latter's refusal to
certify the plaintiff as candidate for the office of congressman at
large, inasmuch as the plaintiff's case rested on the theory that the
apportionment act of congress and the redistricting act of virginia, by
failing to take into account the disenfranchisement of % of the voters
occasioned by the poll tax, were both invalid, and that virginia
accordingly was entitled to only four instead of nine congressmen, which
four were to be elected at large.[] "it is well known that the
elective franchise has been limited or denied to citizens in various
states of the union in past years, but no serious attempt has been made
by congress to enforce the mandate of the second section of the
fourteenth amendment, and it is noteworthy that there are no instances
in which the courts have attempted to revise the apportionment of
representatives by congress."[]
[pg ]
section . no person shall be a senator or representative in
congress, or elector of president and vice president, or hold any
office, civil or military, under the united states, or under any state,
who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of congress, or as an
officer of the united states, or as a member of any state legislature,
or as an executive or judicial officer of any state, to support the
constitution of the united states, shall have engaged in insurrection or
rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies
thereof. but congress may by a vote of two-thirds of each house, remove
such disability.
in general
the right to remove disabilities imposed by this section was exercised
by congress at different times on behalf of enumerated
individuals—notably by act of december ,  ( stat. ). in
, the disabilities were removed, by a blanket act, from all persons
"except senators and representatives of the thirty-sixth and
thirty-seventh congresses, officers in the judicial military, and naval
service of the united states, heads of departments, and foreign
ministers of the united states" ( stat. ). twenty-six years later,
on june ,  ( stat. ), congress enacted briefly that "the
disability imposed by section  *** incurred heretofore [prior to june
, ], is hereby removed."[]
[pg ]
section . the validity of the public debt of the united
states, authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of
pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or
rebellion, shall not be questioned. but neither the united states nor
any state shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of
insurrection or rebellion against the united states, or any claim for
the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations
and claims shall be held illegal and void.
although section four "was undoubtedly inspired by the desire to put
beyond question the obligations of the government issued during the
civil war, its language indicates a broader connotation. *** 'the
validity of the public debt' *** [embraces] whatever concerns the
integrity of the public obligations," and applies to government bonds
issued after as well as before adoption of the amendment.[]
[pg ]
section . the congress shall have power to enforce, by
appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.
scope of the provision
"*** until some state law has been passed, or some state action
through its officers or agents has been taken, adverse to the rights of
citizens sought to be protected by the fourteenth amendment, no
legislation of the united states under said amendment, nor any
proceeding under such legislation, can be called into activity: ***
the legislation which congress is authorized to adopt in this behalf is
not general legislation upon the rights of the citizen, but corrective
legislation, that is, such as may be necessary and proper for
counteracting such laws as the states may adopt or enforce, and which,
by the amendment, they are prohibited from making or enforcing, or such
acts and proceedings as the states may commit or take, and which, by the
amendment, they are prohibited from committing or taking."[]
conversely, congress may enforce the provisions of the amendment
whenever they are disregarded by either the legislative, the executive,
or the judicial department of the state. the mode of the enforcement is
left to its discretion. it may secure the right, that is, enforce its
recognition, by removing the case from a state court, in which it is
denied, into a federal court where it will be acknowledged.[]
similarly, congress may provide that "no citizen, possessing all other
qualifications which are or may be prescribed by law shall be
disqualified for service as grand or petit juror in any court of the
united states, or of any state, on account of race, color, or previous
condition of servitude; and any officer or other person charged with any
duty in the selection or summoning of jurors who shall exclude or fail
to summon any citizen for the cause aforesaid shall, on conviction
thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, ***"[] however, the
supreme court declined to sustain congress when, under the guise of
enforcing the fourteenth amendment by appropriate legislation, it
enacted a statute which was not limited to take effect only in case a
state should abridge the privileges of united states citizens, but
applied no matter how well the state might have performed its duty, and
would subject to punishment private individuals who conspired to deprive
anyone of the equal protection of the laws.[]
[pg ]whether its powers of enforcement enable congress constitutionally to
punish state officers who abuse their authority and act in violation of
their state's laws is a question on which the justices only recently
have divided. five justices ruled in screws v. united states[]
that section  of the criminal code[] which provides "whoever,
under the color of any law, statute, ordinance, ***, willfully
subjects, ***, any inhabitant of any state, *** to the deprivation
of any rights, *** protected by the constitution and laws of the
united states, ***" could be the basis of a prosecution of screws, a
georgia sheriff, and others, on charges of having, in the course of
arresting a negro, brutally beaten him to death and deprive him of "the
right not to be deprived of life without due process of law."[]
holding that, "abuse of state power" does not create "immunity to
federal power" these five justices concluded that ex parte
virginia[] and united states v. classic[] had rejected for all
time the defense that action by state officers in excess of their powers
did not constitute state action "under color of law" and therefore was
punishable, if at all, only as a crime against the state.[] the
conviction of screws was, however, reversed on the ground that the jury
should have been instructed to say whether the accused had had the
"specific intent" to deprive their victim of his constitutional rights,
since in the absence of such a finding § failed for
indefiniteness.[] but this construction of the word "willfully"
appears subsequently to have been abandoned, or at least considerably
watered down. in williams v. united states,[] decided in april
, the court ruled, by a bare majority, that a conviction under §
was not subject to objection on the ground of the vagueness of the
statute where the indictment made it clear that the constitutional right
violated by the defendant was immunity from the use of force and
violence to obtain a confession, and this meaning was also made clear by
the trial judge's charge to the jury.[] to the same effect is the
later case of koehler v. united states[] in which the court denied
certiorari in a case closely resembling that of screws, although the
trial judge, while charging the jury that it must find specific intent,
nevertheless went on to say:"'the color of the act determines the
complexion of the intent. the intent to injure or defraud is presumed
when the unlawful act, which results in loss or injury, is proved to
have been knowingly committed. it is a well settled rule, which the law
applies to both criminal and civil cases, that the intent is presumed
and inferred from the result of the action.'"[]
notes
[] as to the other categories, see art. i, §, cl. ,
naturalization (see pp. -).
[] scott v. sandford,  how.  ().
[] ibid. -, -, -.
[] by the civil rights act of april ,  ( stat. ),
enacted two years prior to the fourteenth amendment, "all persons born
in the united states and not subject to any foreign power, excluding
indians not taxed, are hereby declared to be citizens of the united
states; ***"
[]  u.s.  ().—thus, a person who was born in the
united states of swedish parents then naturalized here did not lose her
citizenship and was therefore not subject to deportation because of her
removal to sweden during her minority, it appearing that her parents
resumed their citizenship in that country, but that she returned here on
attaining majority with intention to retain and maintain her
citizenship.—perkins v. elg,  u.s.  ().
[] in re look tin sing,  f.  ().
[] lam mow v. nagle,  f. (d)  ().
[] united states v. gordon, fed. cas. no. , (). the
term, united states, is defined in the recently enacted immigration and
nationality act as follows: "the term, 'united states', except as
otherwise specifically herein provided, when used in a geographical
sense, means the continental united states, alaska, hawaii, puerto rico,
guam, and the virgin islands of the united states."  stat. , §
(). whether the expression is used in the same sense in amendment xiv
may be questionable.
[] slaughter-house cases,  wall. ,  ().
[] arver v. united states (selective draft law cases), 
[] insurance co. v. new orleans, fed. cas. no. ,
().—not being citizens of the united states, corporations
accordingly have been declared unable "to claim the protection of that
clause of the fourteenth amendment which secures the privileges and
immunities of citizens of the united states against abridgment or
impairment by the law of a state."—orient ins. co. v. daggs,  u.s.
,  (). this conclusion was in harmony with the earlier holding
in paul v. virginia,  wall.  () to the effect that
corporations were not within the scope of the privileges and immunities
clause of state citizenship set out in article , section . see also
selover, bates & co. v. walsh,  u.s. ,  (); berea college
v. kentucky,  u.s.  (); liberty warehouse co. v. burley
tobacco growers' co-op. marketing asso.,  u.s. ,  ();
grosjean v. american press co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  wall. , , - ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. , citing crandall v. nevada,  wall.  ().
decided before ratification of the fourteenth amendment.
[] crandall v. nevada,  wall.  (). this case has
been cited as supporting the claim that "the right to pass freely from
state to state" is "among the rights and privileges of national
citizenship" (twining v. new jersey,  u.s. ,  ()); but it
was pointed out in united states v. wheeler,  u.s. ,  (),
that the statute involved in the crandall case was held to burden
directly the performance by the united states of its governmental
functions. in williams v. fears,  u.s. ,  (), a law
taxing the business of hiring persons to labor outside the state was
upheld on the ground that it affected freedom of egress from the state
"only incidentally and remotely."
[] united states v. cruikshank,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte yarbrough,  u.s.  (); wiley v.
sinkler,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. waddell,  u.s.  ().
[] logan v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] re quarles,  u.s.  ().
[] crutcher v. kentucky,  u.s. ,  ().
[] concurring in the result, justice stone contended that the
case should have been disposed of by reliance upon the due process,
rather than the privileges and immunities, clause, inasmuch as the
record disclosed that the complainants had not invoked the latter clause
and the evidence failed to indicate that any of the complainants were in
fact citizens or that any relation between citizens and the federal
government was involved.—ibid. -.
[] justices douglas, black, murphy and jackson.
[]  wall.  ().
[] see madden v. kentucky,  u.s. , .
[] ibid. .
[] holden v. hardy,  u.s. ,  ().
[] williams v. fears,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wilmington star min. co. v. fulton,  u.s. , 
[] heim v. mccall,  u.s.  (); crane v. new
york,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri p.r. co. v. castle,  u.s.  ().
[] western u. teleg. co. v. commercial milling co., 
[] bradwell v. illinois,  wall. ,  (); re
lockwood,  u.s.  ().
[] kirtland v. hotchkiss,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bartemeyer v. iowa,  wall.  (); mugler v.
kansas,  u.s.  (); crowley v. christensen,  u.s. , 
(); giozza v. tiernan,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte kemmler,  u.s.  ().
[] minor v. happersett,  wall.  ().
[] pope v. williams,  u.s.  ().
[] ferry v. spokane, p. & s.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] walker v. sauvinet,  u.s.  ().
[] presser v. illinois,  u.s. ,  ().
[] maxwell v. dow,  u.s. , , - ().
[] twining v. new jersey,  u.s. , - ().
reaffirmed in adamson v. california,  u.s. , - ().
[] new york ex rel. bryant v. zimmerman,  u.s. , 
[] palko v. connecticut,  u.s.  ().
[] breedlove v. suttles,  u.s.  ().
[] madden v. kentucky,  u.s. , - ();
overruling colgate v. harvey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] snowden v. hughes,  u.s.  ().
[] macdougall v. green,  u.s.  ()
[] hibben v. smith,  u.s. ,  ().
[] carroll v. greenwich ins. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
see also french v. barber asphalt paving co.,  u.s. , 
[] scott v. sandford,  how. ,  (), is the
exception. see pp. -.
[]  wall.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. , , .
[]  wall. , -, ,  ().
[] savings & loan association v. topeka,  wall. , 
().—"there are *** rights in every free government beyond the
control of the state. *** there are limitations on [governmental
power] which grow out of the essential nature of all free governments.
implied reservations of individual rights, without which the social
compact could not exist, ***"
[] "rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness are
equivalent to the rights of life, liberty, and property. these are the
fundamental rights which can only be taken away by due process of law,
and which can only be interfered with, or the enjoyment of which can
only be modified, by lawful regulations necessary or proper for the
mutual good of all; *** this right to choose one's calling is an
essential part of that liberty which it is the object of government to
protect; and a calling, when chosen, is a man's property and right.
*** a law which prohibits a large class of citizens from adopting a
lawful employment, or from following a lawful employment previously
adopted, does deprive them of liberty as well as property, without due
process of law."—slaughter-house cases,  wall. , ,  (justice
bradley).
[] see fletcher v. peck,  cr. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. .—"we cannot shut out of view the fact, within
the knowledge of all, that the public health, the public morals, and the
public safety, may be endangered by the general use of intoxicating
drinks; nor the fact, ***, that *** pauperism, and crime *** are,
in some degree, at least, traceable to this evil."
[] ibid. .
[] ibid.
[] adkins v. children's hospital,  u.s.  ();
stettler v. o'hara,  u.s.  (); morehead v. new york ex
rel. tipaldo,  u.s.  (); overruled by west coast hotel co.
v. parrish,  u.s.  ().
[] west coast hotel co. v. parrish,  u.s.  ().
thus the national labor relations act was declared not to "interfere
with the normal exercise of the right of the employer to select its
employees or to discharge them." however, restraint of the employer for
the purpose of preventing an unjust interference with the correlative
right of his employees to organize was declared not to be
arbitrary.—national labor relations board v. jones & laughlin, 
[] see especially howard jay graham, "the 'conspiracy
theory' of the fourteenth amendment", selected essays on constitutional
law, i, - ().
[]  u.s. .—in a case arising under the fifth amendment,
decided almost at the same time, the court explicitly declared the
united states "equally with the states *** are prohibited from
depriving persons or corporations of property without due process of
law." sinking fund cases,  u.s. , - ().
[] smyth v. ames,  u.s. , ,  (); kentucky
finance corp. v. paramount auto exch. corp.,  u.s. ,  ();
liggett (louis k.) co. v. baldridge,  u.s.  ().
[] northwestern nat. l. ins. co. v. riggs,  u.s. ,
 (); western turf assoc. v. greenberg,  u.s. , 
(); pierce v. society of the sisters,  u.s. ,  ().
earlier, in , in northern securities co. v. united states, (
u.s. , ), a case interpreting the federal antitrust law, justice
brewer, in a concurring opinion, had declared that "a corporation,
***, is not endowed with the inalienable rights of a natural person."
[] grosjean v. american press co.,  u.s. , 
[] yick wo v. hopkins,  u.s.  (); terrace v.
thompson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] columbus & g.r. co. v. miller,  u.s.  ();
pennie v. reis,  u.s.  (); taylor v. beckham (no. ), 
u.s.  (); straus v. foxworth,  u.s.  (); tyler v.
judges of the court of registration,  u.s. ,  ().
[] pawhuska v. pawhuska oil co.,  u.s.  ();
trenton v. new jersey,  u.s.  (); williams v. baltimore,
[] boynton v. hutchinson gas co.,  u.s.  ();
south carolina highway dept. v. barnwell bros.,  u.s.  ().
the converse is not true, however; and "the interest of a state official
in vindicating the constitution *** gives him no legal standing to
attack the constitutionality of a state statute in order to avoid
compliance with it.—smith v. indiana,  u.s.  (); braxton
county ct. v. west virginia,  u.s.  (); marshall v. dye,
 u.s.  (); stewart v. kansas city,  u.s.  (). see
also coleman v. miller,  u.s. , - ()."
[] bacon v. walker,  u.s.  (); chicago, b. &
q.r. co. v. illinois ex rel. grimwood,  u.s. ,  ();
california reduction co. v. sanitary reduction works,  u.s. ,
 (); eubank v. richmond,  u.s.  (); schmidinger v.
chicago,  u.s.  (); sligh v. kirkwood,  u.s. , -
(); nebbia v. new york,  u.s.  (); nashville c. & st.
l.r. co. v. walters,  u.s.  ().
[] hadacheck v. sebastian,  u.s.  (); hall v.
geiger-jones co.,  u.s.  (); sligh v. kirkwood,  u.s. ,
- (); eubank v. richmond,  u.s. ,  (); erie r.
co. v. williams,  u.s. ,  (); panhandle eastern pipe line
co. v. state highway commission,  u.s. ,  (); hudson
county water co. v. mccarter,  u.s.  ().
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. goldsboro,  u.s. ,
[] treigle v. acme homestead asso.,  u.s. , 
(); liggett (louis k.) co. v. baldridge,  u.s. , -
[] pennsylvania coal co. v. mahon,  u.s.  ().
see also welch v. swasey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] noble state bank v. haskell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] erie r. co. v. williams,  u.s. ,  ().
[] new orleans public service co. v. new orleans,  u.s.
[] abie state bank v. bryan,  u.s. ,  ().
[] meyer v. nebraska,  u.s. ,  ().
[] jacobson v. massachusetts,  u.s.  (); zucht
v. king,  u.s.  ().
[] buck v. bell,  u.s.  ().
[] minnesota v. probate court,  u.s.  ().
[] lanzetta v. new jersey,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. . even this statement was a dictum. inasmuch as
only corporations and no parents were party litigants, the court in fact
disposed of the case on the ground that the corporations were being
deprived of their "property" without due process of law.
[] waugh v. mississippi university,  u.s. , -
[] hamilton v. university of california,  u.s. , 
(). see also p. .
[]  wall.  ().
[]  u.s. , .—herein liberty of contract was
defined as follows: "the liberty mentioned in that [fourteenth]
amendment means not only the right of the citizen to be free from the
mere physical restraint of his person, as by incarceration, but the term
is deemed to embrace the right of the citizen to be free in the
enjoyment of all his faculties; to be free to use them in all lawful
ways; to live and work where he will; to earn his livelihood by any
lawful calling; to pursue any livelihood or avocation, and for that
purpose to enter into all contracts which may be proper, necessary and
essential to his carrying out to a successful conclusion the purposes
above mentioned."
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. mcguire,  u.s. , ,
 (); wolff packing co. v. court of industrial relations, 
[] holden v. hardy,  u.s.  ().
[] miller v. wilson,  u.s.  (); bosley v.
mclaughlin,  u.s.  (). see also muller v. oregon,  u.s.
 (); riley v. massachusetts,  u.s.  (); hawley v.
walker,  u.s.  ().
[] bunting v. oregon,  u.s.  ().
[] atkin v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] consolidated coal co. v. illinois,  u.s. 
[] wilmington star min. co. v. fulton,  u.s. 
[] barrett v. indiana,  u.s.  ().
[] plymouth coal co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] booth v. indiana,  u.s.  ().
[] sturges & b. mfg. co. v. beauchamp,  u.s. 
[] knoxville iron co. v. harbison,  u.s.  ();
dayton coal & i. co. v. barton,  u.s.  (); keokee consol.
coke co. v. taylor,  u.s.  ().
[] erie r. co. v. williams,  u.s.  ().
[] st. louis, i.m. & s.r. co. v. paul,  u.s. 
[] rail & river coal co. v. yaple,  u.s.  ().
see also mcclean v. arkansas,  u.s.  ().
[] west coast hotel co. v. parrish,  u.s.  (),
overruling adkins v. children's hospital,  u.s.  () (a fifth
amendment case); morehead v. new york ex rel. tipaldo,  u.s. 
[] day-brite lighting, inc. v. missouri,  u.s. , 
[] ibid., -.
[] new york c.r. co. v. white,  u.s. ,  ().
[] arizona copper co. v. hammer (arizona employers'
liability cases),  u.s. , - ().
[] in determining what occupations may be brought under the
designation of "hazardous," the legislature may carry the idea to the
"vanishing point."—ward & gow v. krinsky,  u.s. ,  ().
[] new york c.r. v. white,  u.s.  (); mountain
timber co. v. washington,  u.s.  ().
[] arizona copper co. v. hammer (arizona employers'
liability cases),  u.s. , - ().
[] hawkins v. bleakly,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. mcguire,  u.s. 
[] alaska packers asso. v. industrial commission,  u.s.
[] thornton v. duffy,  u.s.  ().
[] booth fisheries co. v. industrial commission,  u.s.
[] staten island r.t.r. co. v. phoenix indemnity co., 
[] sheehan co. v. shuler,  u.s.  (); new york
state r. co. v. shuler,  u.s.  ().
[] new york c.r. co. v. bianc,  u.s. 
().—attorneys are not deprived of property or their liberty of
contract by restriction imposed by the state on the fees which they may
charge in cases arising under the workmen's compensation law.—yeiser
v. dysart,  u.s.  ().
[] justice black in lincoln union v. northwestern co., 
u.s. ,  (). see also pp. , -, .
in his concurring opinion, contained in the companion case of american
federation of labor v. american sash co.,  u.s. , -
(), justice frankfurter summarized as follows the now obsolete
doctrines employed by the court to strike down state laws fostering
unionization. "*** unionization encountered the shibboleths of a
premachine age and these were reflected in juridical assumptions that
survived the facts on which they were based. adam smith was treated as
though his generalizations had been imparted to him on sinai and not as
a thinker who addressed himself to the elimination of restrictions which
had become fetters upon initiative and enterprise in his day. basic
human rights expressed by the constitutional conception of 'liberty'
were equated with theories of laissez faire. the result was that
economic views of confined validity were treated by lawyers and judges
as though the framers had enshrined them in the constitution. *** the
attitude which regarded any legislative encroachment upon the existing
economic order as infected with unconstitutionality led to disrespect
for legislative attempts to strengthen the wage-earners' bargaining
power. with that attitude as a premise, adair v. united states, 
u.s.  (), and coppage v. kansas,  u.s.  (), followed
logically enough; not even truax v. corrigan,  u.s.  (),
could be considered unexpected."
on grounds of unconstitutional impairment of freedom of contract, or
more particularly, of the unrestricted right of the employer to hire and
fire, a federal and a state statute attempting to outlaw "yellow dog"
contracts whereby, as a condition of obtaining employment, a worker had
to agree not to join or to remain a member of a union, were voided in
adair v. united states and coppage v. kansas, respectively. in truax
v. corrigan, a majority of the court held that an arizona statute
which operated, in effect, to make remediless [by forbidding the use of
injunction] injury to an employer's business by striking employees and
others, through concerted action in picketing, displaying banners
advertising the strike, denouncing the employer as unfair to union
labor, appealing to customers to withdraw their patronage, and
circulating handbills containing abusive and libelous charges against
employers, employees, and patrons, and intimidations of injury to future
patrons, deprives the owner of the business and the premises of his
property without due process of law.
in wolff packing co. v. industrial court,  u.s.  (); 
u.s.  () and in dorchy v. kansas,  u.s.  (), the
court had also ruled that a statute compelling employers and employees
to submit their controversies over wages and hours of labor to state
arbitration was unconstitutional as part of a system compelling
employers and employees to continue in business on terms not of their
own making.
[] prudential ins. co. v. cheek,  u.s.  (). in
conjunction with its approval of this statute, the court also sanctioned
judicial enforcement by a state court of a local rule of policy which
rendered illegal an agreement of several insurance companies having a
monopoly of a line of business in a city that none would employ within
two years any man who had been discharged from, or left, the service of
any of the others.
[] chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. perry,  u.s. 
[] dorchy v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] see p. .
[] cases disposing of the contention that restraints on
picketing amount to a denial of freedom of speech and constitute
therefore a deprivation of liberty without due process of law have been
set forth under amendment i.
[] ibid. . justice frankfurter, concurring, declared that
"the insistence by individuals on their private prejudices ***, in
relations like those now before us, ought not to have a higher
constitutional sanction than the determination of a state to extend the
area of nondiscrimination beyond that which the constitution itself
exacts." ibid. .
[]  u.s. , , . in a lengthy opinion, in which he
registered his concurrence with both decisions, justice frankfurter set
forth extensive statistical data calculated to prove that labor unions
not only were possessed of considerable economic power but by virtue of
such power were no longer dependent on the closed shop for survival. he
would therefore leave to the legislatures the determination "whether it
is preferable in the public interest that trade unions should be
subjected to state intervention or left to the free play of social
forces, whether experience has disclosed 'union unfair labor practices,'
and, if so, whether legislative correction is more appropriate than
self-discipline and pressure of public opinion—***."  u.s. ,
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). other recent cases regulating
picketing are treated under amendment i, see p. .
[] chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
[] wolff packing co. v. court of industrial relations, 
[] munn v. illinois,  u.s.  (); budd v. new
york,  u.s. ,  (); brass v. north dakota ex rel. stoeser,
[] cotting v. godard,  u.s.  ().
[] townsend v. yeomans,  u.s.  ().
[] german alliance ins. co. v. lewis,  u.s.  ();
aetna ins. co. v. hyde,  u.s.  ().
[] o'gorman & young v. hartford f. ins. co.,  u.s. 
[] williams v. standard oil co.,  u.s.  ().
[] tyson & bros.—united theatre ticket offices v. banton,
[] new state ice co. v. liebmann,  u.s.  ().
[] nebbia v. new york,  u.s. , -, -, 
(). in reaching this conclusion the court might be said to have
elevated to the status of prevailing doctrine the views advanced in
previous decisions by dissenting justices. thus, justice stone,
dissenting in ribnik v. mcbride,  u.s. , - () had
declared: "price regulation is within the state's power whenever any
combination of circumstances seriously curtails the regulative force of
competition so that buyers or sellers are placed at such a disadvantage
in the bargaining struggle that a legislature might reasonably
anticipate serious consequences to the community as a whole." in his
dissenting opinion in new state ice co. v. liebmann,  u.s. ,
- (), justice brandeis had also observed that: "the notion of
a distinct category of business 'affected with a public interest'
employing property 'devoted to a public use' rests upon historical
error. in my opinion the true principle is that the state's power
extends to every regulation of any business reasonably required and
appropriate for the public protection. i find in the due process clause
no other limitation upon the character or the scope of regulation
permissible."
[] justice mcreynolds, speaking for the dissenting justices,
labelled the controls imposed by the challenged statute as a "fanciful
scheme to protect the farmer against undue exactions by prescribing the
price at which milk disposed of by him at will may be resold."
intimating that the new york statute was as efficacious as a safety
regulation which required "householders to pour oil on their roofs as a
means of curbing the spread of a neighborhood fire," justice mcreynolds
insisted that "this court must have regard to the wisdom of the
enactment," and must determine "whether the means proposed have
reasonable relation to something within legislative power."— u.s.
[]  u.s.  (). see also peik v. chicago & n.w.r.
co.,  u.s.  ().
[] rate-making is deemed to be one species of price fixing.
power comm'n v. pipeline co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] nebbia v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s.  (). see also chicago, b. & q.r. co. v.
chicago,  u.s.  ().
[] dow v. beidelman,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid . insofar as judicial intervention resulting in
the invalidation of legislatively imposed rates has involved carriers,
it should be noted that the successful complainant invariably has been
the carrier, not the shipper.
[]  u.s.  ().—of course the validity of rates
prescribed by a state for services wholly within its limits, must be
determined wholly without reference to the interstate business done by a
public utility. domestic business should not be made to bear the losses
on interstate business, and vice versa. thus a state has no power to
require the hauling of logs at a loss or at rates that are unreasonable,
even if a railroad receives adequate revenues from the intrastate long
haul and the interstate lumber haul taken together. on the other hand,
in determining whether intrastate passenger railway rates are
confiscatory, all parts of the system within the state (including
sleeping, parlor, and dining cars) should be embraced in the
computation; and the unremunerative parts should not be excluded because
built primarily for interstate traffic or not required to supply local
transportation needs.—see: minnesota rate cases (simpson v.
shepard),  u.s. , - (); chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v.
public utilities commission,  u.s.  (); groesbeck v. duluth,
s.s. & a.r. co.,  u.s.  (). the maxim that a legislature
cannot delegate legislative power is qualified to permit creation of
administrative boards to apply to the myriad details of rate schedules
the regulatory police power of the state. to prevent the conferring upon
an administrative agency of authority to fix rates for public service
from being a mere delegation of legislative power, and therefore void,
the legislature must enjoin upon it a certain course of procedure and
certain rules of decision in the performance of its functions, with
which the agency must substantially comply to validate its action.
wichita railroad & l. co. v. public utilities commission,  u.s. 
[] reagan v. farmers' loan & trust company,  u.s. ,
[] interstate commerce commission v. illinois c.r. co.,
[] des moines gas co. v. des moines,  u.s.  ().
[] minnesota rate cases (simpson v. shepard),  u.s.
[] knoxville v. water company,  u.s.  ().
[] smith v. illinois bell teleph. co.,  u.s. 
[] willcox v. consolidated gas co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. , ,  (). see also minnesota rate
cases (simpson v. shepard),  u.s. ,  ().
[] san diego land & town co. v. jasper,  u.s. , ,
 (). see also van dyke v. geary,  u.s.  (); georgia
ry. v. r.r. comm.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] for its current position, see crowell v. benson, 
[]  u.s. , - (). see also interstate comm.
comm. v. illinois c.r.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. . in injunctive proceedings, evidence is freshly
introduced whereas in the cases received on appeal from state courts,
the evidence is found within the record.
[]  u.s. , .—although this and the previously
cited decision arose out of controversies involving the natural gas act
of  ( stat. ), the principles laid down therein are believed to
be applicable to the review of rate orders of state commissions, except
insofar as the latter operate in obedience to laws containing unique
standards or procedures.
[] in federal power commission v. nat. gas pipeline co.,
 u.s. , , justices black, douglas, and murphy, in a concurring
opinion, proposed to travel the road all the way back to munn v.
illinois, and deprive courts of the power to void rates simply because
they deem the latter to be unreasonable. in a concurring opinion,
written earlier in  in driscoll v. edison co.,  u.s. , ,
justice frankfurter temporarily adopted a similar position; for therein
he declared that "the only relevant function of law *** [in rate
controversies] is to secure observance of those procedural safeguards in
the exercise of legislative powers, which are the historic foundations
of due process." however, in his dissent in the hope gas case ( u.s.
, ), he disassociated himself from this proposal, and asserted
that "it was decided [more than fifty years ago] that the final say
under the constitution lies with the judiciary."
[] federal power commission v. hope gas co.,  u.s. ,
[] federal power comm. v. hope gas co.,  u.s. , 
(), citing chicago & grand trunk ry. co. v. wellman,  u.s. ,
- (); missouri ex rel. southwestern bell teleph. co. v.
public service commission,  u.s. ,  ().
[] for this reason there is presented below a survey of the
formulas, utilization of which was hitherto deemed essential if due
process requirements were to be satisfied.
() fair value.—on the premise that a utility is entitled to
demand a rate schedule that will yield a "fair return upon the value" of
the property which it employs for public convenience, the court in ,
in smyth v. ames ( u.s. , -), held that determination of
such value necessitated consideration of at least such factors as "the
original cost of construction, the amount expended in permanent
improvements, the amount and market value of *** [the utility's] bonds
and stock, the present as compared with the original cost of
construction, [replacement cost], the probable earning capacity of the
property under particular rates prescribed by statute, and the sum
required to meet operating expenses."
() reproduction cost.—prior to the demise in  of the
smyth v. ames fair value formula, two of the components thereof were
accorded special emphasis, with the second quickly surpassing the first
in terms of the measure of importance attributed to it. these were: ()
the actual cost of the property ("the original cost of construction
together with the amount expended in permanent improvements") and ()
reproduction cost ("the present as compared with the original cost of
construction"). if prices did not fluctuate through the years, the
controversy which arose over the application of reproduction cost in
preference to original cost would have been reduced to a war of words;
for results obtained by reliance upon either would have been identical.
the instability in the price structure, however, presented the courts
with a dilemma. if rate-making is attempted at a time of declining
prices, valuation on the basis of present or reproduction cost will
advantage the consumer or user, and disadvantage the utility. on the
other hand, if the original cost of construction is employed, the
benefits are redistributed, with the consumer becoming the loser.
similarly, when rates are fixed at a time of rising prices, reliance
upon reproduction cost to the exclusion of original cost will produce
results satisfactory to the utility and undesirable to the public, and
vice versa.
notwithstanding the admonition of smyth v. ames that original cost, no
less than reproduction cost, was to be considered in determining value,
the court, in the years which intervened between  and , wavered
only slightly in its preference for the reproduction cost formula, and
moderated its application thereof only in part whenever periods of
rising or sustained high prices appeared to require such deviation in
behalf of consumer interests. as examples of the varied application by
the court of the reproduction cost formula, the following cases are
significant: san diego land and town co. v. national city,  u.s.
,  (); san diego land & town co. v. jasper,  u.s. ,
 (); willcox v. consolidated gas co.,  u.s. ,  ();
minnesota rate cases,  u.s.  (); galveston electric co. v.
galveston,  u.s. ,  (); missouri ex rel. southwestern bell
teleph. co. v. public service commission,  u.s.  ();
bluefield waterworks & improv. co. v. pub. serv. comm.,  u.s. 
(); georgia r. & power co. v. railroad comm.,  u.s. , 
(); mccardle v. indianapolis water co.,  u.s.  (); st.
louis & o'fallon ry. v. united states,  u.s.  ().
() prudent investment (versus reproduction cost).—this method
of valuation, which was championed by justice brandeis in a separate
opinion filed in southwestern bell teleph. co. v. pub. serv. comm.
( u.s. , -, , - ()), was defined by him as
follows: "the compensation which the constitution guarantees an
opportunity to earn is the reasonable cost of conducting the business.
cost includes not only operating expenses, but also capital charges.
capital charges cover the allowance, by way of interest, for the use of
the capital, ***; the allowance for the risk incurred; and enough more
to attract capital. *** where the financing has been proper, the cost
to the utility of the capital, required to construct, equip and operate
its plant, should measure the rate of return which the constitution
guarantees opportunity to earn." advantages to be derived from "adoption
of the amount prudently invested as the rate base and the amount of the
capital charge as the measure of the rate of return" would, according to
justice brandeis, be nothing less than the attainment of a "basis for
decision which is certain and stable. the rate base would be ascertained
as a fact, not determined as a matter of opinion. it would not fluctuate
with the market price of labor, or materials, or money. ***"
as a method of valuation, the prudent investment theory was not accorded
any acceptance until the depression of the 's. the sharp decline in
prices which occurred during this period doubtless contributed to the
loss of affection for reproduction cost; and in los angeles gas co. v.
r.r. comm'n.,  u.s.  () and r.r. comm'n. v. pacific gas co.,
 u.s. , ,  () the court upheld respectively a valuation
from which reproduction cost had been excluded and another in which
historical cost served as the rate base. later, in , when in power
comm'n. v. nat. gas pipeline co.,  u.s. , the court further
emphasized its abandonment of the reproduction cost factor, there
developed momentarily the prospect that prudent investment might be
substituted. this possibility was quickly negatived, however, by the
hope gas case ( u.s.  ()) which dispensed with the necessity
of relying upon any formula for the purpose of fixing valid rates.
() depreciation.—no less indispensable to the determination
of the fair value mentioned in smyth v. ames was the amount of
depreciation to be allowed as a deduction from the measure of cost
employed, whether the latter be actual cost, reproduction cost, or any
other form of cost determination. although not mentioned in smyth v.
ames, the court gave this item consideration in knoxville v. knoxville
water co.,  u.s. , - (); but notwithstanding its early
recognition as an allowable item of deduction in determining value,
depreciation continued to be the subject of controversy arising out of
the difficulty of ascertaining it and of computing annual allowances to
cover the same. indicative of such controversy has been the disagreement
as to whether annual allowances granted shall be in such amount as will
permit the replacement of equipment at current costs; i.e., present
value, or at original cost. in the hope gas case,  u.s. , 
(), the court reversed united r. & electric co. v. west,  u.s.
, - (), insofar as the latter holding rejected original
cost as the basis of annual depreciation allowances.
() going concern value and good will.—whether or not
intangibles were to be included in valuation was not passed upon in
smyth v. ames; but shortly thereafter, in des moines gas co. v. des
moines,  u.s. ,  (), the court declared it to be
self-evident "that there is an element of value in an assembled and
established plant, doing business and earning money, over one not thus
advanced, *** [and that] this element of value is a property right,
and should be considered in determining the value of the property, upon
which the owner has a right to make a fair return ***." generally
described as going concern value, this element has never been precisely
defined by the court, and the latter has accordingly been plagued by the
difficulty of determining its worth. in its latest pronouncement on the
subject, uttered in power comm'n. v. nat. gas pipeline co.,  u.s.
,  (), the court denied that there is any "constitutional
requirement that going concern value, even when it is an appropriate
element to be included in a rate base, must be separately stated and
appraised as such *** valuations for rate purposes of a business
assembled as a whole *** [have often been] sustained without separate
appraisal of the going concern element. *** when that has been done,
the burden rests on the regulated company to show that this item has
neither been adequately covered in the rate base nor recouped from prior
earnings of the business." franchise value and good will, on the other
hand, have been consistently excluded from valuation; the latter
presumably because a utility invariably enjoys a monopoly and consumers
have no choice in the matter of patronizing it. the latter proposition
has been developed in the following cases: willcox v. consolidated gas
co.,  u.s.  (); des moines gas co. v. des moines,  u.s.
, - (); galveston electric co. v. galveston,  u.s. 
(); los angeles gas & e. corp. v. railroad commission,  u.s.
() salvage value.—it is not constitutional error to disregard
theoretical reproduction cost for a plant which "no responsible person
would think of reproducing." accordingly, where, due to adverse
conditions, a street-surface railroad has lost all value except for
scrap or salvage, it was permissible for a commission, as the court held
in market st. r. co. v. comm'n.,  u.s. , ,  (), to use
as a rate base the price at which the utility offered to sell its
property to a citizen. moreover, the commission's order was not invalid
even though under the prescribed rate the utility would operate at a
loss; for the due process cannot be invoked to protect a public utility
against business hazards, such as the loss of, or failure to obtain,
patronage. on the other hand, in the case of a water company whose
franchise has expired (denver v. denver union water co.,  u.s. 
()), but where there is no other source of supply, its plant should
be valued as actually in use rather than at what the property would
bring for some other use in case the city should build its own plant.
() past losses and gains.—"the constitution [does not]
require that the losses of *** [a] business in one year shall be
restored from future earnings by the device of capitalizing the losses
and adding them to the rate base on which a fair return and depreciation
allowance is to be earned." power comm'n. v. nat. gas pipeline co.,
 u.s. ,  (). nor can past losses be used to enhance the
value of the property to support a claim that rates for the future are
confiscatory (galveston electric co. v. galveston,  u.s. 
()), any more than profits of the past can be used to sustain
confiscatory rates for the future (newton v. consolidated gas co., 
u.s. ,  (); public utility commissioners v. new york teleg.
co.,  u.s. , - ()).
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. north carolina corp.
commission,  u.s. ,  (), citing chicago, b.& q.r. co. v.
iowa,  u.s.  (). see also prentis v. atlantic coast line
co.,  u.s.  (); denver & r.g.r. co. v. denver,  u.s. 
[] chicago & g.t.r. co. v. wellman,  u.s. , 
(); mississippi r. commission v. mobile & o.r. co.,  u.s. ,
 (). see also missouri p.r. co. v. nebraska,  u.s. 
(); nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. walters,  u.s. , 
[] cleveland electric ry. co. v. cleveland,  u.s. 
[] detroit united railway co. v. detroit,  u.s. 
(). see also denver v. new york trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] los angeles v. los angeles gas & electric corp., 
[] newburyport water co. v. newburyport,  u.s. 
(). see also skaneateles waterworks co. v. skaneateles,  u.s.
 (); helena waterworks co. v. helena,  u.s.  ();
madera waterworks v. madera,  u.s.  ().
[] western union teleg. co. v. richmond,  u.s. 
[] pierce oil corp. v. phoenix ref co.,  u.s. 
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. goldsboro,  u.s. ,
 (). see also chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago,  u.s.
,  (); chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. illinois ex rel. grimwood,
 u.s. , - (); new orleans public service, inc. v. new
orleans,  u.s.  ().
[] consumers' co. v. hatch,  u.s.  ().
[] panhandle eastern pipe line co. v. state highway
commission,  u.s.  ().
[] new orleans gas light co. v. drainage commission, 
[] norfolk & s. turnpike co. v. virginia,  u.s. 
[] international bridge co. v. new york,  u.s. 
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. nebraska,  u.s. 
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. illinois ex rel. grimwood,
 u.s.  (); chicago & a.r. co. v. tranbarger,  u.s. 
(); lake shore & m.s.r. co. v. clough,  u.s.  ().
[] pacific gas & electric co. v. police ct.,  u.s. 
[] chicago, st. p., m. & o.r. co. v. holmberg,  u.s.
[] nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. walters,  u.s. 
(). see also lehigh valley r. co. v. public utility comrs., 
[] united fuel gas co. v. railroad commission,  u.s.
, - (). see also new york ex rel. woodhaven gas light co.
v. public service commission,  u.s.  (); new york ex rel.
new york & o. gas co. v. mccall,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri p.r. co. v. kansas ex rel. taylor,  u.s.
 (); chesapeake & o.r. co. v. public service commission, 
u.s.  (); ft. smith light & traction co. v. bourland,  u.s.
[] chesapeake & o.r. co. v. public service commission, 
u.s. ,  (); brooks-scanlon co. v. railroad commission, 
u.s.  (); railroad commission v. eastern texas r. co.,  u.s.
 (); broad river power co. v. south carolina ex rel. daniel, 
[] atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. railroad commission, 
[] minneapolis & st. l.r. co. v. minnesota ex rel.
railroad & w. commission,  u.s.  ().
[] gladson v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri p.r. co. v. kansas ex rel. taylor,  u.s.
[] chesapeake & o.r. co. v. public service commission, 
[] lake erie & w.r. co. v. state public utilities
commission ex rel. cameron,  u.s.  (); western & a.r. co. v.
georgia public service commission,  u.s.  ().
[] alton r. co. v. illinois comm'n,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri p.r. co. v. nebraska,  u.s.  ().
[] chesapeake & o.r. co. v. public service commission, 
[] great northern r. co. v. minnesota ex rel. railroad &
warehouse commission,  u.s.  (); great northern r. co. v.
cahill,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. wisconsin,  u.s. 
[] washington ex rel. oregon r. & n. co. v. fairchild, 
u.s. , - (). see also michigan c.r. co. v. michigan
railroad commission,  u.s.  (); seaboard air line r. co. v.
railroad commission,  u.s. ,  ().
[] louisville & n.r. co. v. central stockyards co., 
[] michigan c.r. co. v. michigan railroad commission, 
[] chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. iowa,  u.s. 
[] chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. minneapolis c. & c.
asso.,  u.s.  (). nor are railroads denied due process when
they are forbidden to exact a greater charge for a shorter distance than
for a longer distance. louisville & n.r. co. v. kentucky,  u.s.
,  (); missouri p.r. co. v. mcgrew coal co.,  u.s. 
[] wadley southern r. co. v. georgia,  u.s. 
[] richmond, f. & p.r. co. v. richmond,  u.s. 
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. goldsboro,  u.s. 
[] great northern r. co. v. minnesota ex rel. clara city,
[] denver & r.g.r. co. v. denver,  u.s.  ().
[] nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. white,  u.s. 
[] nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. alabama,  u.s. 
[] chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. arkansas,  u.s. 
(); st. louis, i.m. & s.r. co. v. arkansas,  u.s.  ();
missouri p.r. co. v. norwood,  u.s.  ().
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. georgia,  u.s. 
[] erie r. co. v. solomon,  u.s.  ().
[] new york, n.h. & h.r. co. v. new york,  u.s. 
[] chicago & n.w.r. co. v. nye schneider fowler co., 
u.s.  (). see also yazoo & m.v.r. co. v. jackson vinegar co.,
 u.s.  (); cf. adams express co. v. croninger,  u.s.
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. glenn,  u.s. 
[] st. louis & s.f.r. co. v. mathews,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago & n.w.r. co. v. nye schneider fowler co., 
[] kansas city southern r. co. v. anderson,  u.s. 
[] st. louis, i.m. & s.r. co. v. wynne,  u.s. 
[] chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. polt,  u.s. 
[] missouri p.r. co. v. tucker,  u.s.  ().
[] st. louis, i.m. & s.r. co. v. williams,  u.s. , 
[] missouri p.r. co. v. humes,  u.s.  ();
minneapolis & st. l.r. co. v. beckwith,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. cram,  u.s.  ().
[] southwestern teleg. & teleph. co. v. danaher,  u.s.
[] new orleans debenture redemption co. v. louisiana, 
[] lake shore & m.s.r. co. v. smith,  u.s. , 
[] national council v. state council,  u.s. 
[] munday v. wisconsin trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] state farm ins. co. v. duel,  u.s.  ().
[] asbury hospital v. cass county,  u.s.  ().
[] nebbia v. new york,  u.s. , - ().
[] smiley v. kansas,  u.s.  (). see
waters-pierce oil co. v. texas,  u.s.  (); national cotton
oil co. v. texas,  u.s.  (), also upholding antitrust laws.
[] international harvester co. v. missouri,  u.s. 
(). see also american seeding machine co. v. kentucky,  u.s.
[] grenada lumber co. v. mississippi,  u.s. 
[] aikens v. wisconsin,  u.s.  ().
[] central lumber co. v. south dakota,  u.s. 
[] fairmont creamery co. v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] old dearborn distributing co. v. seagram-distillers
corp.,  u.s.  (); the pep boys v. pyroil sales co.,  u.s.
[] schmidinger v. chicago,  u.s. ,  (),
citing mclean v. arkansas,  u.s. ,  ().
[] merchants exch. v. missouri ex rel. barker,  u.s.
[] hauge v. chicago,  u.s.  ().
[] lemieux v. young,  u.s.  (); kidd, d. & p.
co. v. musselman grocer co.,  u.s.  ().
[] pacific states box & basket co. v. white,  u.s. 
[] schmidinger v. chicago,  u.s.  ().
[] burns baking co. v. bryan,  u.s.  ().
[] petersen baking co. v. bryan,  u.s.  ().
[] armour & co. v. north dakota,  u.s.  ().
[] heath & m. mfg. co. v. worst,  u.s.  (); corn
products ref. co. v. eddy,  u.s.  (); national fertilizer
asso. v. bradley,  u.s.  ().
[] advance-rumely thresher co. v. jackson,  u.s. 
[] hall v. geiger-jones co.,  u.s.  (); caldwell
v. sioux falls stock yards co.,  u.s.  (); merrick v.
halsey & co.,  u.s.  ().
[] booth v. illinois,  u.s.  ().
[] otis v. parker,  u.s.  ().
[] brodnax v. missouri,  u.s.  ().
[] house v. mayes,  u.s.  ().
[] rast v. van deman & l. co.,  u.s.  (); tanner
v. little,  u.s.  (); pitney v. washington,  u.s. 
[] noble state bank v. haskell,  u.s.  ();
shallenberger v. first state bank,  u.s.  (); assaria state
bank v. dolley,  u.s.  (); abie state bank v. bryan, 
[] provident inst. for savings v. malone,  u.s. 
(); anderson national bank v. luckett,  u.s.  ().
when a bank conservator appointed pursuant to a new statute has all the
functions of a receiver under the old law, one of which is the
enforcement on behalf of depositors of stockholders' liability, which
liability the conservator can enforce as cheaply as could a receiver
appointed under the pre-existing statute, it cannot be said that the new
statute, in suspending the right of a depositor to have a receiver
appointed, arbitrarily deprives a depositor of his remedy or destroys
his property without due process of law. the depositor has no property
right in any particularly form of remedy.—gibbes v. zimmerman, 
[] doty v. love,  u.s.  ().
[] farmers & m. bank v. federal reserve bank,  u.s. 
[] griffith v. connecticut,  u.s.  ().
[] mutual loan co. v. martell,  u.s.  ().
[] la tourette v. mcmaster,  u.s.  (); stipcich
v. metropolitan l. ins. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] german alliance ins. co. v. lewis,  u.s. 
[] o'gorman and young v. hartford insur. co.,  u.s. 
[] nutting v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  (),
distinguishing allgeyer v. louisiana,  u.s.  (). see also
hooper v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] daniel v. family ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] osborn v. ozlin,  u.s. , - (). dissenting
from the conclusion, justice roberts declared that the plain effect of
the virginia law is to compel a nonresident to pay a virginia resident
for services which the latter does not in fact render.
[] california auto. assn. v. maloney,  u.s. 
[] allgeyer v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
[] new york l. ins. co. v. dodge,  u.s.  ().
[] national union f. ins. co. v. wanberg,  u.s. 
[] hartford acci. & indem. co. v. nelson (n.o.) mfg. co.,
[] merchants mut. auto liability ins. co. v. smart, 
[] orient ins. co. v. daggs,  u.s.  ().
[] hoopeston canning co. v. cullen,  u.s.  ().
[] german alliance ins. co. v. hale,  u.s.  ().
see also carroll v. greenwich ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] life & c. ins. co. v. mccray,  u.s.  ().
[] northwestern nat. l. ins. co. v. riggs,  u.s. 
[] whitfield ex rel. hadley v. aetna l. ins. co.,  u.s.
[] polk v. mutual reserve fund life association,  u.s.
[] neblett v. carpenter,  u.s.  ().
[] brazee v. michigan,  u.s.  ().—with four
justices dissenting, the court, in adams v. tanner,  u.s. 
(), "struck down a state law absolutely prohibiting maintenance of
private employment agencies." commenting on the "constitutional
philosophy" thereof in lincoln union v. northwestern co.,  u.s.
,  (), justice black stated that olsen v. nebraska,  u.s.
 (), (see p. ) "clearly undermined adams v. tanner."
[] liggett (louis k.) co. v. baldridge,  u.s. 
[] mcnaughton v. johnson,  u.s. ,  (). see
also dent v. west virginia,  u.s.  (); hawker v. new
york,  u.s.  (); reetz v. michigan,  u.s.  ();
watson v. maryland,  u.s.  ().
[] collins v. texas,  u.s.  (); hayman v.
galveston,  u.s.  ().
[] semler v. oregon state dental examiners,  u.s. ,
 (). see also douglas v. noble,  u.s.  (); graves
v. minnesota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] olsen v. smith,  u.s.  ().
[] nashville, c. &. st. l.r. co. v. alabama,  u.s. 
[] smith v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[] western turf asso. v. greenberg,  u.s.  ().
[] cargill (w.w.) co. v. minnesota ex rel. railroad & w.
commission,  u.s.  ().
[] lehon v. atlanta,  u.s.  ().
[] gundling v. chicago,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bourjois, inc. v. chapman,  u.s.  ().
[] weller v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] packer corp. v. utah,  u.s.  ().
[] halter v. nebraska,  u.s.  ().
[] mccloskey v. tobin,  u.s.  ().
[] natal v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
[] murphy v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] rosenthal v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] thompson v. consolidated gas utilities corp.,  u.s.
, - (), citing ohio oil co. v. indiana (no. ),  u.s. 
(); lindsley v. natural carbonic gas co.,  u.s.  ();
oklahoma v. kansas natural gas co.,  u.s.  ().
[] champlin ref. co. v. corporation commission,  u.s.
[] railroad commission v. oil co.,  u.s.  ().
see also r.r. commission v. oil co.,  u.s.  (); r.r.
commission v. humble oil & refining co.,  u.s.  ().
[] thompson v. consolidated gas utilities corp.,  u.s.
[] cities service co. v. peerless co.,  u.s. 
(); phillips petroleum co. v. oklahoma, ibid.,  ().
[] walls v. midland carbon co.,  u.s.  (). see
also henderson co. v. thompson,  u.s.  ().
[] bandini petroleum co. v. superior ct.,  u.s. 
[] gant v. oklahoma city,  u.s.  ().
[] pennsylvania coal co. v. mahon,  u.s.  ().
[] hudson county water co. v. mccarter,  u.s. ,
[] miller v. schoene,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] sligh v. kirkwood,  u.s.  ().
[] bayside fish flour co. v. gentry,  u.s. , 
[] manchester v. massachusetts,  u.s.  (); geer
v. connecticut,  u.s.  ().
[] miller v. mclaughlin,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bayside fish flour co. v. gentry,  u.s.  ().
[] geer v. connecticut,  u.s.  ().
[] silz v. hesterberg,  u.s.  ().
[] reinman v. little rock,  u.s.  ().
[] hadacheck v. sebastian,  u.s.  ().
[] fischer v. st. louis,  u.s.  ().
[] reinman v. little rock,  u.s.  ().
[] bacon v. walker,  u.s.  ().
[] northwestern laundry co. v. des moines,  u.s. 
(). for a case embracing a rather special set of facts, see
dobbins v. los angeles,  u.s.  ().
[] welch v. swasey,  u.s.  ().
[] euclid v. ambler realty co.,  u.s.  (); zahn
v. board of public works,  u.s.  (); nectaw v. cambridge,
 u.s.  (); cusack (thomas) co. v. chicago,  u.s. 
(); st. louis poster advertising co. v. st. louis,  u.s. 
[] washington ex rel. seattle title trust co. v. roberage,
[] eubank v. richmond,  u.s.  ().
[] gorieb v. fox,  u.s.  ().
[] buchanan v. warley,  u.s.  ().
[] pierce oil corp. v. hope,  u.s.  ().
[] standard oil co. v. marysville,  u.s.  ().
[] barbier v. connolly,  u.s.  (); soon hing v.
crowley,  u.s.  ().
[] maguire v. reardon,  u.s.  ().
[] queenside hills co. v. saxl,  u.s.  ().
[] compagnie francaise de navigation à vapeur v. louisiana
state board of health,  u.s.  ().
[] jacobson v. massachusetts,  u.s.  (); new york
ex rel. lieberman v. van de carr,  u.s.  ().
[] perley v. north carolina,  u.s.  ().
[] california reduction co. v. sanitary reduction works,
[] hutchinson v. valdosta,  u.s.  ().
[] sligh v. kirkwood,  u.s. , - ().
[] powell v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  (); magnano
(a.) co. v. hamilton,  u.s.  ().
[] north american cold storage co. v. chicago,  u.s.
[] adams v. milwaukee,  u.s.  ().
[] baccus v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
[] roschen v. ward,  u.s.  ().
[] minnesota ex rel. whipple v. martinson,  u.s. , 
[] hutchinson ice cream co. v. iowa,  u.s.  ().
[] hebe co. v. shaw,  u.s.  ().
[] price v. illinois,  u.s.  ().
[] sage stores v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] weaver v. palmer bros co.,  u.s.  ().
[] ah sin v. wittman,  u.s.  ().
[] marvin v. trout,  u.s.  ().
[] stone v. mississippi ex rel. harris,  u.s. 
(); douglas v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] l'hote v. new orleans,  u.s.  ().
[] petit v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
[] boston beer co. v. massachusetts,  u.s. , 
(); mugler v. kansas,  u.s.  (); kidd v. pearson, 
u.s.  (); purity extract & tonic co. v. lynch,  u.s. 
(); james clark distilling co. v. western maryland r. co., 
u.s.  (); barbour v. georgia,  u.s.  ().
[] mugler v. kansas,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hawes v. georgia,  u.s.  (); van oster v.
kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] stephenson v. binford,  u.s.  ().
[] stanley v. public utilities commission,  u.s. 
[] stephenson v. binford,  u.s.  ().
[] michigan public utilities commission v. duke,  u.s.
[] frost v. railroad commission,  u.s.  ();
smith v. cahoon,  u.s.  ().
[] bradley v. pub. util. comm'n.,  u.s.  ().
[] sproles v. binford,  u.s.  ().
[] railway express v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] reitz v. mealey,  u.s.  ().
[] young v. masci,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte poresky,  u.s.  (). see also packard
v. banton,  u.s.  (); sprout v. south bend,  u.s. 
(); hodge drive-it-yourself co. v. cincinnati,  u.s. 
(); continental baking co. v. woodring,  u.s.  ().
[] irving trust co. v. day,  u.s. ,  ().
[] demorest v. city bank co.,  u.s. , - ().
[] connecticut ins. co. v. moore,  u.s.  ().
justice jackson and douglas dissented on the ground that new york is
attempting to escheat unclaimed funds not located either actually or
constructively in new york and which are the property of beneficiaries
who may never have been citizens or residents of new york.
[] snowden v. hughes,  u.s.  ().
[] angle v. chicago, st. p.m. & o.r. co.,  u.s. 
[] coombes v. getz,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] gibbes v. zimmerman,  u.s. ,  ().
[] shriver v. woodbine sav. bank,  u.s.  ().
[] chase securities corp. v. donaldson,  u.s. ,
[] sentell v. new orleans & c.r. co.,  u.s. 
[] soliah v. heskin,  u.s.  ().
[] trenton v. new jersey,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago v. sturges,  u.s.  ().
[] louisiana ex rel. folsom bros. v. new orleans,  u.s.
[] attorney general ex rel. kies v. lowrey,  u.s. 
[] hunter v. pittsburgh,  u.s.  ().
[] stewart v. kansas city,  u.s.  ().
[] tonawanda v. lyon,  u.s.  (); cass farm co.
v. detroit,  u.s.  ().
[] southwestern oil co. v. texas,  u.s. , 
[] citizens' sav. & l. asso. v. topeka,  wall. 
(); jones v. portland,  u.s.  (); green v. frazier,
 u.s.  (); carmichael v. southern coal & coke co.,  u.s.
[] milheim v. moffat tunnel improv. dist.,  u.s. 
[] jones v. portland,  u.s.  ().
[] green v. frazier,  u.s.  ().
[] nicchia v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] milheim v. moffat tunnel improv. dist,  u.s. 
[] cochran v. louisiana state bd. of ed.,  u.s. 
[] carmichael v. southern coal & coke co.,  u.s. 
[] fox v. standard oil co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] stewart dry goods co. v. lewis,  u.s.  ().
see also chapman v. zobelein,  u.s.  (); kelly v.
pittsburgh,  u.s.  ().
[] nashville, c. & st. l.r. co. v. wallace,  u.s. 
(); carmichael v. southern coal & coke co.,  u.s.  (). a
taxpayer therefore cannot contest the imposition of an income tax on the
ground that, in operation, it returns to his town less income tax than
he and its other inhabitants pay.—dane v. jackson,  u.s. 
[] stebbins v. riley,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] cahen v. brewster,  u.s.  ().
[] keeney v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] salomon v. state tax commission,  u.s.  ().
[] orr v. gilman,  u.s.  (); chanler v.
kelsey,  u.s.  ().
[] nickel v. cole,  u.s. ,  ().
[] coolidge v. long,  u.s.  ().
[] binney v. long,  u.s.  ().
[] whitney v. state tax com.,  u.s. , ().
[] welch v. henry,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hoeper v. tax commission,  u.s.  ().
[] welch v. henry,  u.s. , - ().
[] puget sound power & light co. v. seattle,  u.s. 
[] new york, p. & n. teleg. co. v. dolan,  u.s. 
[] barwise v. sheppard,  u.s.  ().
[] nashville, o. & st. l. ky. v. browning,  u.s. 
[] paddell v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] hagar v. reclamation district,  u.s.  ().
[] butters v. oakland,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri p.r. co. v. western crawford road improv.
dist.,  u.s.  (). see also roberts v. richland irrig. co.,
 u.s.  () in which it was also stated that an assessment to pay
the general indebtedness of an irrigation district is valid, even though
in excess of the benefits received.
[] houck v. little river drainage dist,  u.s. 
[] road improv. dist. v. missouri p.r. co.,  u.s. 
[] kansas city southern r. co. v. road improv. dist., 
[] louisville & n.r. co. v. barber asphalt pav. co., 
[] myles salt co. v. iberia & st. m. drainage dist., 
[] wagner v. leser,  u.s.  ().
[] charlotte harbor & n.r. co. v. welles,  u.s. 
[] union refrigerator transit co. v. kentucky,  u.s.
,  (). see also louisville & j. ferry co. v. kentucky, 
[] carstairs v. cochran,  u.s.  (); hannis
distilling co. v. baltimore,  u.s.  (); frick v.
pennsylvania,  u.s.  (); blodgett v. silberman,  u.s. 
[] new york ex rel. new york, c. & h.r.r. co. v. miller,
[] wheeling steel corp v. fox,  u.s. , -
(); union refrigerator transit co. v. kentucky,  u.s. , 
(); johnson oil ref. co. v. oklahoma ex rel. mitchell,  u.s.
[] robert l. howard, state jurisdiction to tax intangibles:
a twelve year cycle,  missouri law review , - (); ralph t.
rawlins, state jurisdiction to tax intangibles: some modern aspects, 
texas law review , - ().
[] kirtland v. hotchkiss,  u.s. ,  ().
[] savings & l. soc. v. multnomah county,  u.s. 
[] bristol v. washington county,  u.s. , 
[] fidelity & c. trust co. v. louisville,  u.s. 
[] rogers v. hennepin county,  u.s.  ().
[] citizens nat. bank v. durr,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hawley v. maiden,  u.s. ,  ().
[] first bank stock corp. v. minnesota,  u.s. , 
[] schuylkill trust co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] harvester co. v. dept. of taxation,  u.s. 
[] wisconsin gas co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] new york ex rel. hatch v. reardon,  u.s. 
[] graniteville mfg. co. v. query,  u.s.  ().
[] buck v. beach,  u.s.  ().
[] brooke v. norfolk,  u.s.  ().
[] greenough v. tax assessors,  u.s. , -
[] senior v. braden,  u.s.  ().
[] stebbins v. riley,  u.s. , - ().
[]  u.s.  ().—in dissenting in state tax
commission v. aldrich,  u.s. ,  (), justice jackson
asserted that a reconsideration of this principle had become timely.
[]  u.s.  (). see also treichler v. wisconsin,
 u.s.  (); city bank farmers trust co. v. schnader,  u.s.
[]  u.s. ,  ().—a decision rendered in 
which is seemingly in conflict was wachovia bank & trust co. v.
doughton,  u.s. , in which north carolina was prevented from
taxing the exercise of a power of appointment through a will executed
therein by a resident, when the property was a trust fund in
massachusetts created by the will of a resident of the latter state. one
of the reasons assigned for this result was that by the law of
massachusetts the property involved was treated as passing from the
original donor to the appointee. however, this holding was overruled in
graves v. schmidlapp,  u.s.  ().
[] rhode island hospital trust co. v. doughton,  u.s.
[] first national bank v. maine,  u.s. , -
[]  u.s.  ().—in dissenting, justice holmes
observed that wheeler v. sohmer,  u.s.  (), previously
mentioned, apparently joined blackstone v. miller on the "index
expurgatorius."
[] ibid. .
[]  wheat. ,  ().
[] wheeling steel corp. v. fox,  u.s.  (). see
also memphis gas co. v. beeler,  u.s. ,  ().
[] adams express co. v. ohio state auditor,  u.s. 
[] alpha portland cement co. v. massachusetts,  u.s.
[] cream of wheat co. v. grand forks county,  u.s. 
[] newark fire ins. co. v. state board,  u.s. , ,
 (). although the eight judges affirming this tax were not in
agreement as to the reasons to be assigned in justification of this
result, the holding appears to be in line with the dictum uttered by the
late chief justice stone in curry v. mccanless ( u.s. at ) to
the effect that the taxation of a corporation by a state where it does
business, measured by the value of the intangibles used in its business
there, does not preclude the state of incorporation from imposing a tax
measured by all its intangibles.
[] delaware l. & w.r. co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] louisville & j. ferry co. v. kentucky,  u.s. 
[] kansas city ry. v. kansas,  u.s.  (); kansas
city, m. & b.r. co. v. stiles,  u.s.  ().
[] schwab v. richardson,  u.s.  ().
[] western u. teleg. co. v. kansas ex rel. coleman, 
u.s.  (); pullman co. v. kansas ex rel. coleman,  u.s. 
(); looney v. crane co.,  u.s.  (); international paper
co. v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ().
[] cudahy packing co. v. hinkle,  u.s.  ().
[] st. louis s.w.r. co. v. arkansas ex rel. norwood, 
[] atlantic refining co. v. virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] american mfg co. v. st. louis,  u.s.  (). nor
does a state license tax on the production of electricity violate the
due process clause because it may be necessary, to ascertain, as an
element in its computation, the amounts delivered in another
jurisdiction.—utah power & light co. v. pfost,  u.s.  ().
[] james v. dravo contracting co.  u.s.  ().
[] union refrigerator transit co. v. kentucky,  u.s.
[] southern pacific co. v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] old dominion steamship co. v. virginia,  u.s. 
[] pullman's palace car co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] northwest airlines v. minnesota,  u.s. , -,
 ().—the case was said to be governed by new york central
railroad v. miller,  u.s. ,  (). as to the problem of
multiple taxation of such airplanes, which had in fact been taxed
proportionately by other states, the court declared that the "taxability
of any part of this fleet by any other state than minnesota, in view of
the taxability of the entire fleet by that state, is not now before us."
justice jackson, in a concurring opinion, would treat minnesota's right
[to tax as] exclusive of any similar right elsewhere.
[] johnson oil ref. co. v. oklahoma ex rel. mitchell, 
[] pittsburgh, c.c. & st. l.r. co. v. backus,  u.s. 
[] wallace v. hines,  u.s.  ().—for example, the
ratio of track mileage within the taxing state to total track mileage
cannot be employed in evaluating that portion of total railway property
found in said state when the cost of the lines in the taxing state was
much less than in other states and the most valuable terminals of the
railroad were located in other states. see also fargo v. hart, 
u.s.  (); union tank line v. wright,  u.s.  ().
[] great northern r. co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
[] illinois cent. r. co. v. minnesota,  u.s. 
[] lawrence v. state tax commission,  u.s.  ().
[] shaffer v. carter,  u.s.  (); travis v. yale
& t. mfg. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] new york ex rel. cohn v. graves,  u.s.  ().
[] maguire v. trefry,  u.s.  ().
[] guaranty trust co. v. virginia,  u.s. , 
[] whitney v. graves,  u.s.  ().
[] underwood typewriter co. v. chamberlain,  u.s. 
(); bass, ratcliff & gretton v. state tax commission,  u.s. 
[] hans rees' sons v. north carolina,  u.s. 
[] matson nav. co. v. state board,  u.s.  ().
[] wisconsin v. j.c. penney co.,  u.s. , -
(). dissenting, justice roberts, along with chief justice hughes and
justices mcreynolds and reed, stressed the fact that the use and
disbursement by the corporation at its home office of income derived
from operations in many states does not depend on, and cannot be
controlled by, any law of wisconsin. the act of disbursing such income
as dividends, he contended, is "one wholly beyond the reach of
wisconsin's sovereign power, one which it cannot effectively command, or
prohibit or condition." the assumption that a proportion of the
dividends distributed is paid out of earnings in wisconsin for the year
immediately preceding payment is arbitrary and not borne out by the
facts. accordingly, "if the exaction is an income tax in any sense it is
such upon the stockholders [many of whom are nonresidents] and is
obviously bad."—see also wisconsin v. minnesota mining co., 
[] great a. & p. tea co. v. grosjean,  u.s. 
[] equitable l. assur. soc. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] provident sav. life assur. soc. v. kentucky,  u.s.
[] continental co. v. tennessee,  u.s. ,  (),
(emphasis supplied).
[] palmetto f. ins. co. v. connecticut,  u.s. 
[] st. louis cotton compress co. v. arkansas,  u.s. 
[] connecticut general co. v. johnson,  u.s. 
[] metropolitan l. ins. co. v. new orleans,  u.s. 
[] board of assessors v. new york l. ins. co.,  u.s.
[] liverpool & l. & g. ins. co. v. board of assessors, 
[] orient ins. co. v. board of assessors,  u.s. 
[] turpin v. lemon,  u.s. ,  (); glidden v.
harrington,  u.s.  ().
[] mcmillen v. anderson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bell's gap r. co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. , 
[] hodge v. muscatine county,  u.s.  ().
[] hagar v. reclamation dist. no. ,  u.s. ,
[] hagar v. reclamation dist. no. ,  u.s. , 
[] mcmillen v. anderson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] taylor v. secor, (state railroad tax cases),  u.s.
[] nickey v. mississippi,  u.s. ,  (). see
also clement nat. bank v. vermont,  u.s.  ().
[] pittsburgh, c.c. & st. l.r. co. v. backus,  u.s. 
[] michigan c.r. co. v. powers,  u.s. ,  ().
[] pittsburgh, c.c. & st. l.r. co. v. board of public
works,  u.s. ,  ().
[] st. louis & k.c. land co. v. kansas city,  u.s. ,
 (); paulson v. portland,  u.s. ,  (); bauman v.
ross,  u.s. ,  ().
[] tonawanda v. lyon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] londoner v. denver,  u.s.  ().
[] withnell v. ruecking constr. co.,  u.s. , 
(); browning v. hooper,  u.s. ,  (). likewise, the
committing to a board of county supervisors of authority to determine,
without notice or hearing, when repairs to an existing drainage system
are necessary cannot be said to deny due process of law to landowners in
the district, who, by statutory requirement, are assessed for the cost
thereof in proportion to the original assessments.—breiholz v.
pocahontas county,  u.s.  ().
[] fallbrook irrig. district v. bradley,  u.s. ,
,  (); browning v. hooper,  u s. ,  ().
[] utley v. st. petersburg,  u.s. ,  ();
french v. barber asphalt paving co.,  u.s. ,  (). see
also soliah v. heskin,  u.s.  ().
[] hibben v. smith,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hancock v. muskogee,  u.s. , 
().—likewise, a taxpayer does not have a right to a hearing before
a state board of equalization preliminary to issuance by it of an order
increasing the valuation of all property in a city by %.—bi-metallic
invest. co. v. state bd. of equalization,  u.s.  ().
[] detroit v. parker,  u.s.  ().
[] paulsen v. portland,  u.s. ,  ().
[] londoner v. denver,  u.s.  (). see also
cincinnati, n.o. & t.p.r. co. v. kentucky (kentucky railroad tax
cases),  u.s. ,  (); winona & st. p. land co. v.
minnesota,  u.s. ,  (); merchants' & mfgrs. nat. bank v.
pennsylvania,  u.s. ,  (); glidden v. harrington, 
[] corry v. baltimore,  u.s. ,  ().
[] leigh v. green,  u.s. , - ().
[] ontario land co. v. yordy,  u.s.  (). see
also longyear v. toolan,  u.s.  ().
[] brinkerhoff-faris trust & sav. co. v. hill,  u.s.
[] central of georgia r. co. v. wright,  u.s. 
[] carpenter v. shaw,  u.s.  (). see also ward
v. love county,  u.s.  ().
[] farncomb v. denver,  u.s.  ().
[] pullman co. v. knott,  u.s.  ().
[] bankers trust co. v. blodgett,  u.s.  ().
[] national safe deposit co. v. stead,  u.s. 
[] pierce oil corp. v. hopkins,  u.s.  ().
[] carstairs v. cochran,  u.s.  (); hannis
distilling co. v. baltimore,  u.s.  ().
[] travis v. yale & t. mfg. co.,  u.s. , -
[] league v. texas,  u.s.  ().
[] palmer v. mcmahon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] scottish union & nat. ins. co. v. bowland,  u.s. 
[] king v. mullins,  u.s.  (); chapman v.
zobelein,  u.s.  ().
[] leigh v. green,  u.s.  ().
[] davidson v. new orleans,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dewey v. des moines,  u.s.  ().
[] league v. texas,  u.s. ,  (). see also
straus v. foxworth,  u.s.  ().
[] exercisable as to every description of property,
tangibles and intangibles including choses in action, contracts, and
charters, but only for a public purpose, the power of eminent domain may
also be conferred by the state upon municipal corporations, public
utilities, and even upon individuals. like every other governmental
power, the power of eminent domain cannot be surrendered by the state or
its subdivisions either by contract or by any other means.—long island
water supply co. v. brooklyn,  u.s.  (); offield v. new
york, n.h. & h.r. co.,  u.s.  (); sweet v. rechel,  u.s.
 (); clark v. nash,  u.s.  (); pennsylvania hospital
v. philadelphia,  u.s.  (); galveston wharf co. v.
galveston,  u.s.  ().
[] green v. frazier,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  pet. .
[]  u.s. , , - (); see also sweet v:
rechel,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hairston v. danville & w.r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] green v. frazier,  u.s. ,  (); cincinnati
v. vester,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hairston v. danville & w.r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] united states ex rel. t.v.a. v. welch,  u.s. ,
-, - (), citing case v. bowles,  u.s. , 
(), and new york v. united states,  u.s.  ()—concurring
in the result, justice frankfurter insisted that "the fact that the
nature of the subject matter gives the legislative determination nearly
immunity from judicial review does not mean that the power to review is
wanting." also concurring in the result, justice reed, for himself and
chief justice stone, dissented from that portion of the opinion which
suggested that "there is no judicial review" of the question whether a
"taking is for a public purpose."
[] justice reed concurring in united states ex rel. t.v.a.
v. welch,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bragg v. weaver,  u.s. - ().—it is no
longer open to question that the state legislature may confer upon a
municipality the authority to determine such necessity for
itself.—joslin mfg. co. v. providence,  u.s. ,  ().
[] rindge co. v. los angeles county,  u.s.  ().
[] pumpelly v. green bay company,  wall. , -
(); welch v. swasey,  u.s.  (); pennsylvania coal co.
v. mahon,  u.s.  (). see also comparable cases involving
the federal government and discussed under the fifth amendment, united
states v. lynah,  u.s.  (); united states v. cress, 
u.s.  (); portsmouth harbor l. & h. co. v. united states, 
u.s.  (); united states v. causby,  u.s.  (). see
also the cases hereinafter discussed on the limitations on
"uncompensated takings."
[] long island water supply co. v. brooklyn,  u.s. 
[] clark v. nash,  u.s.  ().
[] strickley v. highland boy gold mining co.,  u.s. 
[] mt. vernon-woodberry cotton duck co. v.. alabama
interstate power co.,  u.s.  ().
[] hendersonville light & power co. v.. blue ridge
interurban r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] roe v. kansas ex rel. smith,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dohany v. rogers,  u.s.  ().
[] hairston v. danville & w.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] delaware, l. & w.r. co. v. morristown,  u.s. 
[] otis co. v. ludlow mfg. co.,  u.s. , , 
(). see also head v. amoskeag mfg. co.,  u.s. , -
[] missouri p.r. co. v. nebraska ex rel. board of
transportation,  u.s. ,  (). the state court in this case
was declared to have acknowledged that the taking was not for a public
use. hence, its reversal by the supreme court did not conflict with the
later observation by the court that "no case is recalled where this
court has condemned *** a taking upheld by the state court as a taking
for public uses in conformity with its laws."—see hairston v.
danville & w.r. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] backus (a.) jr. and sons v. port street union depot
co.,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] mcgovern v. new york,  u.s. , - ().
[] ibid. .
[] provo bench canal and irrig. co. v. tanner,  u.s.
 (); appleby v. buffalo,  u.s.  ().
[] backus (a.) jr. and sons v. port street union depot
co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago,  u.s. , 
(); mcgovern v. new york,  u.s. ,  ().
[] roberts v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] dohany v. rogers,  u.s.  ().
[] joslin mfg. co. v. providence,  u.s. , 
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago,  u.s. , 
[] manigault v. springs,  u.s. , - ().
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago,  u.s. , 
[] darling v. newport news,  u.s.  ().
[] northern transportation co. v. chicago,  u.s. ,
 (). see also marchant v. pennsylvania railroad co.,  u.s.
[] meyer v. richmond,  u.s.  (). for cases
illustrative of the types of impairment or flooding consequent upon
erection of dams or aids to navigation which have been deemed to amount
to a taking for which compensation must be paid, see pumpelly v.
green bay company,  wall.  (); united states v. lynah, 
u.s.  (); united states v. cress,  u.s.  ().
[] sauer v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] welch v. swasey,  u.s.  ().
[] pennsylvania coal co. v. mahon,  u.s. , -
(). for comparable cases involving the federal government see
portsmouth harbor l. & h. co. v. united states,  u.s.  ()
and united states v. causby,  u.s.  ().
[] georgia v. chattanooga,  u.s. ,  ().
[] north laramie land co. v. hoffman,  u.s. , 
(). see also bragg v. weaver,  u.s.  ().
[] bragg v. weaver,  u.s.  (); joslin mfg. co.
v. providence,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bragg v. weaver,  u.s. ,  (); north laramie
land co. v. hoffman,  u.s.  ().
[] bragg v. weaver,  u.s. ,  ().
[] long island water supply co. v. brooklyn,  u.s. ,
[] hays v. seattle,  u.s. ,  (); bailey v.
anderson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] the requirements of due process in tax and eminent domain
proceedings are discussed in conjunction with the coverage of these
topics. see pp. -, .
[] hagar v. reclamation dist.,  u.s. ,  ();
hurtado v. california,  u.s. ,  ().
[] brown v. new jersey,  u.s. ,  (); hurtado
v. california,  u.s. ,  (); twining v. new jersey, 
u.s. ,  (); anderson nat. bank v. luckett,  u.s. , 
[] marchant v. pennsylvania r. co.,  u.s. , 
[] ballard v. hunter,  u.s. ,  (); palmer v.
mcmahon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mcmillen v. anderson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] r.r. commission v. oil co.,  u.s.  (). see
also railroad commission v. oil co.,  u.s.  ().
[] dreyer v. illinois,  u.s. , - ().
[] new york ex rel. lieberman v. van de carr,  u.s.
[] ohio ex rel. bryant v. akron metropolitan park dist,
[] carfer v. caldwell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] scott v. mcneal,  u.s. ,  (); pennoyer v.
neff,  u.s. ,  ().
[] national exchange bank v. wiley,  u.s. , 
(); iron cliffs co. v. negaunee iron co.,  u.s. , 
[] arndt v. griggs,  u.s. ,  (); grannis v.
ordean,  u.s.  (); pennington v. fourth nat. bank,  u.s.
[] goodrich v. ferris,  u.s. ,  ().
[] pennington v. fourth nat. bank,  u.s. , 
[] the jurisdictional requirements for rendering a valid
decree in divorce proceedings are considered under the full faith and
credit clause, supra, pp. -.
[] pennoyer v. neff,  u.s.  (); simon v.
southern r. co.,  u.s. ,  (); grannis v. ordean,  u.s.
[] louisville & n.r. co. v. schmidt,  u.s.  ();
mcdonald v. mabee,  u.s. , , (). see also adam v.
saenger,  u.s.  ().
[] rees v. watertown,  wall.  (); coe v. armour
fertilizer works,  u.s. ,  (); griffin v. griffin, 
[] sugg v. thornton,  u.s.  ().
[] riverside & dan river cotton mills v. menefee,  u.s.
,  (); hess v. pawloski,  u.s. ,  (). see
also harkness v. hyde,  u.s.  (); wilson v. seligman, 
[] milliken v. meyer,  u.s. , - ().
[] mcdonald v. mabee,  u.s. ,  ().
[] thus, in an older decision rendered in , the court
held that whereas "states could exclude foreign corporations ***, and
therefore establish *** [appointment of such an agent] as a condition
to letting them in," they had no power to exclude individuals; and as a
consequence, a statute was ineffective which treated nonresident
partners, by virtue of their having done business therein, as having
consented to be bound by service of process on a person who was their
employee when the transaction sued on arose but was not their agent at
the time of service.—flexner v. farson, . u.s. ,  ().
because it might be construed to negative extension to nonresidents,
other than motorists, of the statutory device upheld in hess v.
pawloski, the doctrine of flexner v. farson, "that the mere
transaction of business in a state by a nonresident natural person does
not imply consent to be bound by the process of its courts," was
recently condemned as inadequate "to cope with the increasing problem of
practical responsibility of hazardous business conducted in absentia
***"—sugg v. hendrix,  f. (d) ,  ().
[] hess v. pawloski,  u.s.  (); wuchter v.
pizzutti,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] philadelphia & reading ry. co. v. mckibbin,  u.s.
[] in a very few cases, "continuous operations within a
state were thought to be so substantial and of such a nature as to
justify suits against [a foreign corporation] on causes of action
arising from dealings entirely distinct from those" operations.—see
st. louis s.w.r. co. v. alexander,  u.s.  (); missouri, k. &
t.r. co. v. reynolds,  u.s.  ().
[] old wayne life assn. v. mcdonough,  u.s. , 
[] simon v. southern r. co.,  u.s. , -
().—in neither this case, nor the preceding decision were the
defendant corporations notified of the pendency of the action, service
having been made only on the insurance commissioner or the secretary of
state.
[] green v. chicago, b. & q.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
see also davis v. farmers co-operative co.,  u.s. , 
[] pennsylvania f. ins. co. v. gold issue min. & m. co.,
[] rosenberg bros. & co. v. curtis brown co.,  u.s.
[] goldey v. morning news,  u.s.  ().
[] conley v. mathieson alkali works,  u.s.  ().
[] riverside mills v. menefee,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mutual life insurance co. v. spratley,  u.s. 
[] st. clair v. cox,  u.s. ,  (). see st.
louis s.w.r. co. v. alexander,  u.s.  ().
[] mutual reserve &c. assn. v. phelps,  u.s. , 
[] washington v. superior court,  u.s. , 
[] this departure was recognized by justice rutledge in a
subsequent opinion in nippert v. richmond,  u.s. ,  ().
the principle that solicitation of business alone is inadequate to
confer jurisdiction for purposes of subjecting a foreign corporation to
a suit in personam was established in green v. chicago, b. & q.r.
co.,  u.s.  (); but was somewhat qualified by the later
holding in international harvester co. v. kentucky,  u.s. 
() to the effect that when solicitation was connected with other
activities (in the latter case, the local agents collected from the
customers), a foreign corporation was then doing business within the
forum state. inasmuch as the international shoe company, in addition to
having its agents solicit orders, also permitted them to rent quarters
for the display of merchandise, the observation has been made that the
court, by applying the qualification of the international harvester
case, could have decided international shoe co. v. washington, 
u.s.  () as it did without abandoning the "presence" doctrine.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. -.—concerning the holding in minnesota
ass'n. v. benn,  u.s.  (), that a similar minnesota mail
order insurance company could not be viewed as doing business in montana
where the claimant-plaintiff lived, and that the circumstances under
which its montana contracts, executed and to be performed in minnesota,
were consummated could not support in implication that the foreign
insurer had consented to be sued in montana, the majority asserted that
the "narrow grounds relied on by the court in the benn case cannot be
deemed controlling."
declaring that what is necessary to sustain a suit by a policyholder in
virginia against a foreign insurer is not determinative when the state
seeks to regulate solicitation within its borders, justice douglas, in a
concurring opinion, emphasized that it is the nature of the state's
action that determines the degree of activity in a state necessary for
satisfying the requirements of due process, and that solicitation by
existing members operates as though the insurer "had formally designated
virginia members as its agents."
insisting that "an in personam judgment cannot be based upon service
by registered letter on a nonresident corporation or a natural person,
neither of whom has ever been" in virginia, justice minton, with whom
justice jackson was associated in a dissenting opinion, would have
dismissed the appeal on the ground that "virginia has not claimed the
power to require [the insurer] *** to appoint the secretary of state
as their agent for service of process, nor have [its] courts rendered
judgment in a suit where service was made in that manner." he would
therefore let virginia "go through this shadow-boxing performance in
order to publicize the activities of" the insurer.—justices reed and
frankfurter joined this dissent on the merits.—ibid. -, , .
in perkins v. benguet mining co.,  u.s.  () it was held,
that the state of ohio was free either to open its courts, or to refuse
to do so, to a foreign corporation owning gold and silver mines in the
philippine islands, but temporarily (during japanese occupation)
carrying on a part of its general business in ohio, including directors
meetings, business correspondence, banking, etc. two members of the
court dissented, contending that what it was doing was "giving
gratuitously an advisory opinion to the ohio supreme court. [they] would
dismiss the writ [of certiorari] as improvidently granted." the case is
obviously too atypical to offer much promise of importance as a
precedent.
[] arndt v. griggs,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ballard v. hunter,  u.s. ,  (); pennoyer
v. neff,  u.s.  ().
[] dewey v. des moines,  u.s. ,  (); pennoyer
v. neff,  u.s.  ().
[] american land co. v. zeiss,  u.s.  ().
[] pennoyer v. neff,  u.s.  (); citing boswell
v. otis,  how.  (); cooper v. reynolds,  wall.  ().
such remedy, by way of example, is also available to a wife who is
enabled thereby to impound local bank deposits of her absent husband for
purposes of collecting unpaid instalments by him. moreover, because of
the antiquity of the procedure authorized, a statute permitting the
impounding of property of an absconding father for the maintenance of
his children is not in conflict with due process because it fails to
provide for notice, actual or constructive, to the
absconder.—pennington v. fourth nat. bank,  u.s. ,  ();
corn exch. bank v. coler,  u.s. ,  (). likewise,
proceedings to attach wages in execution of a judgment for debt may be
instituted without any notice or service on the judgment debtor. the
latter, having had his day in court when the judgment was rendered, is
not entitled to be apprized of what action the judgment creditor may
elect to take to enforce collection.—endicott co. v. encyclopedia
press,  u.s. ,  ().
[] goodrich v. ferris,  u.s. ,  ().
[] mccaughey v. lyall,  u.s.  ().
[] robards v. lamb,  u.s. ,  (). inasmuch as it
is within the power of a state to provide that one who has undertaken
administration of an estate shall remain subject to the order of its
courts until said administration is closed, it follows that there can be
no question as to the validity of a judgment for unadministered assets
obtained on service of publication plus service personally upon an
executor in the state in which he had taken refuge and in which he had
been adjudged incompetent.—michigan trust co. v. ferry,  u.s. 
(). also, when a mother petitions for her appointment as guardian,
and no one but the mother and her infant son of tender years, are
concerned, failure to serve notice of the petition upon the infant does
not invalidate the proceedings resulting in her appointment.—jones v.
prairie oil & gas co.,  u.s.  (). also a pennsylvania statute
which establishes a special procedure for appointment of one to
administer the estate of absentees, which procedure is distinct from
that contained in the general law governing settlement of decedents'
estates and provides special safeguards to protect the rights of
absentees is not repugnant to the due process clause because it
authorizes notice by publication after an absence of seven
years.—cunnius v. reading school dist.,  u.s.  ().
[] hamilton v. brown,  u.s. ,  ().
[] security sav. bank v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] anderson nat. bank v. luckett,  u.s.  ().
[] mullane v. central hanover tr. co.,  u.s. 
[] voeller v. neilston co.,  u.s.  ().
[] grannis v. ordean,  u.s. , - ().
[] miedreich v. lauenstein,  u.s.  ().
[] twining v. new jersey,  u.s. ,  (); jacob
v. roberts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bi-metallic co. v. colorado,  u.s. ,  ();
bragg v. weaver,  u.s. ,  (). for the procedural
requirements that must be observed in the passage of legislation levying
special assessments or establishing assessment districts, see pp.
[] pacific states box & basket co. v. white,  u.s. 
(); western union telegraph co. v. industrial com'n.,  f. supp.
 (); ralph f. fuchs, procedure in administrative rule-making, 
harvard law review,  ().
whether action of an administrative agency, which voluntarily affords
notice and hearing in proceedings in which due process would require the
same, is voided by the fact that the statute in pursuance of which it
operates does not expressly provide such protection, is a question as to
which the supreme court has developed no definitive answer. it appears
to favor the doctrine enunciated by state courts to the effect that such
statutes are to be construed as impliedly requiring notice and hearing,
although, in a few instances, it has uttered comments rejecting this
notice-by-implication theory.—see toombs v. citizens bank,  u.s.
 (); paulsen v. portland,  u.s.  (); bratton v.
chandler,  u.s.  (); cincinnati, n.o. & t.r. co. v.
kentucky,  u.s.  (). contra: central of georgia r. co. v.
wright,  u.s.  (); coe v. armour fertilizer works,  u.s.
 (); wuchter v. pizzutti,  u.s.  ().
[] bratton v. chandler,  u.s.  (); missouri ex
rel. hurwitz v. north,  u.s.  ().
[] north american cold storage co. v. chicago,  u.s.
, - (). for an exposition of the doctrine applicable for
determining the tort liability of administrative officers, see miller
v. horton,  mass.  ().
[] samuels v. mccurdy,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] anderson national bank v. luckett,  u.s. ,
[] coffin bros. & co. v. bennett,  u.s. ,  ().
[] postal teleg. cable co. v. newport,  u.s. , 
(); baker v. baker, e. & co.,  u.s. ,  (); louisville
& n.r. co. v. schmidt,  u.s. ,  ().
[] american surety co v. baldwin,  u.s. , 
[] saunders v. shaw,  u.s.  ().
[] see footnote , p. .
[] coe v. armour fertilizer works,  u.s. , 
(); wuchter v. pizzutti,  u.s.  ().
[] roller v. holly,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] goodrich v. ferris,  u.s. ,  (). one may, of
course, waive a right to notice and hearing, as in the case of a debtor
or surety who consents to the entry of a confessed judgment on the
happening of certain conditions.—johnson v. chicago & p. elevator
co.,  u.s.  (); american surety co. v. baldwin,  u.s. 
[] see pp. -.
[] holmes v. conway,  u.s. ,  (); louisville
& n.r. co. v. schmidt,  u.s. ,  ().
[] snyder v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  (); west
v. louisiana,  u.s. ,  (); chicago, b. & q.r. co. v.
chicago,  u.s.  (); jordan v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,
 (). the power of a state to determine the limits of the
jurisdiction of its courts and the character of the controversies which
shall be heard in them and to deny access to its courts, in the exercise
of its right to regulate practice and procedure; is also subject to the
restrictions imposed by the contract, full faith and credit, and
privileges and immunities clauses of the federal constitution. angel
v. bullington,  u.s.  ().
[] hardware dealers mut. f. ins. co. v. glidden co., 
u.s. ,  (); iowa c.r. co. v. iowa,  u.s. ,  ();
honeyman v. hanan,  u.s.  ().
[] cincinnati street r. co. v. snell,  u.s. , 
[] ownbey v. morgan,  u.s. ,  (). thus, the
fourteenth amendment does not constrain the states to accept modern
doctrines of equity, or adopt a combined system of law and equity
procedure, or dispense with all necessity for form and method in
pleading, or give untrammeled liberty to make amendments.
[] cohen v. beneficial loan corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] young co. v. mcneal-edwards co.,  u.s.  ();
adam v. saenger,  u.s.  ().
[] jones v. union guano co.,  u.s.  ().
[] york v. texas,  u.s.  (); kauffman v.
wooters,  u.s. ,  ().
[] grant timber & mfg. co. v. gray,  u.s.  ().
[] ownbey v. morgan,  u.s. , 
().—consistently, with due process, a state may provide that the
doctrines of contributory negligence, assumption of risk, and fellow
servant shall not bar recovery in actions brought against an employer
for death or injury resulting from dangerous machinery improperly
safeguarded. a person having no vested right to the defense of
contributory negligence, a state may take it away altogether, or may
provide that said defense, as well as that of assumption of risk, are
questions of fact to be left to the jury.—bowersock v. smith, 
u.s. ,  (); chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. cole,  u.s. , 
(); herron v. southern p. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] sawyer v. piper,  u.s.  ().
[] ballard v. hunter,  u.s. ,  ().
[] missouri k. & t.r. co. v. cade,  u.s. , 
[] lowe v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] yazoo & m.v.r. co. v. jackson vinegar co.,  u.s. 
(); chicago & n.w.r. co. v. nye schneider fowler co.,  u.s. ,
- (); hartford l. ins. co. v. blincoe,  u.s. , 
(); life & c. ins. co. v. mccray,  u.s.  ().
[] pizitz dry goods co. v. yeldell,  u.s. , 
[] coffey v. harlan county,  u.s. , , 
[] wheeler v. jackson,  u.s. ,  (); kentucky
union co. v. kentucky,  u.s. ,  ().
[] blinn v. nelson,  u.s.  ().
[] turner v. new york,  u.s. ,  ().
[] soper v. lawrence bros. co.,  u.s.  (). nor
is a former owner who had not been in possession for five years after
and fifteen years before said enactment thereby deprived of any property
without due process.
[] mattson v. department of labor,  u.s. , 
[] campbell v. holt,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] chase securities corp. v. donaldson,  u.s. 
[] gange lumber co. v. rowley,  u.s.  ().
[] campbell v. holt,  u.s. ,  (). see also
stewart v. keyes,  u.s. ,  ().
[] home ins. co. v. dick,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hawkins v. bleakly,  u.s. ,  ();
james-dickinson farm mortg. co. v. harry,  u.s. ,  (). an
omission in a criminal trial of any reference to the presumption of
innocence effects no denial of due process of law where the state
appellate court ruled that such omission did not invalidate the
proceedings. howard v. fleming,  u.s. ,  ().
[] manley v. georgia,  u.s. ,  (); western & a.r.
co. v. henderson,  u.s. ,  (); bailey v. alabama, 
u.s. ,  (); mobile, j. & k.c.r. co. v. turnipseed,  u.s.
[] bailey v. alabama,  u.s. ,  ().
[] manley v. georgia,  u.s. ,  ().
[] western & a.r. co. v. henderson,  u.s.  ().
[] atlantic coast line r. co. v. ford,  u.s. 
(). see also mobile, j. & k.c.r. co. v. turnipseed,  u.s. 
[] hawes v. georgia,  u.s.  ().
[] bandini petroleum co. v. superior ct.,  u.s. , 
[] hawker v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] cockrill v. california,  u.s. ,  ().
[] morrison v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] morrison v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] "the limits are in substance these, that the state shall
have proved enough to make it just for the defendant to be required to
repeal what has been proved ***, or at least that upon a balancing of
convenience or of the opportunities for knowledge the shifting of the
burden will be found to be an aid to the accuser without subjecting the
accused to hardship or oppression."—ibid. -.
[] ibid. -, -.
[] leland v. oregon,  u.s.  ().
[] walker v. sauvinet,  u.s.  (); new york c.r.
co. v. white,  u.s. ,  (); snyder v. massachusetts, 
[] marvin v. trout,  u.s. ,  ().
[] tinsley v. anderson,  u.s. ,  ();
eilenbecker v. district court,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] delgado v. chavez,  u.s. ,  ().
[] wilson v. north carolina ex rel. caldwell,  u.s. 
(); foster v. kansas ex rel. johnston,  u.s. ,  ().
[] long island water supply co. v. brooklyn,  u.s. ,
[] montana company v. st. louis min. & mill co.,  u.s.
,  (); church v. kelsey,  u.s.  ().
[] jordan v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] maxwell v. dow,  u.s. ,  ().
[] winters v. new york,  u.s. , -,  ().
see also cline v. frink dairy,  u.s.  (); cole v.
arkansas,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lanzetta v. new jersey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] minnesota v. probate court,  u.s.  ().
[] hurtado v. california,  u.s. , ,  ();
brown v. new jersey,  u.s. ,  (); maxwell v. dow, 
u.s. ,  (); graham v. west virginia,  u.s. , 
(); jordan v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lem woon v. oregon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] gaines v. washington,  u.s. ,  ().
[] norris v. alabama,  u.s.  (). see also hale
v. kentucky,  u.s.  (); pierre v. louisiana,  u.s. 
(); smith v. texas,  u.s.  (); shepherd v. florida,
[] powell v. alabama,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] palko v. connecticut,  u.s. , - ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s. ,  ().—the court presently seems to be
holding that in capital cases, notwithstanding the absence even of other
circumstances prejudicial to the defendant, the right to counsel is
unqualified. see the later cases discussed herein, especially tomkins
v. missouri,  u.s.  (); williams v. kaiser,  u.s. 
(); hawk v. olson,  u.s.  (); and the court's summary of
its rulings in uveges v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  (), supra,
p. .
[] ibid. -.
[]  u.s.  ().—in a post mortem comment on this
case appearing in the later decision of betts v. brady,  u.s. ,
 (), there is contained the intimation that the mere failure to
appoint counsel, alone, in the absence of the proof of other facts
tending to show that the whole trial was "a mere sham and a pretense,"
would not have sufficed to support a finding of a denial of due
process.
[] ibid. , .
[] in powell v. alabama,  u.s.  (); avery v.
alabama,  u.s.  (); and smith v. o'grady,  u.s. 
(), a state law required the appointment of counsel.
[]  u.s. , -, - ().—dissenting,
justice black, with whom justices douglas and murphy were in agreement,
acknowledged regretfully that the view that the "fourteenth amendment
made the sixth applicable to the states *** has never been accepted by
a majority of this court," and submitted a list of citations showing
that by judicial decision, as well as by constitutional and statutory
provision, a majority of states require that indigent defendants, in
noncapital as well as capital cases, be provided with counsel on
request. this evidence, he contended, supports the conclusion that
"denial to the poor of a request for counsel in proceedings based on
serious charges of crime," has "long been regarded throughout this
country as shocking to the 'universal sense of justice.'"
[]  u.s.  (). see also white v. ragen,  u.s.
[]  u.s.  (). justices murphy and rutledge
dissented, the former contending that "the right to counsel means
nothing unless it means the right to counsel at each and every step in a
criminal proceeding."—ibid. .
[] rice v. olson,  u.s.  (), was distinguished
on the ground that the record in the older case contained specific
allegations bearing on the disabilities of the accused to stand
prosecution without the aid of counsel and the complete absence of any
uncontested finding, as in the instant case, of an intelligent waiver of
counsel.
dissenting for himself and justices black and rutledge, justice douglas
declared that, under the authority of williams v. kaiser,  u.s.
,  (), "if *** [the] defendant is not capable of making his
own defense, it is the duty of the court, at least in capital cases, to
appoint counsel, whether requested so to do or not."— u.s. , 
(). in a separate dissent, justice murphy observed that while "legal
technicalities doubtless afford justification for our pretense of
ignoring plain facts before us," facts which emphasize the absence of
any intelligent waiver of counsel, "the result certainly does not
enhance the high traditions of the judicial process."—ibid. .
[]  u.s. ,  ().—acknowledging that the
decision is in line with the precedent of betts v. brady, justice
black, who was joined by justices douglas, murphy, and rutledge,
lamented that the latter was a "kind of precedent [which he] had hoped
that the court would not perpetuate." complaining of the loss of
certainty occasioned by the court's refusal to read into the fourteenth
amendment the absolute right to counsel set out in the sixth amendment,
justice black contends that the fair trial doctrine as enunciated in
this and in the adamson v. california case (see p. ) decided on
the same day is "another example of the consequences which can be
produced by the substitution of this court's day-to-day opinion of what
kind of trial is fair and decent for the kind of trial which the bill of
rights guarantees."—ibid. , .—in a second dissenting opinion
meriting the concurrence of justices black, douglas, and murphy, justice
rutledge, who also is of the opinion that the absolute right to counsel
granted by the sixth amendment should be enjoyed in state criminal
trials, insisted that even under the fair trial doctrine, the accused
had not been accorded due process.
[] see p. .
[]  u.s. , , - ().—as against the
assertion of the majority that the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment does not of its own force require appointment of counsel for
one simply because he would have a constitutional right to the
assistance of counsel in a comparable federal case, the minority,
consisting of justices black, murphy, and rutledge speaking through
justice douglas, declared that "the bill of rights is applicable to all
courts at all times"; for, otherwise, "of what value is the
constitutional guarantee of a fair trial if an accused does not have
counsel to advise and defend him." noting that all members of the court
were in accord on the requirement of counsel in capital offenses, the
minority contended that the considerations inducing such unanimity were
"equally germane [in noncapital cases] where liberty rather than life
hangs in the balance." conceding that "it might not be nonsense to draw
the betts v. brady line somewhere between that case and the case of
one charged with violation of a parking ordinance, and to say the
accused is entitled to counsel in the former but not in the latter," the
minority concluded as follows: "*** to draw the line between this case
and cases where the maximum penalty is death is to make a distinction
which makes no sense in terms of the absence or presence of need for
counsel. yet it is the need for counsel that establishes the real
standard for determining whether the lack of counsel rendered the trial
unfair. and the need for counsel, even by betts v. brady standards, is
not determined by the complexities of the individual case or the ability
of the particular person who stands as an accused before the court. that
need is measured by the nature of the charge and the ability of
the average man to face it alone, unaided by an expert in the law."
[] ibid. .—the majority also observed that "trial
court's facetiousness casts a somewhat somber reflection on the fairness
of the proceeding ***"
although chief justice vinson and justices reed and burton dissented
without an opinion in townsend v. burke, four justices, black,
douglas, and murphy speaking through justice rutledge filed a vigorous
dissent in gryger v. burke,  u.s. , ,  (). justice
rutledge declared his inability to "square *** [this] decision in this
case with that made in townsend v. burke. i find it difficult to
comprehend that the [trial] court's misreading or misinformation
concerning the facts of [the] record [townsend v. burke] vital to the
proper exercise of the sentencing function is prejudicial ***, but its
misreading or misconception of the controlling statute, [gryger v.
burke] in a matter so vital as imposing mandatory sentence or exercising
discretion concerning it, has no such effect. perhaps the difference
serves only to illustrate how capricious are the results when the right
to counsel is made to depend not upon the mandate of the constitution,
but upon the vagaries of whether judges, *** will regard this incident
or that in the course of particular criminal proceedings as
prejudicial."
[]  u.s.  (); see also per curiam opinion
granting certiorari in foulke v. burke,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] rice v. olson,  u.s. , - ().
[] wade v. mayo,  u.s. , - (); de meerleer
v. michigan,  u.s. , - (); betts v. brady,  u.s.
,  (); powell v. alabama,  u.s. , -,  ().
[] townsend v. burke,  u.s. , - (); de
meerleer v. michigan,  u.s. ,  (); smith v. o'grady,
[] rice v. olson,  u.s. , - ().
[] gibbs v. burke,  u.s. , - (). devotion
to the fair trial doctrine has also created another problem for the
court, that of a burdensome increase in the volume of its business.
inasmuch as accurate appraisal of the effect of absence of counsel on
the validity of a state criminal proceeding has been rendered more
difficult by the vagueness of that doctrine as well as by the court's
acknowledged variation in the application thereof, innumerable state
prisoners have been tempted to seek judicial reconsideration of their
convictions. to reduce the number of such cases which it is obliged to
examine on their merits, the court had been compelled to have recourse
to certain protective rules. thus, when a state prisoner seeks to attack
the validity of his conviction by way of habeas corpus proceedings
begun in a lower federal court, application for that writ will be
entertained only after all state remedies available, including all
appellate remedies in state courts and in the supreme court by appeal or
writ of certiorari, have been exhausted. this rule, however, will not be
applied when no adequate state remedy is in fact available. also when a
prisoner's petition for release on the grounds of the unconstitutionally
of his conviction has been rejected by a state court, a petition for
certiorari addressed to the united states supreme court will be denied
whenever it appears that the prisoner had not invoked the appropriate
state remedy. or stated otherwise, where the state court's conviction or
refusal to grant writs of habeas corpus to those under state sentences
may fairly be attributed to a rule of local procedure and is not
exclusively founded on the denial of a federal claim, such as, right to
counsel, the supreme court will refuse to intervene. as in the case of
other legal rules, justices of the supreme court have often found
themselves in disagreement as to the manner of applying these
aforementioned principles; and vigorous dissents arising out of this
very issue were recorded in the cases of marino v. ragen,  u.s. 
(); wade v. mayo,  u.s.  (); and uveges v.
pennsylvania,  u.s.  (). justice frankfurter has frequently,
albeit unsuccessfully contended, that "intervention by *** [the
supreme court] in the criminal process of states *** should not be
indulged in unless no reasonable doubt is left that a state denies, or
has refused to exercise, means of correcting a claimed infraction of the
united states constitution. *** after all, [it should be borne in mind
that] this is the nation's ultimate judicial tribunal, not a
super-legal-aid bureau."
[] jordan v. massachusetts,  u.s. , . ().
[] maxwell v. dow,  u.s.  ().
[] hallinger v. davis,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] missouri v. lewis,  u.s.  (); maxwell v.
dow,  u.s. ,  (); jordan v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,
 (); snyder v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] brown v. new jersey,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] ashe v. united states ex rel. valotta,  u.s. ,
[] fay v. new york,  u.s. ,  (); moore v.
new york,  u.s.  ().—both cases reject the proposition that
the commandment of the sixth amendment, which requires a jury trial in
criminal cases in the federal courts is picked up by the due process
clause of the fourteenth amendment so as to become a limitation upon the
states.
[] fay v. new york,  u.s. , - ().—since
congress, by way of enforcing the guarantees contained in the fourteenth
amendment, has, by statute [ stat. ,  ();  u.s.c. ], made
it a crime to exclude a citizen from jury service only on account of
race, color, or previous condition of servitude, the supreme court
"never has interfered with the composition of state court juries except
in cases where this guidance of congress was applicable." without
suggesting that "no case of discrimination in jury drawing except those
involving race or color can carry such unjust consequences as to amount
to a denial of *** due process," the court has nevertheless required
that a defendant, alleging grounds not covered by that statute, "must
comply with the exacting requirements of proving clearly" that the
procedure in his case was destructive of due process.
these statements reflect the views of only five justices. speaking for
the minority (justices black, douglas, and rutledge), justice murphy
declared that "the vice lies in the very concept of 'blue ribbon'
panels—the systematic and intentional exclusion of all but the 'best'
or the most learned or intelligent of the general jurors. such panels
are completely at war with the democratic theory of our jury system, a
theory formulated out of the experience of generations. one is
constitutionally entitled to be judged by a fair sampling of all one's
neighbors who are qualified, not merely those with superior intelligence
or learning. jury panels are supposed to be representative of all
qualified classes. within those classes, of course, are persons with
varying degrees of intelligence, wealth, education, ability and
experience. but it is from that welter of qualified individuals, who
meet specified minimum standards, that juries are to be chosen. any
method that permits only the 'best' of these to be selected opens the
way to grave abuses. the jury is then in danger of losing its democratic
flavor and becoming the instrument of the select few." a "blue ribbon
jury" is neither "a jury of the *** [defendant's] peers," nor "a jury
chosen from a fair cross-section of the community, ***"—moore v.
new york,  u.s. , - ().
[] rawlins v. georgia,  u.s.  (). the supreme
court "has never entertained a defendant's objections to exclusions from
the jury except when he was a member of the excluded class."—fay v.
new york,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. , , -, ; citing missouri v.
lewis,  u.s.  (); and holden v. hardy,  u.s. , , 
[] in several decisions the court, assuming, but without
deciding, that a state law requiring a witness to answer incriminating
questions would violate the due process clause, has then proceeded to
conclude, nevertheless, that a state antitrust law which grants immunity
from local prosecution to a witness compelled to testify thereunder is
valid even though testimony thus extracted may later serve as the basis
of a federal prosecution for violation of federal antitrust laws.—jack
v. kansas,  u.s. ,  ().
[] snyder v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] palko v. connecticut,  u.s. , - ().
[]  u.s. , - (). for the significance of
this decision as a precedent in favor of a more careful scrutiny by the
supreme court of state trials in which a denial of constitutional rights
allegedly occurred, see p. .
[] ibid, -.
[] ibid. -, -.
[]  u.s. ,  (). this dictum represents the
closest approach which the court thus far has made toward inclusion of
the privilege against self-incrimination within the due process clause
of the fourteenth amendment. in all but a few of the forced confession
cases, however, the results achieved by application of the fair trial
doctrine differ scarcely at all from those attainable by incorporation
of the privilege within that clause.
[] see baldwin v. missouri,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. , - ().—all members of the court
were in accord, however, in condemning, as no less a denial of due
process, the admission at the second trial of ashcraft [ashcraft v.
tennessee,  u.s.  ()] of evidence uncovered in consequence of
the written confession, acceptance of which at the first trial had led
to the reversal of his prior conviction.
[] ibid. .—of three justices who dissented, justice
murphy, with whom justice black was associated, declared that it was
"inconceivable *** that the second confession was free from the
coercive atmosphere that admittedly impregnated the first one"; and
added that previous decisions of this court "in effect have held that
the fourteenth amendment makes the prohibition [of the fifth pertaining
to self-incrimination] applicable to the states."—ibid. -.
[] chief justice stone, together with justices roberts,
reed, and jackson, all of whom dissented, would have sustained the
conviction.
[] justices rutledge and murphy dissented in part, assigning
among their reasons therefor their belief that the "subsequent
confessions, ***, were vitiated with all the coercion which destroys
admissibility of the first one." according to justice rutledge, "a
stricter standard is necessary where the confession tendered follows a
prior coerced one than in the case of a single confession ***. once a
coerced confession has been obtained all later ones should be excluded
from evidence, wherever there is evidence that the coerced one has been
used to secure the later ones."— u.s. , , - ().
[] in lyons v. oklahoma,  u.s. ,  (), the
court stated that "when the state-approved instruction (to the jury)
fairly raises the question of whether or not the challenged confession
was voluntary, ***, the requirements of due process, ***, are
satisfied and this court will not require a modification of local
practice to meet views that it might have as to *** how specific an
instruction *** must be." in malinski v. new york, the four
dissenting justices declared that "the trial court, ***, instructed
the jury that the evidence with respect to the first confession was
adduced only to show that the second was coerced. and *** that it
could consider the second confession, only if it found it voluntary, and
that it could convict in that case. in view of these instructions, we
cannot say that the first confession was submitted to the jury, or that
in the absence of any exception or request to charge more particularly,
there was any error, of which the *** [accused] can complain."—
[] the coercive nature of the first oral confession was
apparently acknowledged by the prosecuting attorney in his summation to
the jury; for he declared that the accused "was not hard to break," and
that the purpose of holding him incommunicado and unclothed in a hotel
room from  a.m. to  p.m., when the confession was made, was to "let
him think that he is going to get a shellacking (beating)."— u.s.
[] adamson v. california,  u.s. , , , , 
[] adamson v. california,  u.s. , -, -, 
(). see also malinski v. new york,  u.s. , , , 
[] adamson v. california,  u.s. , , -, 
().—dissenting separately, justice murphy, together with justice
rutledge, announced their agreement with justice black, subject to one
reservation. while agreeing "that the specific guarantees of the bill of
rights should be carried over intact into the first section of the
fourteenth amendment," they were "not prepared to say that the latter is
entirely and necessarily limited by the bill of rights. occasions may
arise where a proceeding falls so far short of conforming to fundamental
standards of procedure as to warrant *** condemnation in terms of a
lack of due process despite the absence of a specific provision in the
bill of rights."—ibid. .
in a lengthy article based upon a painstaking examination of original
data pertaining to the "understanding of the import of the *** clauses
of section  of the fourteenth amendment at the time the amendment was
adopted"; that is, during the period -, professor charles
fairman has marshalled a "mountain of evidence" calculated to prove
conclusively the inaccuracy of justice black's reading of
history.—charles fairman. does the fourteenth amendment incorporate the
bill of rights? the original understanding.— stanford law review,
[] ibid. -.—in a dissenting opinion, in which chief
justice vinson and justices jackson and reed concurred, justice burton
remarked that inasmuch as the issue of the voluntariness of the
confession was one of fact, turning largely on the credibility of
witnesses, the determination thereof by the trial judge and jury should
not be overturned upon mere conjecture.—ibid. , .
[] the court also held that the procedure of alabama, in
requiring the accused to obtain permission from an appellate court
before filing a petition in a trial court for a writ of error coram
nobis was consistent with due process. alabama was deemed to possess
"ample machinery for correcting the constitutional wrong of which the
*** [accused] complained."—ibid. , -.
[] the accused, in his petition, neither denied his guilt
nor any of the acts on which his conviction was based. he simply
contended that because of fear generated by coercive police methods
applied to him, he had concealed such evidence from his own counsel at
the time of the trial and had informed the latter that his confessions
were voluntary. his charges of duress were supported by affidavits of
three associates in crime, none of whom claims to have seen the alleged
beatings of the petitioner.—ibid. -.
[] in a dissenting opinion, in which justices douglas and
rutledge concurred, justice murphy maintained that inasmuch as there was
some evidence to substantiate the petitioner's claim, the latter should
have been allowed a hearing in the trial court. according to justice
murphy, a conviction based on a coerced confession is "void even though
the confession is in fact true" and the petitioner is guilty. justice
frankfurter criticized this dissenting opinion as having been "written
as though this court was a court of criminal appeals for revision of
convictions in the state courts."—ibid. , -.
[] watts v. indiana,  u.s. ,  ().
[] watts v. indiana,  u.s. ,  (); citing
malinski v. new york,  u.s.  (); haley v. ohio,  u.s.
[]  u.s. ,  (). in the , , and  terms
only one case arose which involved the forced confession issue in any
significant way. this was rochin v. california,  u.s.  (),
which is discussed immediately below in another connection. see also
jennings v. illinois,  u.s.  (); and stroble v.
california,  u.s.  (), in which diverse, but not necessarily
conflicting, results were reached.
[] consolidated rendering co. v. vermont,  u.s. ,
 (); hammond packing co. v. arkansas,  u.s. , 
[] wolf v. colorado,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. -.—in harmony with his views, as previously
stated in malinski v. new york,  u.s.  () and adamson v.
california,  u.s. , - (), justice frankfurter amplified his
appraisal of the due process clause as follows: "due process of law
*** conveys neither formal nor fixed nor narrow requirements. it is
the compendius expression for all those rights which the courts must
enforce because they are basic to our free society. but basic rights do
not become petrified as of any one time, even though, as a matter of
human experience, some may not too rhetorically be called eternal
verities. it is of the very nature of a free society to advance in its
standards of what is deemed reasonable and right. representing as it
does a living principle, due process is not confined within a permanent
catalogue of what may at a given time be deemed the limits of the
essentials of fundamental rights. to rely on a tidy formula for the easy
determination of what is a fundamental right for purposes of legal
enforcement may satisfy a longing for certainty but ignores the
movements of a free society. *** the real clue to the problem
confronting the judiciary in the application of the due process clause
is not to ask where the line is once and for all to be drawn but to
recognize that it is for the court to draw it by the gradual and empiric
process of 'inclusion and exclusion.'"—ibid. .
[] wolf v. colorado,  u.s. , - ().
[] ibid. , , , , .
[] stefanelli v. minard,  u.s.  (); rochin v.
california,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. , , citing malinski v. new york, 
[] ibid., .
[]  u.s. , - (). "of course", said justice
douglas, citing holt v. united states,  u.s. , - (),
"an accused can be compelled to be present at the trial, to stand, to
sit, to turn this way or that, and to try on a cap or a coat."  u.s.
at . see the self-incrimination clause of amendment v.
[] mooney v. holohan,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .—because judicial process adequate to correct
this alleged wrong was believed to exist in california and had not been
fully invoked by mooney, the court denied his petition. subsequently, a
california court appraised the evidence offered by mooney and ruled that
his allegations had not been established.—ex parte mooney,  cal. (d)
,  p (d)  (); certiorari denied,  u.s.  (). mooney
later was pardoned by governor olson.—new york times, january , .
[]  u.s.  (). see also new york ex rel. whitman
v. wilson,  u.s.  (); ex parte hawk,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. , , - ().—justice black,
together with justices douglas and murphy, dissented on the ground that
the florida court, "with intimations of approval" by the majority, had
never found it necessary to pass on the credibility of hysler's
allegations, but had erroneously declared that all his allegations, even
if true and fully known to the trial court, would not have precluded a
conviction.
in an earlier case, lisenba v. california,  u.s.  (), the
court, without discussion of this principle relating to the use of
perjured testimony, sustained a california appellate court's denial of a
petition for habeas corpus. the accused, after having been convicted
and sentenced to death for murder, filed his petition supported by
affidavits of a codefendant, who, after pleading guilty and serving as a
witness for the state had received a life sentence. the latter affirmed
that his testimony at the trial of the petitioner "was obtained by
deceit, fraud, collusion, and coercion, and was known to the prosecutor
to be false." even though the california court had denied the petition
for habeas corpus without taking oral evidence and without requiring
the state to answer, the supreme court upheld this action on the ground
that there was no adequate showing of a corrupt bargain between the
prosecution and the codefendant and that the appraisal of conflicting
evidence was for the court below. even if latter's refusal to believe
the codefendant's depositions were erroneous, such error, the court
added, would not amount to a denial of due process.
[]  u.s.  (). certiorari was denied, however, for
the reason that the state court's refusal to issue the writ of habeas
corpus was based upon an adequate nonfederal ground.
[] schwab v. berggren,  u.s. ,  ().—this
statement is a dictum, however; for the issue presented by the accused's
petition for a writ of habeas corpus was that the state appellate
court had denied him due process in ruling on his appeal from his
conviction in the absence of both the petitioner and his counsel and
without notice to either as to the date of its decision. insofar as a
right to be present exists, its application, the supreme court
maintained, is limited to courts of original jurisdiction trying
criminal cases.
[] howard v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] snyder v. massachusetts,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , , , , .—in a dissent, in which
justices brandeis, butler, and sutherland concurred, justice roberts
insisted that "it *** [was] not a matter of assumption but a certainty
*** [that] *** the *** privilege of the accused to be present
throughout his trial is of the very essence of due process," and, in
that connection, "the great weight of authority is that" the view by the
jury "forms part of the trial." even if "the result would have been the
same had the [accused] been present, still the denial of the
constitutional right ought not to be condoned. *** nor ought this
court to convert the inquiry from one as to the denial of the right into
one as to the prejudice suffered by the denial. to pivot affirmance on
the question of the amount of harm done the accused is to beg the
constitutional question involved. *** the guarantee of the fourteenth
amendment is not that a just result shall have been obtained, but that
the result, whatever it be, shall be reached in a fair way."—ibid.
[] ibid. -, -.—dissenting, justice murphy
maintained that the use in a capital case of probation reports which
"concededly [would] not have been admissible at the trial, and ***
[were] not subject to examination by the defendant, ***" violated "the
high commands of due process ***"—ibid. . justice rutledge
dissented without an opinion.
[] ibid. -.—disagreeing, justice frankfurter contended
that a state is "precluded by the due process clause from executing a
man who has temporarily or permanently become insane"; and thus bereft
of unlimited discretion as to "how it will ascertain sanity," a state
"must afford rudimentary safeguards for establishing [that]
fact."—ibid. , , , -.
[] in re oliver,  u.s.  (). on application for
habeas corpus, the prisoner's commitment was reviewed by the michigan
appellate court in the light, not of the whole record, but only of
fragmentary excerpts showing merely the testimony alleged to be false
and evasive.
in a concurring opinion, justice rutledge advocated disposing of the
case on the ground that the michigan one-man grand jury system was in
its entirety in conflict with the requirements of due process.
on the ground that the michigan courts had not passed on the
constitutionality of the procedure at issue, justices frankfurter and
jackson dissented and urged the remanding of the case. see also gaines
v. washington,  u.s. ,  ().
[] justice douglas, with justice black concurring, dissented
on the ground that even if "such elements of misbehavior as expression,
manner of speaking, bearing, and attitude *** [had] a contemptuous
flavor. *** freedom of speech should [not] be so readily sacrificed in
a courtroom." stressing that the trial judge penalized fisher only for
his forbidden comment and not for his behavior, and that it took a
ruling of the texas appellate court to settle the issue whether such
comment was improper under texas practice, justice douglas concluded
that the record suggests only that "the judge picked a quarrel with this
lawyer and used his high position to wreak vengeance." there having been
no substantial obstruction of the trial, justice murphy believed that
the trial judge's use of his power was inconsistent with due process;
whereas justice rutledge, in dissenting, contended "there can be no due
process in trial in the absence of calm judgment and action, untinged
with anger, from the bench."—ibid. -, , .
[] tumey v. ohio,  u.s.  (). see also jordan
v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] "unless the costs usually imposed are so small that they
may be properly ignored as within the maxim de minimis non curat
lex."—see tumey v. ohio,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] dugan v. ohio,  u.s.  ().
[] frank v. mangum,  u.s. ,  ().
[] moore v. dempsey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] thiel v. southern pacific co.,  u.s.  ().
see also fay v. new york,  u.s.  (), supra p. .
[] snyder v. massachusetts,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] lisenba v. california,  u.s. ,  ().
[] buchalter v. new york,  u.s. ,  (). the
court also declared that the due process clause did "not draw to itself
the provisions of state constitutions or state laws."
[] powell v. alabama,  u.s. ,  (); snyder v.
massachusetts,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cole v. arkansas,  u.s. ,  (). see also
williams v. north carolina,  u.s. ,  (), wherein the
court also stated that where a conviction in a criminal prosecution is
based upon a general verdict that does not specify the ground on which
it rests, and one of the grounds upon which it may rest is invalid under
the constitution, the judgment cannot be sustained.
[] paterno v. lyons,  u.s. , - ().
[] mckane v. durston,  u.s.  ().—the
prohibition of the requirement of excessive bail, expressed in the
eighth amendment as a restraint against the federal government, has
never been deemed to be applicable to the states by virtue of the due
process clause of the fourteenth amendment. however, in a recent civil
suit, a united states district court judge asserted his belief, by way
of dictum, that protection against "unreasonable searches and seizures,
invasion of freedom of speech and press, unlawful and unwarranted
incarcerations, arrests, and failure to allow reasonable bail would
all be fundamental rights protected by [the fourteenth] amendment from
state invasion."—international union, etc. v. tennessee copper co.,
 f. supp.  ().
[] collins v. johnston,  u.s. ,  ().—in
affirming a judgment obtained by texas in a civil suit to recover
penalties for violation of its antitrust law, the supreme court
proffered the following vague standard for determining the validity of
penalties levied by states. "the fixing of punishment for crime or
penalties for unlawful acts against its laws is within the police power
of the state. we can only interfere with such legislation and judicial
action of the states enforcing it if the fines imposed are so grossly
excessive as to amount to a deprivation of property without due process
of law." however, a fine of $,, levied in this case against a
corporation having assets of $,, and paying out dividends as
high as %, and which was shown to have profited from its wrong doing
was not considered to be excessive.—waters-pierce oil co. v. texas,
[] graham v. west virginia,  u.s. ,  (). see
also ughbanks v. armstrong,  u.s. ,  ().
[] concurring in the result, justice frankfurter
concentrated on the problem suggested by the proposed absorption of the
bill of rights by the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment,
and restated his previously disclosed position as follows: "not until
recently was it suggested that the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment was merely a compendious reference to the bill of rights
whereby the states were now restricted in devising and enforcing their
penal code precisely as is the federal government by the first eight
amendments. on this view, the states would be confined in the
enforcement of their criminal codes by those views for safeguarding the
rights of the individual which were deemed necessary in the eighteenth
century. some of these safeguards have perduring validity. some grew out
of transient experience or formulated remedies which time might well
improve. the fourteenth amendment did not mean to imprison the states
into the limited experience of the eighteenth century. it did mean to
withdraw from the states the right to act in ways that are offensive to
a decent respect for the dignity of man, and heedless of his freedom.
"these are very broad terms by which to accommodate freedom and
authority. as has been suggested ***, they may be too large to serve
as the basis for adjudication in that they allow much room for
individual notions of policy. that is not our concern. the fact is that
the duty of such adjudication on a basis no less narrow has been
committed to this court.
"in an impressive body of decisions this court has decided that the due
process clause of the fourteenth amendment expresses a demand for
civilized standards which are not defined by the specifically enumerated
guarantees of the bill of rights. they neither contain the
particularities of the first eight amendments nor are they confined to
them. *** insofar as due process under the fourteenth amendment
requires the states to observe any of the immunities 'that are as valid
as against the federal government by force of the specific pledges of
particular amendments' it does so because they 'have been found to be
implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, and thus, through the
fourteenth amendment, become valid as against the states,'" [citing
palko v. connecticut,  u.s. , ,  ().]—ibid. -.
justice burton, with whom justices murphy, douglas, and rutledge were
associated, dissented on the grounds that "the proposed repeated, and at
least second, application to the *** [defendant] of an electric
current sufficient to cause death is ***, a cruel and unusual
punishment violative of due process of law."—ibid. .
in solesbee v. balkcom,  u.s.  (), the court declined to
intervene in case coming up from georgia in which appellant, claiming
that he had become insane following conviction and sentence of death,
sought a postponement of execution from the governor of the state.
justice frankfurter dissented, asserting that the due process clause of
amendment xiv prohibits a state from executing an insane convict.
[]  u.s. ,  (). see also keerl v. montana,
[] graham v. west virginia,  u.s. ,  ().
[] in a lengthy dictum, justice cardozo, speaking for the
court, rejected the defendant's view that "whatever would be a violation
of the original bill of rights (amendments one to eight) if done by the
federal government is now equally unlawful by force of the fourteenth
amendment if done by a state." by a selective process of inclusion and
exclusion, he conceded that "the due process clause of the fourteenth
amendment may make it unlawful for a state to abridge by its statutes
the freedom of speech which the first amendment safeguards against
encroachment by the congress, *** or the like freedom of the press,
*** or the free exercise of religion, *** or the right of peaceable
assembly ***, or the right of one accused of crime to the benefit of
counsel." however, insofar as such "immunities, [which] are valid as
against the federal government by force of the specific pledges of
particular amendments, have become valid as against the states," that
result is attributable, not to the absorption by the due process clause
of the fourteenth amendment of particular provisions of the bill of
rights, but to the fact that such immunities "have been found to be
implicit in the concept of ordered liberty ***" protected by that
clause.—ibid. , -.
[] justice butler dissented without an opinion.
[]  u.s. , ,  ().—in line with its former
ruling in graham v. west virginia,  u.s.  (), the court
reiterated in gryger v. burke,  u.s.  (), that a life
sentence imposed on a fourth offender under a state habitual criminal
act is a stiffened penalty for his latest offense, which is considered
to be an aggravated offense because a repetitive one, and is therefore
not invalid as subjecting the offender to a new jeopardy.
[] ex parte hull,  u.s.  ().
[] white v. ragen,  u.s.  n.  ().
[] mckane v. durston,  u.s. ,  (); andrews
v. swartz  u.s. ,  (); murphy v. massachusetts, 
u.s. ,  (); reetz v. michigan,  u.s. ,  ().
[] thus, where on the day assigned for hearing of a writ of
error, it appeared that the accused had escaped from jail, the court,
without denial of due process, could order that the writ be dismissed
unless the accused surrender himself within  days or be
captured.—allen v. georgia,  u.s.  ().
[] carter v. illinois,  u.s. , - ().
[] frank v. mangum,  u.s.  ().
[] for rules of self-limitation formulated by the court not
only to minimize its opportunities for such interference but also to
curtail the volume of litigation reaching it for final disposition,
see p. .
[] despite the court's contention that moore v. dempsey
was disposed of in conformity with the principles enunciated in frank
v. mangum, the two decisions are distinguishable not only by the
different results reached therein, but by the fact that the state
appellate court in frank v. mangum had ruled that the trial court had
correctly concluded, on the basis of the evidence submitted, that the
allegations of mob violence were unsubstantiated whereas the arkansas
appellate court, in moore v. dempsey, conceded a similar allegation to
be correct but did not deem it sufficient to render the trial a nullity.
although in the later case, arkansas demurred and thereby admitted the
allegations supporting the habeas corpus petition to be true, that
fact is a lesser significance, for even in frank v. mangum, the
supreme court abided by the rule that the writ of habeas corpus
relates to matters of substance and not of mere form, and declared that
the petitioner's allegations should be treated as if conceded by the
sheriff having custody of the petitioner.— u.s. , , 
[] james v. appel,  u.s. ,  (); pittsburgh,
c.c. & st. l.r. co. v. backus,  u.s.  (); standard oil co.
v. missouri ex rel. hadley,  u.s. ,  (); baldwin v.
iowa state traveling men's assoc.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] tracy v. ginzberg,  u.s.  (); allen v.
georgia,  u.s. ,  (); fallbrook irrig. district v.
bradley,  u.s. ,  ().
[] thorington v. montgomery,  u.s. ,  ().
[] cross v. north carolina,  u.s.  ().
[] ballard v. hunter,  u.s. ,  (); lyons v.
oklahoma,  u.s.  (); gryger v. burke,  u.s.  ().
[] mcdonald v. oregon r. & nav. co.,  u.s. , 
[] caldwell v. texas,  u.s. , ,  ();
bergemann v. backer,  u.s. ,  ().
[] rogers v. peck,  u.s. ,  ().
[] west v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
[] chicago l. ins. co. v. cherry,  u.s. , 
[] standard oil co. v. missouri ex rel. hadley,  u.s.
,  (); patterson v. colorado ex rel. attorney general, 
u.s. ,  (); stockholders v. sterling,  u.s. , 
[] virginia v. rives,  u.s. ,  ().
[] minneapolis & st. l.r. co. v. beckwith,  u.s. ,
[] yick wo v. hopkins,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] snowden v. hughes,  u.s. ,  ().
[] truax v. corrigan,  u.s.  ().
[] neal v. delaware,  u.s.  ().
[] shelley v. kraemer,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] missouri ex rel. gaines v. canada,  u.s. , 
[] smith v. allwright,  u.s.  (). cf. nixon
v. herndon,  u.s.  (); nixon v. condon,  u.s. 
(); grovey v. townsend,  u.s.  ().
[] slaughter-house cases,  wall. ,  ().
[] chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. iowa,  u.s.  ();
peik v. chicago & northwestern r. co.,  u.s.  (); chicago, m.
& st. p.r. co. v. ackley,  u.s.  (); winona & st. p.r. co.
v. blake,  u.s.  ().
[] santa clara county v. southern p.r. co.,  u.s. 
the ruling stood unchallenged until  when justice black asserted in
a dissenting opinion that "i do not believe the word 'person' in the
fourteenth amendment includes corporations." connecticut general life
insurance co. v. johnson,  u.s. ,  (). more recently
justice douglas expressed the same view in a dissenting opinion in which
justice black concurred. wheeling steel corporation v. glander, 
[] yick wo v. hopkins,  u.s. ,  ().
[] newark v. new jersey,  u.s.  (); williams
v. baltimore,  u.s.  ().
[] cf. hillsborough v. cromwell,  u.s.  ().
[] blake v. mcclung,  u.s. ,  (); sully v.
american nat. bank,  u.s.  ().
[] kentucky finance corp. v. paramount auto exchange
corp.,  u.s.  ().
[] hillsborough v. cromwell,  u.s.  ().
[] wheeling steel corp. v. glander,  u.s.  ();
hanover insurance co. v. harding,  u.s.  ().
[] fire asso. of philadelphia v. new york,  u.s. 
[] yick wo v. hopkins,  u.s. ,  ().
[] barbier v. connolly,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. -.
[] truax v. corrigan,  u.s. , - ().
[] barrett v. indiana,  u.s.  ().
[] watson v. maryland,  u.s.  ().
[] orient ins. co. v. daggs,  u.s. ,  ().
[] bachtel v. wilson,  u.s. ,  (). see also
frost v. corporation commission,  u.s. ,  (); smith v.
cahoon,  u.s. , - ().
[] lindsley v. natural carbonic gas co.,  u.s. 
[] middleton v. texas power & light co.,  u.s. ,
 (); madden v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
[] crescent cotton oil co. v. mississippi,  u.s. ,
[] west coast hotel co. v. parrish,  u.s. , 
[] lindsley v. natural carbonic gas co.,  u.s. , 
(). cf. united states v. petrillo,  u.s. ,  ().
[] dominion hotel v. arizona,  u.s. ,  ().
[] west coast hotel v. parrish,  u.s. , 
[] dominion hotel v. arizona,  u.s. ,  ().
[] watson v. maryland,  u.s. ,  ().
[] phelps v. board of education,  u.s. , 
[] chicago dock & canal co. v. fraley,  u.s. , 
[] davidson v. new orleans,  u.s. ,  ().
[] fire asso. of philadelphia v. new york,  u.s. 
(); santa clara county v. southern p.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] bell's gap r. co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. , 
(). (emphasis supplied.)
[] louisville gas & e. co. v. coleman,  u.s. , 
classification for purposes of taxation has been held valid in the
following situations:
banks: a heavier tax on banks which make loans mainly from money of
depositors than on other financial institutions which make loans mainly
from money supplied otherwise than by deposits. first nat. bank v.
louisiana tax commission,  u.s.  ().
bank deposits: a tax of ¢ per $ on deposits in banks outside a
state in contrast with a rate of ¢ per $ on deposits in the state.
madden v. kentucky,  u.s.  ().
coal: a tax of -/ percent on anthracite but not on bituminous coal.
heisler v. thomas colliery co.,  u.s.  ().
gasoline: a graduated severance tax on oils sold primarily for their
gasoline content, measured by resort to baumé gravity. ohio oil co. v.
conway,  u.s.  ().
chain stores: a privilege tax graduated according to the number of
stores maintained, state tax comr's. v. jackson,  u.s.  ();
fox v. standard oil co.,  u.s.  (); a license tax based on
the number of stores both within and without the state, great a. & p.
tea co. v. grosjean,  u.s.  ().
electricity: municipal systems may be exempted, puget sound power &
light co. v. seattle,  u.s.  (); that portion of electricity
produced which is used for pumping water for irrigating lands may be
exempted, utah power & light co. v. pfost,  u.s.  ().
insurance companies: license tax measured by gross receipts upon
domestic life insurance companies from which fraternal societies having
lodge organizations and insuring lives of members only are exempt, and
similar foreign corporations are subject to a fixed and comparatively
slight fee for the privilege of doing local business of the same kind.
northwestern mutual l. ins. co. v. wisconsin,  u.s.  ().
oleomargarine: classified separately from butter. magnano co. v.
hamilton,  u.s.  ().
peddlers: classified separately from other vendors. caskey baking co.
v. virginia,  u.s.  ().
public utilities: a gross receipts tax at a higher rate for railroads
than for other public utilities, ohio tax cases,  u.s.  (); a
gasoline storage tax which places a heavier burden upon railroads than
upon common carriers by bus, nashville c. & st. l. co. v. wallace, 
u.s.  (); a tax on railroads measured by gross earnings from
local operations, as applied to a railroad which received a larger net
income than others from the local activity of renting, and borrowing
cars, illinois central r. co. v. minnesota,  u.s.  (); a
gross receipts tax applicable only to public utilities, including
carriers, the proceeds of which are used for relieving the unemployed,
new york rapid transit corp. v. new york,  u.s.  ().
wine: exemption of wine from grapes grown in the state while in the
hands of the producer. cox v. texas,  u.s.  ().
laws imposing miscellaneous license fees have been upheld as follows:
cigarette dealers: taxing retailers and not wholesalers. cook v.
marshall county,  u.s.  ().
commission merchants: requirements that dealers in farm products on
commission procure a license, payne v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
elevators and warehouses: license limited to certain elevators and
warehouses on right-of-way of railroad, cargill co. v. minnesota, 
u.s.  (); a license tax applicable only to commercial warehouses
where no other commercial warehousing facilities in township subject to
tax, independent warehouse inc. v. scheele,  u.s.  ().
laundries: exemption from license tax of steam laundries and women
engaged in the laundry business where not more than two women are
employed. quong wing v. kirkendall,  u.s.  ().
merchants: exemption from license tax measured by amount of purchases,
of manufacturers within the state selling their own product. armour &
co. v. virginia,  u.s.  ().
sugar refineries: exemption from license applicable to refiners of
sugar and molasses of planters and farmers grinding and refining their
own sugar and molasses. american sugar refining co. v. louisiana, 
theaters: license graded according to price of admission. metropolis
theatre co. v. chicago,  u.s.  ().
wholesalers of oil: occupation tax on wholesalers in oil not
applicable to wholesalers in other products. southwestern oil co. v.
texas,  u.s.  ().
[] bell's gap r. co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. , 
[] quong wing v. kirkendall,  u.s. ,  (). see
also hammond packing co. v. montana,  u.s.  ().
[] puget sound power & light co. v. seattle,  u.s.
[] colgate v. harvey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] southern r. co. v. greene,  u.s. ,  ();
quaker city cab co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. ,  ().
[] keeney v. new york,  u.s. ,  (); state
tax comrs. v. jackson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] giozza v. tiernan,  u.s. ,  ().
[] louisville gas & e. co. v. coleman,  u.s. , 
(). see also bell's gap r. co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. ,
[] stewart dry goods co. v. lewis,  u.s.  ().
see also valentine v. great a. & p. tea co.,  u.s.  ().
[] liggett co. v. lee,  u.s.  ().
[] quaker city cab co. v. pennsylvania,  u.s. 
[] state tax comrs. v. jackson,  u.s. , 
[] colgate v. harvey,  u.s. ,  ().
[] darnell v. indiana,  u.s. ,  (); farmers
& m. sav. bank v. minnesota,  u.s. ,  ().
[] morf v. bingaman,  u.s. ,  ().
[] baltic min. co. v. massachusetts,  u.s. , 
(). see also cheney bros. co. v. massachusetts,  u.s. ,
[] fire asso. of philadelphia v. new york,  u.s. ,
[] hanover f. ins. co. v. harding,  u.s. , 
[] southern r. co. v. greene,  u.s. ,  ().
[] concordia f. ins. co. v. illinois,  u.s. 
[] lincoln nat. life ins. co. v. read,  u.s. 
[] wheeling steel corp. v. glander,  u.s. , ,
[] royster guano co. v. virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] shaffer v. carter,  u.s. , ,  (); travis
v. yale & t. mfg. co.,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] welch v. henry,  u.s.  ().
[] magoun v. illinois trust & sav. bank,  u.s. ,
[] billings v. illinois,  u.s.  ().
[] campbell v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] salomon v. state tax commission,  u.s.  ().
[] board of education v. illinois,  u.s.  ().
[] maxwell v. bugbee,  u.s.  ().
[] continental baking co. v. woodring,  u.s. 
[] dixie ohio express co. v. state revenue commission,
[] alward v. johnson,  u.s.  ().
[] bekins van lines v. riley,  u.s.  ().
[] morf v. bingaman,  u.s.  ().
[] clark v. paul gray, inc.,  u.s.  ().
[] carley & hamilton v. snook,  u.s.  ().
[] aero mayflower transit co. v. georgia pub. serv.
commission,  u.s.  ().
[] breedlove v. suttles,  u.s.  ().
[] royster guano co. v. virginia,  u.s. , 
[] missouri v. dockery,  u.s.  ().
[] kentucky union co. v. kentucky,  u.s. , 
[] sunday lake iron co. v. wakefield twp.,  u.s. 
(); raymond v. chicago union traction co.,  u.s. , , 
[] coulter v. louisville & n.r. co.,  u.s.  ().
see also chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. babcock,  u.s.  ().
[] charleston assn. v. alderson,  u.s.  ().
nashville, c. & st. l. ry. v. browning,  u.s.  ().
[] sioux city bridge co. v. dakota county,  u.s. ,
[] hillsborough v. cromwell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] st. louis-san francisco r. co. v. middlekamp,  u.s.
[] memphis & c.r. co. v. pace,  u.s.  ().
[] kansas city southern r. co. v. road improv. dist., 
u.s.  (); thomas v. kansas city southern r. co.,  u.s. 
[] road improv. dist. v. missouri p.r. co.,  u.s. 
[] branson v. bush,  u.s.  ().
[] columbus & g.r. co. v. miller,  u.s.  ().
[] buck v. bell,  u.s. ,  ().
[] classifications under police regulations have been held
valid in the following situations:
advertising: discrimination between billboard and newspaper
advertising of cigarettes, packer corp. v. utah,  u.s.  ();
prohibition of advertising signs on motor vehicles, except when used in
the usual business of the owner, and not used mainly for advertising,
fifth ave. coach co. v. new york,  u.s.  (); prohibition of
advertising on motor vehicles except notices or advertising of products
of the owner, railway express inc. v. new york,  u.s.  ();
prohibition against sale of articles on which there is a representation
of the flag for advertising purposes, except newspapers, periodicals and
books; halter v. nebraska,  u.s.  ().
amusement: prohibition against keeping billiard halls for hire, except
in case of hotels having twenty-five or more rooms for use of regular
guests. murphy v. california,  u.s.  ().
barber shops: a law forbidding sunday labor except works of necessity
or charity, and specifically forbidding the keeping open of barber
shops. petit v. minnesota,  u.s.  ().
cattle: a classification of sheep, as distinguished from cattle, in a
regulation restricting the use of public lands for grazing. bacon v.
walker,  u.s.  (). see also omaechevarria v. idaho, 
cotton gins: in a state where cotton gins are held to be public
utilities and their rates regulated, the granting of a license to a
cooperative association distributing profits ratably to members and
nonmembers does not deny other persons operating gins equal protection
when there is nothing in the laws to forbid them to distribute their net
earnings among their patrons. corporations commission v. lowe, 
fish processing: stricter regulation of reduction of fish to flour or
meal than of canning. bayside fish flour co. v. gentry,  u.s. 
food: bread sold in loaves must be of prescribed standard sizes,
schmidinger v. chicago,  u.s.  (); food preservatives
containing boric acid may not be sold, price v. illinois,  u.s. 
(); lard not sold in bulk must be put up in containers holding one,
three or five pounds or some whole multiple thereof, armour & co. v.
north dakota,  u.s.  (); milk industry may be placed in a
special class for regulation, new york ex rel. lieberman v. van de
carr,  u.s.  (); vendors producing milk outside city may be
classified separately, adams v. milwaukee,  u.s.  ();
producing and nonproducing vendors may be distinguished in milk
regulations, st. john v. new york,  u.s.  (); different
minimum and maximum milk prices may be fixed for distributors and
storekeepers; nebbia v. new york,  u.s.  (); price
differential may be granted for sellers of milk not having a well
advertised trade name, borden's farm products co. v. ten eyck, 
u.s.  (); oleomargarine colored to resemble butter may be
prohibited, capital city dairy co. v. ohio ex rel. attorney general,
 u.s.  (); table syrups may be required to be so labelled and
disclose identity and proportion of ingredients, corn products ref. co.
v. eddy,  u.s.  ().
geographical discriminations: legislation limited in application to a
particular geographical or political subdivision of a state, ft. smith
light & traction co. v. board of improvement,  u.s. , 
(); ordinance prohibiting a particular business in certain sections
of a municipality, hadacheck v. sebastian,  u.s.  ();
statute authorizing a municipal commission to limit the height of
buildings in commercial districts to  feet and in other districts to
 to  feet, welch v. swasey,  u.s.  (); ordinance
prescribing limits in city outside of which no woman of lewd character
shall dwell, l'hote v. new orleans,  u.s. ,  ().
hotels: requirement that keepers of hotels having over fifty guests
employ night watchmen. miller v. strahl,  u.s.  ().
insurance companies: regulation of fire insurance rates with exemption
for farmers mutuals, german alliance ins. co. v. lewis,  u.s. 
(); different requirements imposed upon reciprocal insurance
associations than upon mutual companies, hoopeston canning co. v.
cullen,  u.s.  (); prohibition against life insurance
companies or agents engaging in undertaking business, daniel v. family
ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
intoxicating liquors: exception of druggists or manufacturers from
regulation. ohio ex rel. lloyd v. dollison,  u.s.  ();
eberle v. michigan,  u.s.  ().
lodging houses: requirement that sprinkler systems be installed in
buildings of nonfireproof construction is valid as applied to such a
building which is safeguarded by a fire alarm system, constant watchman
service and other safety arrangements. queenside hills realty co. v.
saxl,  u.s.  ().
markets: prohibition against operation of private market within six
squares of public market. natal v. louisiana,  u.s.  ().
medicine: a uniform standard of professional attainment and conduct
for all physicians, missouri ex rel. hurwitz v. north,  u.s. 
(); reasonable exemptions from medical registration law, watson v.
maryland,  u.s.  (); exemption of persons who heal by prayer
from regulations applicable to drugless physicians, crane v. johnson,
 u.s.  (); exclusion of osteopathic physicians from public
hospitals, hayman v. galveston,  u.s.  (); requirement that
persons who treat eyes without use of drugs be licensed as optometrists
with exception for persons treating eyes by the use of drugs, who are
regulated under a different statute, mcnaughton v. johnson,  u.s.
 (); a prohibition against advertising by dentists, not
applicable to other professions, semler v. oregon state dental
examiners,  u.s.  ().
motor vehicles: guest passenger regulation applicable to automobiles
but not to other classes of vehicles, silver v. silver,  u.s. 
(); exemption of vehicles from other states from registration
requirement, storaasli v. minnesota,  u.s.  ();
classification of driverless automobiles for hire as public vehicles,
which are required to procure a license and to carry liability
insurance, hodge drive-it-yourself co. v. cincinnati,  u.s. 
(); exemption from limitations on hours of labor for drivers of
motor vehicles of carriers of property for hire, of those not
principally engaged in transport of property for hire, and carriers
operating wholly in metropolitan areas, welch co. v. new hampshire,
 u.s.  (); exemption of busses and temporary movements of farm
implements and machinery and trucks making short hauls from common
carriers from limitations in net load and length of trucks, sproles v.
binford,  u.s.  (); prohibition against operation of
uncertified carriers, bradley v. public utilities commission,  u.s.
 (); exemption from regulations affecting carriers for hire, of
persons whose chief business is farming and dairying, but who
occasionally haul farm and dairy products for compensation, hicklin v.
coney,  u.s.  (); exemption of private vehicles, street cars
and omnibuses from insurance requirements applicable to taxicabs,
packard v. banton,  u.s.  ().
peddlers and solicitors: a state may classify and regulate itinerant
vendors and peddlers, emert v. missouri,  u.s.  (); may
forbid the sale by them of drugs and medicines, baccus v. louisiana,
 u.s.  (); prohibit drumming or soliciting on trains for
business for hotels, medical practitioners, etc., williams v.
arkansas,  u.s.  (); or solicitation of employment to prosecute
or collect claims, mccloskey v. tobin,  u.s.  (). and a
municipality may prohibit canvassers or peddlers from calling at private
residences unless requested or invited by the occupant to do so. breard
v. alexandria,  u.s.  ().
property destruction: destruction of cedar trees to protect apple
orchards from cedar rust. miller v. schoene,  u.s.  ().
railroads: forbid operation on a certain street, richmond, f. & p.r.
co. v. richmond,  u.s.  (); require fences and cattle guards
and allowed recovery of multiple damages for failure to comply, missouri
p.r. co. v. humes,  u.s.  (); minneapolis & st. l.r. co.
v. beckwith,  u.s.  (); minneapolis & st. l.r. co. v.
emmons,  u.s.  (); charge them with entire expense of altering
a grade crossing, new york & n.e.r. co. v. bristol,  u.s. 
(); makes them responsible for fire communicated by their engines,
st. louis & s.f.r. co. v. mathews,  u.s.  (); requires cutting
of certain weeds, missouri, k. & t.r. co. v. may,  u.s.  ();
create a presumption against a railroad failing to give prescribed
warning signals, atlantic coast line r. co. v. ford,  u.s. 
(); require use of locomotive headlights of a specified form and
power, atlantic coast line r. co. v. georgia,  u.s.  ();
make railroads liable for damage caused by operation of their
locomotives, unless they make it appear that their agents exercised all
ordinary and reasonable care and diligence, seaboard air line r. co.
v. watson,  u.s.  (); require sprinkling of streets between
tracks to lay the dust, pacific gas & electric co. v. police court,
sales in bulk: requirement of notice of bulk sale applicable only to
retail dealers. lemieux v. young,  u.s.  ().
secret societies: regulations applied only to one class of oath-bound
associations, having a membership of  or more persons, where the class
regulated has a tendency to make the secrecy of its purpose and
membership a cloak for conduct inimical to the personal rights of others
and to the public welfare. new york ex rel. bryant v. zimmerman, 
securities: a prohibition on the sale of capital stock on margin or
for future delivery which is not applicable to other objects of
speculation, e.g., cotton, grain. otis v. parker,  u.s.  ().
syndicalism: a criminal syndicalism statute does not deny equal
protection in penalizing those who advocate a resort to violent and
unlawful methods as a means of changing industrial and political
conditions while not penalizing those who advocate resort to such
methods for maintaining such conditions. whitney v. california, 
telegraph companies: a statute prohibiting stipulation against
liability for negligence in the delivery of interstate message, which
did not forbid express companies and other common carriers to limit
their liability by contract. western union teleg. co. v. commercial
milling co.,  u.s.  ().
[] hartford steam boiler inspection & ins. co. v.
harrison,  u.s.  ().
[] smith v. cahoon,  u.s.  ().
[] mayflower farms v. ten eyck,  u.s.  ().
[] buck v. bell,  u.s.  ().
[] skinner v. oklahoma,  u.s.  ().
[] yick wo v. hopkins,  u.s.  ().
[] fisher v. st. louis,  u.s.  ().
[] gorieb v. fox,  u.s.  ().
[] wilson v. eureka city,  u.s.  ().
[] gundling v. chicago,  u.s.  ().
[] kotch v. pilot comm'rs.,  u.s.  ().
[] yick wo v. hopkins,  u.s.  (). cf.
hirabayashi v. united states,  u.s.  (), where the court
sustained the relocation of american citizens of japanese ancestry on
the ground that in this case the fact of origin might reasonably be
deemed to have some substantial relation to national security. it was
careful to point out however, that normally distinctions based on race
or national origin are invidious and hence void.
[] ohio ex rel. clarke v. deckebach,  u.s. 
[] patsone v. pennsylvania,  u.s.  ().
[] heim v. mccall,  u.s.  (); crane v. new
york,  u.s.  ().
[] truax v. raich,  u.s.  ().
[] takahashi v. fish & game comm'n.,  u.s. 
[] terrace v. thompson,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. , .
[] holden v. hardy,  u.s.  ().
[] bunting v. oregon,  u.s.  ().
[] atkin v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] keokee consol. coke co. v. taylor,  u.s. 
(); see also knoxville iron co. v. harbison,  u.s. 
[] mclean v. arkansas,  u.s.  ().
[] prudential insurance co. v. cheek,  u.s. 
[] chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. perry,  u.s. 
[] mountain timber co. v. washington,  u.s. 
[] new york c.r. co. v. white,  u.s.  ();
middleton v. texas power & light co.,  u.s.  (); ward & gow
v. krinsky,  u.s.  ().
[] lincoln federal labor union v. northwestern co., 
[] miller v. wilson,  u.s.  (); bosley v.
mclaughlin,  u.s.  ().
[] muller v. oregon,  u.s.  ().
[] dominion hotel v. arizona,  u.s.  ().
[] radice v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] west coast hotel co. v. parrish,  u.s.  ();
overruling adkins v. children's hospital,  u.s.  (); and
morehead v. tipaldo,  u.s.  ().
[] goesaert v. cleary,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] mallinckrodt chemical works v. missouri ex rel. jones,
[] international harvester co. v. missouri ex rel. atty.
gen.,  u.s.  ().
[] tigner v. texas,  u.s.  (), overruling
connolly v. union sewer pipe co.,  u.s.  ().
[] standard oil co. v. tennessee ex rel. cates,  u.s.
[] carroll v. greenwich ins. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] pacific states box & basket co. v. white,  u.s. 
(). see also slaughter-house cases,  wall.  (); nebbia
v. new york,  u.s. ,  ().
[] pace v. alabama,  u.s.  ().
[] collins v. johnston,  u.s. ,  ();
pennsylvania ex rel. sullivan v. ashe,  u.s.  ().
[] mcdonald v. massachusetts,  u.s.  (). see
also moore v. missouri,  u.s.  (); graham v. west
virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] carlesi v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] ughbanks v. armstrong,  u.s.  ().
[] pennsylvania ex rel. sullivan v. ashe,  u.s. 
[] finley v. california,  u.s.  ().
[] minnesota v. probate court,  u.s.  ().
[] pace v. alabama,  u.s.  ().
[] francis v. resweber,  u.s.  ().
[] skinner v. oklahoma,  u.s.  (). cf. buck
v. bell,  u.s.  (). (sterilization of defectives.)
[] buchanan v. warley,  u.s.  ().
[] corrigan v. buckley,  u.s.  ().
[] shelley v. kraemer,  u.s.  (). cf. hurd v.
hodge,  u.s.  (), where the court held that a restrictive
covenant was unenforceable in the federal court of the district of
columbia for reasons of public policy.
[] plessy v. ferguson,  u.s.  (). cf. morgan
v. virginia,  u.s.  (), where a state statute requiring
segregation of passengers on interstate journeys was held to be an
unlawful restriction on interstate commerce. see also hall v. de
cuir,  u.s.  (), where a state law forbidding steamboats on the
mississippi to segregate passengers according to race was held
unconstitutional under the commerce clause, and bob-lo excursion co.
v. michigan,  u.s.  (), where a michigan statute forbidding
discrimination was held valid as applied to an excursion boat operating
on the detroit river; and henderson v. united states,  u.s. 
(), where segregation in a dining car operated by an interstate
railroad was held to violate a federal statute.
[] mccabe v. atchison, t. & s.f.r. co.,  u.s. 
[] cumming v. county board of education,  u.s. 
[] gong lum v. rice,  u.s.  ().
[] sipuel v. oklahoma,  u.s.  ().
[] fisher v. hurst,  u.s.  ().
the "separate but equal" doctrine took its rise in chief justice shaw's
opinion in roberts v. city of boston,  mass. ,  (), for an
excellent account of which see the article by leonard w. levy and
harlan b. phillips in  american historical review, - (april,
). see also judge danforth's opinion in gallagher v. king, 
in a case in which negro children brought a suit in the federal district
court for the eastern district of south carolina, to enjoin certain
school officials from making any distinctions based upon race or color
in providing educational facilities, the court found that statutes of
south carolina which required separate schools for the two races did not
of themselves violate the fourteenth amendment, but ordered the school
officials to proceed at once to furnish equal educational facilities and
to report to the court within six months as to the action taken. on
appeal to the supreme court the case was remanded for further
proceedings in order that the supreme court may "have the benefit of the
views of the district court upon the additional facts brought to the
attention of that court in the report which it ordered." briggs v.
elliott,  u.s. ,  ().
recently, the fourth united states circuit court of appeals, sitting at
richmond, ruled that negroes must be admitted to the white university of
north carolina law school in terms which flatly rejected the thesis of
separate but equal facilities. "it is a definite handicap to the colored
student to confine his association in the law school with people of his
own class," said the opinion of judge morris a. soper.—mckissick v.
carmichael,  f. d ,  ().
[] guinn v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[] williams v. mississippi,  u.s.  ().
[] giles v. harris,  u.s. ,  ().
[] lane v. wilson,  u.s. ,  ().
[] see p. , ante.
[] nixon v. herndon,  u.s.  ().
[] nixon v. condon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] grovey v. townsend,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. classic,  u.s.  ().
[] pope v. williams,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. ,  (). justice black dissented on the
ground that the equal protection clause was violated.
[]  u.s. , ,  (). justice douglas, with
whom justices black and murphy concurred, dissented saying that the
statute lacked "the equality to which the exercise of political rights
is entitled under the fourteenth amendment."
[] south v. peters,  u.s.  ().
[] dohany v. rogers,  u.s. ,  ().
[] hayes v. missouri,  u.s.  ().
[] hardware dealers mut. f. ins. co. v. glidden co., 
[] lindsley v. natural carbonic gas co.,  u.s. , ,
 (); see also mobile, j. & k.c.r. co. v. turnipseed,  u.s.
 (); adams v. new york,  u.s.  ().
[] cohen v. beneficial loan corp.,  u.s. , 
[] bowman v. lewis,  u.s. ,  (). see also
duncan v. missouri,  u.s.  (); ohio ex rel. bryant v.
akron metropolitan park dist,  u.s.  ().
[] mallett v. north carolina,  u.s.  (); see
also bowman v. lewis,  u.s. ,  ().
[] truax v. corrigan,  u.s.  ().
[] cochran v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] bain peanut co. v. pinson,  u.s.  ().
[] consolidated rendering co. v. vermont,  u.s. 
(). see also hammond packing co. v. arkansas,  u.s. 
[] power mfg. co. v. saunders,  u.s.  ().
[] kentucky finance corp. v. paramount auto exch. corp.,
[] fidelity mut. life asso. v. mettler,  u.s. , 
(). see also manhattan l. ins. co. v. cohen,  u.s. 
[] lowe v. kansas,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri, k. & t.r. co. v. cade,  u.s.  ();
see also missouri, k. & t.r. co. v. harris,  u.s.  ().
[] missouri p.r. co. v. larabee,  u.s.  ().
[] atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. matthews,  u.s. 
[] gulf, c. & s.f.r. co. v. ellis,  u.s.  ().
see also atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. vosburg,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ();  u.s.c. § ().
[] cassell v. texas,  u.s.  (); hill v.
texas,  u.s. ,  (); smith v. texas,  u.s.  ();
pierre v. louisiana,  u.s.  (); virginia v. rives, 
[] virginia v. rives,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] akins v. texas,  u.s. ,  ().
[] patton v. mississippi,  u.s.  (). see also
shepherd v. florida,  u.s.  ().
[] gibson v. mississippi,  u.s.  ().
[] rawlins v. georgia,  u.s.  ().
in an interesting footnote to his opinion, justice jackson asserted that
"it is unnecessary to decide whether the equal protection clause of the
fourteenth amendment might of its own force prohibit discrimination on
account of race in the selection of jurors, so that such discrimination
would violate the due process clause of the same amendment." ibid. .
earlier cases dealing with racial discrimination have indicated that the
discrimination was forbidden by the equal protection clause as well as
by the civil rights act of . see cases cited to the preceding
paragraph.
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , .
[] ibid. .
[] ibid. , , , . four justices, speaking by
justice murphy dissented, saying: "the proof here is adequate enough to
demonstrate that this panel, like every discriminatorily selected 'blue
ribbon' panel, suffers from a constitutional infirmity. that infirmity
is the denial of equal protection to those who are tried by a jury drawn
from a 'blue ribbon' panel. such a panel is narrower and different from
that used in forming juries to try the vast majority of other accused
persons. to the extent of that difference, therefore, the persons tried
by 'blue ribbon' juries receive unequal protection." "in addition, as
illustrated in this case, the distinction that is drawn in fact between
'blue ribbon' jurors and general jurors is often of such a character as
to destroy the representative nature of the 'blue ribbon' panel. there
is no constitutional right to a jury drawn from a group of uneducated
and unintelligent persons. nor is there any right to a jury chosen
solely from those at the lower end of the economic and social scale. but
there is a constitutional right to a jury drawn from a group which
represents a cross-section of the community. and a cross-section of the
community includes persons with varying degrees of training and
intelligence and with varying economic and social positions. under our
constitution, the jury is not to be made the representative of the most
intelligent, the most wealthy or the most successful, nor of the least
intelligent, the least wealthy or the least successful. it is a
democratic institution, representative of all qualified classes of
people. *** to the extent that a 'blue ribbon' panel fails to reflect
this democratic principle, it is constitutionally defective."
[] w.g. rice, esq., jr., university of wisconsin law
school, the position of the american indian in the law of the united
states,  journal of comp. leg. ,  ().
[]  op. atty. gen. , .
[]  stat. ;  stat. ;  u.s.c.a. §a(a).
[] cong. rec., th cong., st sess., vol. , p. ,
january , .
[] mcpherson v. blacker,  u.s.  (); ex parte
yarbrough,  u.s. ,  ().
[] saunders v. wilkins,  f. (d)  ();
certiorari denied,  u.s.  (); rehearing denied,  u.s. 
[] saunders v. wilkins,  f. (d) , -, citing
willoughby, constitution, d ed., pp. , .
[] legislation by congress providing for removal was
necessary to give effect to the prohibition of section ; and until
removed in pursuance of such legislation, the exercise of functions by
persons in office before promulgation of the fourteenth amendment was
not unlawful. (griffin's case,  fed. cas. no.  ()). nor were
persons who had taken part in the civil war and had been pardoned
therefor by the president before the adoption of this amendment
precluded by this section from again holding office under the united
states. ( op. atty. gen.  ()).
the phrase, "engaged in rebellion" has been construed as implying a
voluntary effort to assist an insurrection and to bring it to a
successful termination; and accordingly as not embracing acts done under
compulsion of force or of a well grounded fear of bodily harm. thus,
while the mere holding of a commission of justice of the peace under the
confederate government was not viewed as involving, of itself,
"adherence or countenance to the rebellion," action by such officer in
furnishing a substitute for himself to the confederate army amounted to
such participation in a rebellion unless said action could be shown to
have resulted from fear of conscription and to have sprung, not from
repugnance to military service, but from want of sympathy with the
insurrectionary movement. (united states v. powell,  fed. cas. no.
[] perry v. united states,  u.s. ,  () in
which the court concluded "that the joint resolution of june , ,
insofar as it attempted to override" the gold-clause obligation in a
fourth liberty loan gold bond, "went beyond the congressional power."
see also branch v. haas,  f.  (), citing hanauer v.
woodruff,  wall.  () and thorington v. smith,  wall. 
() in which it was held that inasmuch as bonds issued by the
confederate states were rendered illegal by section four, a contract for
the sale and delivery before october ,  of  confederate coupon
bonds at the rate of $ was void, and a suit for damages for failure
to deliver could not be maintained.
see also the pietro campanella,  f. supp.  () which arose out
of a suit for the forfeiture, prior to our entry into world war ii, of
italian vessels in an american port and their subsequent requisition by
the maritime commission. the attorney general, as successor to the alien
property custodian, was declared to be entitled to the fund thereafter
determined to be due as compensation for the use and subsequent loss of
the vessels; and the order of the alien property custodian vesting in
himself, for the united states, under authority of the trading with the
enemy act and executive order, all rights of claimants in the vessels
and to the fund substituted therefor was held not to be a violation of
section four. an attorney for certain of the claimants, who had asserted
a personal right to a lien upon the fund for his services, had argued
that when the government requisitioned ships under the applicable
statute providing for compensation, and at a time before this country
was at war with italy, the united states entered into a binding
agreement with the owners for compensation and that this promise
constituted a valid obligation of the united states which could not be
repudiated without violating section four.
[] civil rights cases,  u.s. ,  (). see also
united states v. wheeler,  u.s.  () on which it was held
that the united states is without power to punish infractions by
individuals of the right of citizen to reside peacefully in the several
states, and to have free ingress into and egress from such states.
authority to deal with the forcible eviction by a mob of individuals
across state boundaries is exclusively within the power reserved by the
constitution to the states.
[] virginia v. rives,  u.s. ,  (); strauder
v. west virginia,  u.s.  ().
[] ex parte virginia,  u.s. ,  ().
[] united states v. harris,  u.s.  (). see
also baldwin v. franks,  u.s. ,  ().
[] no "opinion of the court" was given. in announcing the
judgment of the court, justice douglas, who was joined by chief justice
stone and justices black and reed, declared that the trial judge had
erred in not charging the jury that the defendants must be found to have
had the specific intention of depriving their victim of his right to a
fair trial in accordance with due process of law, that this was the
force of the word, "willfully," in section , and that any other
construction of section  would be void for want of laying down an
"ascertainable standard of guilt." to avoid a stalemate on the court,
justice rutledge concurred in the result; but, on the merits of the
case, he would have affirmed the conviction. justice murphy announced
that he favored affirming the conviction and therefore dissented.
justice roberts, with whom justices frankfurter and jackson were
associated, dissented for reasons stated in the text.
[]  u.s. , - (). but see barney v. city
of new york,  u.s. , ,  ().
[] ibid. -. the majority supporting this proposition
was not the same majority as the one which held that "state" action was
involved.
[] ibid. -.
[] ibid. -.
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
affirmative interpretation 
negative application; the "grandfather clause" 
application to party primaries 
enforcement 
[pg ]
amendment 
section . the right of citizens of the united states to vote
shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on
account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
section . the congress shall have power to enforce this
article by appropriate legislation.
affirmative interpretation
in its initial appraisals of this amendment the court appeared disposed
to emphasize only its purely negative aspects. "the fifteenth
amendment," it announced, did "not confer the right *** [to vote] upon
any one," but merely "invested the citizens of the united states with a
new constitutional right which is *** exemption from discrimination in
the exercise of the elective franchise on account of race, color, or
previous condition of servitude."[] within less than ten years,
however, in ex parte yarbrough,[] the court ventured to read into the
amendment an affirmative as well as a negative purpose. conceding "that
this article" had originally been construed as giving "no affirmative
right to the colored man to vote," and as having been "designed
primarily to prevent discrimination against him," justice miller, in
behalf of his colleagues, disclosed their present ability "to see that
under some circumstances it may operate as the immediate source of a
right to vote. in all cases where the former slave-holding states had
not removed from their constitutions the words 'white man' as a
qualification for voting, this provision did, in effect, confer on him
the right to vote, because, ***, it annulled the discriminating word
white, and thus left him in the enjoyment of the same right as white
persons. and such would be the effect of any future constitutional
provision of a state which should give the right of voting exclusively
to white people, ***"
[pg ]
negative application; the "grandfather clause"
the subsequent history of the fifteenth amendment has been largely a
record of belated judicial condemnation of various attempts by states to
disfranchise the negro either overtly through statutory enactment, or
covertly through inequitable administration of their electoral laws or
by toleration of discriminatory membership practices of political
parties. of several devices which have been voided, one of the first to
be held unconstitutional was the "grandfather clause." without expressly
disfranchising the negro, but with a view to facilitating the permanent
placement of white residents on the voting lists while continuing to
interpose severe obstacles upon negroes seeking qualification as voters,
several states, beginning in , enacted temporary laws whereby
persons who were voters, or descendants of voters on january , ,
could be registered notwithstanding their inability to meet any literacy
requirements. unable because of the date to avail themselves of the same
exemption, negroes were thus left exposed to disfranchisement on grounds
of illiteracy while whites no less illiterate were enabled to become
permanent voters. with the achievement of this intended result, most
states permitted their laws to lapse; but oklahoma's grandfather clause
was enacted as a permanent amendment to the state constitution; and when
presented with an opportunity to pass on its validity, a unanimous court
condemned the standard of voting thus established as recreating and
perpetuating "the very conditions which the [fifteenth] amendment was
intended to destroy."[] nor, when oklahoma followed up this defeat with
a statute of  which provided that all persons, except those who
voted in , who were qualified to vote in  but who failed to
register between april  and may ,  (sick persons and persons
absent had a second opportunity to register between may  and june ,
) should be perpetually disfranchised, did the court experience any
difficulty in holding the same to be repugnant to the amendment.[] that
amendment, justice frankfurter declared, "nullifies sophisticated as
well as simple-minded modes of discrimination. it hits onerous
procedural requirements which effectively handicap exercise of the
franchise by the colored race although the abstract right to vote may
remain unrestricted as to race."[] more precisely, the effect of this
statute, as discerned by the court, was automatically to continue as
permanent voters, without their being obliged to register again, all
white persons who were on registry lists in  by virtue of the
hitherto invalidated grandfather clause; whereas negroes, prevented from
registering by that clause, were afforded only a twenty-day registration
opportunity to avoid permanent disfranchisement.
[pg ]
application to party primaries
indecision was displayed by the court, however, when it was first called
upon to deal with the exclusion of negroes from participation in primary
elections.[] prior to its becoming convinced that primary contests were
in fact elections,[] the court had relied upon the equal protection
clause to strike down a texas white primary law[] and a subsequent
texas statute which contributed to a like exclusion by limiting voting
in primaries to members of state political parties as determined by the
central committees thereof.[] when exclusion of negroes was thereafter
perpetuated by political parties acting not in obedience to any
statutory command, this discrimination was for a time viewed as not
constituting state action and therefore not prohibited by either the
fourteenth or the fifteenth amendments.[] but this holding was
reversed nine years later when the court, in smith v. allwright,[]
declared that where the selection of candidates for public office is
entrusted by statute to political parties, a political party in making
its selection at a primary election is a state agency, and hence may not
under this amendment exclude negroes from such elections.
at a very early date the court held that literacy tests which are
drafted so as to apply alike to all applicants for the voting franchise
would be deemed to be fair on their face, and in the absence of proof of
discriminatory enforcement could not be viewed as denying the equal
protection of the laws guaranteed by the fourteenth amendment.[] more
recently, the boswell amendment to the constitution of alabama, which
provided that only persons who understood and could explain the
constitution of the united states to the reasonable satisfaction of
boards of registrars was found, both in its object as well as in the
manner of its administration, to be contrary to the [pg ]fifteenth
amendment. the legislative history of the adoption of the alabama
provision disclosed that "the ambiguity inherent in the phrase
'understand and explain' *** was purposeful *** and was intended as
a grant of arbitrary power in an attempt to obviate the consequences of"
smith v. allwright.[]
enforcement
two major questions have presented themselves for decision as a
consequence of the exercise by congress of its powers to enforce this
article, an amendment which the court has acknowledged to be
self-executing.[] these have pertained to the limitations which the
amendment imposes on the competency of congress legislating thereunder
to punish racial discrimination founded upon more than a denial of
suffrage and to penalize such denials when perpetrated by private
individuals not acting under color of public authority. rulings on both
these issues were made very early; and the court thus far has manifested
no disposition to depart from them, although their compatibility with
more recent holdings may be doubtful. thus, when the enforcement act of
,[] which penalized state officers for refusing to receive the
vote of any qualified citizen, was employed to support a prosecution of
such officers for having prevented a qualified negro from voting, the
court held it to be in excess of the authority conferred upon
congress.[] the fifteenth amendment, chief justice waite maintained,
did not confer "authority to impose penalties for every wrongful refusal
to receive *** [a] vote ***, [but] only when the wrongful refusal
*** is because of race, color, or previous condition of servitude,
***" voided for the like reason that this amendment "relates solely to
action 'by the united states or by any state,' and does not contemplate
wrongful individual acts" was another provision of the same act, which
authorized prosecution of private individuals for having prevented
citizens from voting at a congressional election.[]
notes
[] united states v. reese,  u.s. , - ();
united states v. cruikshank,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s. ,  (); citing neal v. delaware, 
u.s. ,  (). this affirmative view was later reiterated in
guinn v. united states,  u.s. ,  ().
[] guinn v. united states,  u.s. , , -
[] lane v. wilson,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. .
[] cases involving this and related issues are also discussed
under the equal protection clause, p. .
[] united states v. classic,  u.s.  (); smith v.
allwright,  u.s.  ().
[] nixon v. herndon,  u.s.  ().
[] nixon v. condon,  u.s. ,  ().
[] grovey v. townsend,  u.s. ,  ().
[]  u.s.  (). notwithstanding that the south
carolina legislature, after the decision in smith v. allwright,
repealed all statutory provisions regulating primary elections and
political organizations conducting them, a political party thus freed of
control is not to be regarded as a private club and for that reason
exempt from the constitutional prohibitions against racial
discrimination contained in the fifteenth amendment. rice v. elmore,
 f. (d)  (); certiorari denied,  u.s.  (). see
also brown v. baskin,  f. supp. ,  () which held
violative of the fifteenth amendment a requirement of a south carolina
political party, which excluded negroes from membership, that white as
well as negro qualified voters, as a prerequisite for voting in its
primary, take an oath that they will support separation of the races.
[] williams v. mississippi,  u.s. ,  ().
[] davis v. schnell,  f. supp. , ,  ();
affirmed,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. amsden,  f.  ().
[]  stat. .
[] united states v.. reese,  u.s. ,  ().
[] james v. bowman,  u.s. ,  () see also
karem v. united states,  f. ,  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
history and purpose of the amendment 
meaning of income as distinguished from capital 
corporate dividends: when taxable as income 
the "stock dividends case" 
other corporate earnings or receipts: when taxable as income 
gains in the form of real estate: when taxable as income 
gains in the form of bequests: when taxable as income 
diminution of loss: not income 
dates applicable in computation of taxable gains 
deductions: exemptions, etc. 
illegal gains as income 
[pg ]
amendment 
the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from
whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several states,
and without regard to any census or enumeration.
history and purpose of the amendment
the ratification of this amendment was the direct consequence of the
decision in [] whereby the attempt of congress the previous year to
tax incomes uniformly throughout the united states[] was held by a
divided court to be unconstitutional. a tax on incomes derived from
property,[] the court declared, was a "direct tax" which congress under
the terms of article i, section , clause , and section , clause ,
could impose only by the rule of apportionment according to population;
although scarcely fifteen years prior the justices had unanimously
sustained[] the collection of a similar tax during the civil war,[]
the only other occasion preceding amendment sixteen in which congress
had ventured to utilize this method of raising revenue.[]
during the interim between the pollock decision in , and the
ratification of the sixteenth amendment in , the court gave evidence
of a greater awareness of the dangerous consequences to national
solvency which that holding threatened, and partially circumvented it,
either by taking refuge in redefinitions of "direct tax" or, and more
especially, by emphasizing, virtually to the exclusion of the former,
the history of excise taxation. thus, in a series of cases, notably
nicol v. ames,[] knowlton v. moore[] and patton v. brady[] [pg ]the
court held the following taxes to have been levied merely upon one of
the "incidents of ownership" and hence to be excises; a tax which
involved affixing revenue stamps to memoranda evidencing the sale of
merchandise on commodity exchanges, an inheritance tax, and a war
revenue tax upon tobacco on which the hitherto imposed excise tax had
already been paid and which was held by the manufacturer for resale.
thanks to such endeavors the court thus found it possible, in ,[]
to sustain a corporate income tax as an excise "measured by income" on
the privilege of doing business in corporate form. the adoption of the
sixteenth amendment, however, put an end to speculation as to whether
the court, unaided by constitutional amendment, would persist along
these lines of construction until it had reversed its holding in the
pollock case. indeed, in its initial appraisal[] of the amendment it
classified income taxes as being inherently "indirect." "the command of
the amendment that all income taxes shall not be subject to
apportionment by a consideration of the sources from which the taxed
income may be derived, forbids the application to such taxes of the rule
applied in the pollock case by which alone such taxes were removed from
the great class of excises, duties, and imposts subject to the rule of
uniformity and were placed under the other or direct class.[] ***
the sixteenth amendment conferred no new power of taxation but simply
prohibited the previous complete and plenary power of income taxation
possessed by congress from the beginning from being taken out of the
category of indirect taxation to which it inherently belonged
meaning of "income" as distinguished from capital
building upon definitions formulated in cases construing the corporation
tax act of ,[] the court initially described income as the "gain
derived from capital, from labor, or from both combined," inclusive of
the "profit gained through a sale or conversion of capital assets";[]
and in the following array of factual situations has subsequently
applied this definition to achieve results that have been productive of
extended controversy.
[pg ]
rendered in conformity with the belief that all income "in the ordinary
sense of the word" became taxable under the sixteenth amendment, the
earliest decisions of the court on the taxability of corporate dividends
occasioned little comment. emphasizing that in all such cases the
stockholder is to be viewed as "a different entity from the
corporation," the court in lynch v. hornby[] held that a cash
dividend equal to % of the par value of outstanding stock and made
possible largely by the conversion into money of assets earned prior to
the adoption of the amendment, was income taxable to the stockholder for
the year in which he received it, notwithstanding that such an
extraordinary payment might appear "to be a mere realization in
possession of an inchoate and contingent interest *** [of] the
stockholder *** in a surplus of corporate assets previously existing."
in peabody v. eisner,[] decided on the same day and deemed to have
been controlled by the preceding case, the court ruled that a dividend
paid in the stock of another corporation, although representing earnings
that had accrued before ratification of the amendment, was also taxable
to the shareholder as income. the dividend was likened to a distribution
in specie.
two years later the court decided eisner v. macomber,[] and the
controversy which that decision precipitated still endures. departing
from the interpretation placed upon the sixteenth amendment in the
earlier cases; namely, that the purpose of the amendment was to correct
the "error" committed in the pollock case and to restore income taxation
to "the category of indirect taxation to which it inherently belonged,"
justice pitney, who delivered the opinion in the eisner case, indicated
that the sole purpose of the sixteenth amendment was merely to "remove
the necessity which otherwise might exist for an apportionment among the
states of taxes laid on income." he thereupon undertook to demonstrate
how what was not income, but an increment of capital when received,
could later be transmitted [pg ]into income upon sale or conversion, and
could be taxed as such without the necessity of apportionment. in short,
the term "income" reacquired to some indefinite extent a restrictive
significance.
specifically, the justice held that a stock dividend was capital when
received by a stockholder of the issuing corporation and did not become
taxable without apportionment; that is, as "income," until sold or
converted, and then only to the extent that a gain was realized upon the
proportion of the original investment which such stock represented. "a
stock dividend," justice pitney maintained, "far from being a
realization of profits to the stockholder, *** tends rather to
postpone such realization, in that the fund represented by the new stock
has been transferred from surplus to capital, and no longer is available
for actual distribution. *** not only does a stock dividend really
take nothing from *** the corporation and add nothing to that of the
shareholder, but *** the antecedent accumulation of profits evidenced
thereby, while indicating that the shareholder is richer because of an
increase of his capital, at the same time shows [that] he has not
realized or received any income in" what is no more than a "bookkeeping
transaction." but conceding that a stock dividend represented a gain,
the justice concluded that the only gain taxable as "income" under the
amendment was "a gain, a profit, something of exchangeable value
proceeding from the property, severed from the capital however
invested or employed, and coming in, being 'derived,' that is,
received or drawn by the recipient [the taxpayer] for his separate
use, benefit, and disposal; ***." only the latter, in his opinion,
answered the description of income "derived" from property; whereas "a
gain accruing to capital, not a growth or an increment of value in
the investment" did not.[]
although steadfastly refusing to depart from the principle[] which it
asserted in eisner v. macomber, the court in subsequent decisions has,
however, slightly narrowed the application thereof. [pg ]thus, the
distribution, as a dividend, to stockholders of an existing corporation
of the stock of a new corporation to which the former corporation, under
a reorganization, had transferred all its assets, including a surplus of
accumulated profits, was treated as taxable income. the fact that a
comparison of the market value of the shares in the older corporation
immediately before, with the aggregate market value of those shares plus
the dividend shares immediately after, the dividend showed that the
stockholders experienced no increase in aggregate wealth was declared
not to be a proper test for determining whether taxable income had been
received by these stockholders.[] on the other hand, no taxable income
was held to have been produced by the mere receipt by a stockholder of
rights to subscribe for shares in a new issue of capital stock, the
intrinsic value of which was assumed to be in excess of the issuing
price. the right to subscribe was declared to be analogous to a stock
dividend, and "only so much of the proceeds obtained upon the sale of
such rights as represents a realized profit over cost" to the
stockholders was deemed to be taxable income.[] similarly, on grounds
of consistency with eisner v. macomber, the court has ruled that
inasmuch as they gave the stockholder an interest different from that
represented by his former holdings, a dividend in common stock to
holders of preferred stock,[] or a dividend in preferred stock
accepted by a holder of common stock[] was income taxable under the
sixteenth amendment.
[pg ]
on at least two occasions the court has rejected as untenable the
contention that a tax on undistributed corporate profits is essentially
a penalty rather than a tax or that it is a direct tax on capital and
hence is not exempt from the requirement of apportionment. inasmuch as
the exaction was permissible as a tax, its validity was held not to be
impaired by its penal objective, namely, "to force corporations to
distribute earnings in order to create a basis for taxation against the
stockholders." as to the added contention that, because liability was
assessed upon a mere purpose to evade imposition of surtaxes against
stockholders, the tax was a direct tax on a state of mind, the court
replied that while "the existence of the defined purpose was a condition
precedent to the imposition of the tax liability, *** this *** [did]
not prevent it from being a true income tax within the meaning of the
sixteenth amendment."[] subsequently, in helvering v. northwest
steel mills,[] this appraisal of the constitutionality of the
undistributed profits tax was buttressed by the following observation:
"it is true that the surtax is imposed upon the annual income only if it
is not distributed, but this does not serve to make it anything other
than a true tax on income within the meaning of the sixteenth amendment.
nor is it true, ***, that because there might be an impairment of the
capital stock, the tax on the current annual profit would be the
equivalent of a tax upon capital. whether there was an impairment of the
capital stock or not, the tax *** was imposed on profits earned during
***—a tax year—and therefore on profits constituting income within
the meaning of the sixteenth amendment."[] likening a cooperative to a
corporation, federal courts have also declared to be taxable income the
net earnings of a farmers' cooperative, a portion of which was used to
pay dividends on capital stock without reference to patronage. the
argument that such earnings were in reality accumulated savings of its
patrons which the cooperative held as their bailee was rejected as
unsound for the reason that "while those who might be entitled to
patronage dividends have, ***, an interest in such earnings, such
interest never ripens into an individual ownership *** until and if a
patronage dividend be declared." had such net earnings been apportioned
to all of the patrons during the year, "there might be *** a more
serious question as to whether such earnings constituted 'income' [of
the cooperative] within the amendment."[] similarly, the power of
congress to tax the income of an unincorporated joint stock association
has been held to be unaffected by the fact that under state law the
association is not a legal entity and cannot hold title to property, or
by the fact that the shareholders are liable for its debts as
partners.[]
[pg ]whether subsidies paid to corporations in money or in the form of grants
of land or other physical property constitute taxable income has also
concerned the court. in edwards v. cuba railroad co.[] it ruled that
subsidies of lands, equipment, and money paid by cuba for the
construction of a railroad were not taxable income but were to be viewed
as having been received by the railroad as a reimbursement for capital
expenditures in completing such project. on the other hand, sums paid
out by the federal government to fulfil its guarantee of minimum
operating revenue to railroads during the six months following
relinquishment of their control by that government were found to be
taxable income. such payments were distinguished from those excluded
from computation of income in the preceding case in that the former were
neither bonuses, nor gifts, nor subsidies; "that is, contributions to
capital."[]
when through forfeiture of a lease in , a landlord became possessed
of a new building erected on his land by the outgoing tenant, the
resulting gain to the former was taxable to him in that year. although
"economic gain is not always taxable as income, it is settled that the
realization of gain need not be in cash derived from the sale of an
asset. *** the fact that the gain is a portion of the value of the
property received by the *** [landlord] does not negative its
realization. *** [nor is it necessary] to recognition of taxable gain
that *** [the landlord] should be able to sever the improvement
begetting the gain from his original capital." hence, [pg ]the taxpayer was
incorrect in contending that the amendment "does not permit the taxation
of such [a] gain without apportionment amongst the states."[]
consistently with this holding the court has also ruled that when an
apartment house was acquired by bequest subject to an unassumed
mortgage, and several years thereafter was sold for a price slightly in
excess of the mortgage, the basis for determining the gain from that
sale was the difference between the selling price, undiminished by the
amount of the mortgage, and the value of the property at the time of the
acquisition, less deductions for depreciation during the years the
building was held by the taxpayer. the latter's contention that the
revenue act, as thus applied, taxed something which was not revenue was
declared to be unfounded.[]
as against the argument of a donee that a gift of stock became a capital
asset when received and that therefore, when disposed of, no part of
that value could be treated as taxable income to said donee, the court
has declared that it was within the power of congress to require a donee
of stock, who sells it at a profit, to pay income tax on the difference
between the selling price and the value when the donor acquired it.[]
moreover, "the receipt in cash or property *** not [being] the only
characteristic of realization of income to a taxpayer on the cash
receipts basis," it follows that one who is normally taxable only on the
receipt of interest payments cannot escape taxation thereon by giving
away his right to such income in advance of payment. when "the taxpayer
does not receive payment of income in money or property, realization may
occur when the last step is taken by which he obtains the fruition of
the economic gain which has already accrued to him." hence an owner of
bonds, reporting on the cash receipts basis, who clipped interest
coupons therefrom before their due date and gave them to his son, was
held to have realized taxable income in the amount of said coupons,
notwithstanding that his son had collected them upon maturity later in
the year.[]
mere diminution of loss is neither gain, profit, nor income.
accordingly, one who in  borrowed a sum of money to be repaid in
german marks and who subsequently lost said money in a business
transaction cannot be taxed on the curtailment of debt effected by
[pg ]using depreciated marks in  to settle a liability of $, for
$,, the "saving" having been exceeded by a loss on the entire
operation.[]
with a frequency that for obvious reasons is progressively diminishing,
the court has also been called upon to resolve questions as to whether
gains, realized after , on transactions consummated prior to
ratification of the sixteenth amendment are taxable, and if so, how such
tax is to be determined. the court's answer generally has been that if
the gain to the person whose income is under consideration became such
subsequently to the date at which the amendment went into effect;
namely, march , , and is a real and not merely an apparent gain,
said gain is taxable. thus, one who purchased stock in  for $
could not limit his taxable gain to the difference between $, the
value of the stock on march ,  and $,, the price obtained on
the sale thereof in ; but was obliged to pay tax on the entire gain,
that is, the difference between the original purchase price and the
proceeds of the sale.[] conversely, one who acquired stock in  for
$, and who sold the same in  for only $,, incurred a
loss and could not be taxed at all, notwithstanding the fact that on
march , , his stock had depreciated to $,.[] on the other
hand, although the difference between the amount of life insurance
premiums, paid as of , and the amount distributed in , when the
insured received the amount of his policy plus cash dividends
apportioned thereto since , constituted a gain, that portion of the
latter which accrued between  and  was deemed to be an accretion
of capital and hence not taxable.[]
[pg ]
notwithstanding the authorization contained in the sixteenth amendment
to tax income "from whatever source derived," congress has been held not
to be precluded thereby from granting exemptions.[] thus, the fact
that "under the revenue acts of , , , and , stock fire
insurance companies were taxed *** upon gains realized from the sale
*** of property accruing subsequent to march , ," but were not so
taxed by the revenue acts of , , and , did not prevent
congress, under the terms of the revenue act of , from taxing all
the gain attributable to increase in value after march ,  which
such a company realized from a sale of property in . the
constitutional power of congress to tax a gain being well established,
congress, was declared competent to choose "the moment of its
realization and the amount realized"; and "its failure to impose a tax
upon the increase in value in the earlier years *** [could not]
preclude it from taxing the gain in the year when realized ***"[]
congress is equally well equipped with the "power to condition, limit,
or deny deductions from gross incomes in order to arrive at the net that
it chooses to tax."[] accordingly, even though the rental value of a
building used by its owner does not constitute income within the meaning
of the amendment,[] congress was competent to provide that an
insurance company shall not be entitled to deductions for depreciation,
maintenance, and property taxes on real estate owned and occupied by it
unless it includes in its computation of gross income the rental value
of the space thus used.[]
[pg ]
in united states v. sullivan[] the court held, in , that gains
derived from illicit traffic in liquor were taxable income under the act
of .[] said justice holmes for the unanimous court: "we see no
reason *** why the fact that a business is unlawful should exempt it
from paying the taxes that if lawful it would have to pay."[] but in
commissioner v. wilcox,[] decided in , justice murphy, speaking
for a majority of the court, held that embezzled money was not taxable
income to the embezzler, although any gain he derived from the use of it
would be. justice burton dissented on the basis of the sullivan case. in
rutkin v. united states,[] decided in , a sharply divided court
cuts loose from the metaphysics of the wilcox case and holds that
congress has the power under amendment xvi to tax as income monies
received by an extortioner.
notes
[] pollock v. farmers' loan & trust co.,  u.s. 
[]  stat. .
[] the court conceded that taxes on incomes from "professions,
trades, employments, or vocations" levied by this act were excise taxes
and therefore valid. the entire statute, however, was voided on the
ground that congress never intended to permit the entire "burden of the
tax to be borne by professions, trades, employments, or vocations" after
real estate and personal property had been exempted.  u.s. , 
[] springer v. united states,  u.s.  ().
[]  stat.  ().
[] for an account of the pollock decision see pp. -.
[] flint v. stone tracy co.,  u.s.  ().
[] brushaber v. union p.r. co.,  u.s.  (); stanton
v. baltic min. co.,  u.s.  (); tyee realty co. v.
anderson,  u.s.  ().
[] brushaber v. union p.r. co.,  u.s. , - ().
[] stanton v. baltic min. co.,  u.s. ,  ().
[] stratton's independence v. howbert,  u.s.  ();
doyle v. mitchell bros. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] eisner v. macomber,  u.s.  (); bowers v.
kerbaugh-empire co.,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. ,  ().—on the other hand, in lynch
v. turrish,  u.s.  (), the single and final dividend
distributed upon liquidation of the entire assets of a corporation,
although equalling twice the par value of the capital stock, was
declared to represent only the intrinsic value of the latter earned
prior to the effective date of the amendment, and hence was not taxable
as income to the shareholder in the year in which actually received.
similarly, in southern p. co. v. lowe,  u.s.  () dividends
paid out of surplus accumulated before the effective date of the
amendment by a railway company whose entire capital stock was owned by
another railway company and whose physical assets were leased to and
used by the latter was declared to be a nontaxable bookkeeping
transaction between virtually identical corporations.
[] eisner v. macomber,  u.s. , , - ().
this decision has been severely criticized, chiefly on the ground that
gains accruing to capital over a period of years are not income and are
not transformed into income by being dissevered from capital through
sale or conversion. critics have also experienced difficulty in
understanding how a tax on income which has been severed from capital
can continue to be labeled a "direct" tax on the capital from which the
severance has thus been made. finally, the contention has been made that
in stressing the separate identities of a corporation and its
stockholders, the court overlooked the fact that when a surplus has been
accumulated, the stockholders are thereby enriched, and that a stock
dividend may therefore be appropriately viewed simply as a device
whereby the corporation reinvests money earned in their behalf. see
also merchants' loan & t. co. v. smietanka,  u.s.  ().
[] reconsideration was refused in helvering v. griffiths,
[] united states v. phellis,  u.s.  ();
rockefeller v. united states,  u.s.  (). see also cullinan
v. walker,  u.s.  ().
in marr v. united states,  u.s. , - () it was held
that the increased market value of stock issued by a new corporation in
exchange for stock of an older corporation, the assets of which it was
organized to absorb, was subject to taxation as income to the holder,
notwithstanding that the income represented profits of the older
corporation and that the capital remained invested in the same general
enterprise. weiss v. stearn,  u.s.  (), in which the
additional value in new securities was held not taxable, was likened to
eisner v. macomber, and distinguished from the aforementioned cases on
the ground of preservation of corporate identity. although the "new
corporation had *** been organized to take over the assets and
business of the old ***, the corporate identity was deemed to have
been substantially maintained because the new corporation was organized
under the laws of the same state with presumably the same powers as the
old. there was also no change in the character of the securities
issued," with the result that "the proportional interest of the
stockholder after the distribution of the new securities was deemed to
be exactly the same."
[] miles v. safe deposit & trust co.,  u.s.  ().
[] koshland v. helvering,  u.s.  ()
[] helvering v. gowran,  u.s.  ().
[] helvering v. national grocery co.,  u.s. , -
(). in helvering v. mitchell,  u.s.  () the defendant
contended the collection of % of any deficiency in addition to the
deficiency alleged to have resulted from a fraudulent intent to evade
the income tax amounted to the imposition of a criminal penalty. the
court, however, described the additional sum as a civil and not a
criminal sanction, and one which could be constitutionally employed to
safeguard the government against loss of revenue. in contrast, the
exaction upheld in helvering v. national grocery co., though conceded
to possess the attributes of a civil sanction, was declared to be
sustainable as a tax.
[]  u.s.  (). see also crane-johnson co. v.
helvering,  u.s.  ().
[]  u.s. , . another provision of the revenue act,
requiring undistributed net income of a foreign personal holding company
to be included in the gross income of citizens or residents who are
shareholders in such company, was upheld as constitutional in rodney
v. hoey,  f. supp. , - ().
[] farmers union co-op co. v. commissioner of int. rev., 
f. (d) , ,  ().
[] burk-waggoner oil asso. v. hopkins,  u.s. 
[] texas & p. ry. co. v. united states,  u.s. , 
(); continental tie & lumber co. v. united states,  u.s. 
[] helvering v. bruun,  u.s. , - (). see
also hewitt realty co. v. commissioner of internal revenue,  f.
(d)  ().
[] crane v. commissioner,  u.s. , - ().
[] the donor could not, "by mere gift, enable another to hold
this stock free from *** the right of the sovereign to take part of
any increase in its value when separated through sale or conversion and
reduced to possession."—taft v. bowers,  u.s. , , 
[] helvering v. horst,  u.s. , - ().
[] bowers v. kerbaugh-empire co.,  u.s.  ().
[] goodrich v. edwards,  u.s.  ().
[] ibid. see also walsh v. brewster,  u.s. 
[] lucas v. alexander,  u.s.  ().
however, a litigant who, in , reduced to judgment, a suit pending on
february ,  for an accounting under a patent infringement, was
unable to have treated as capital, and excluded from the taxable income
produced by such settlement, that portion of his claim which had accrued
prior to march , . income within the meaning of the amendment was
interpreted to be the fruit that is born of capital, not the potency of
fruition. all that the taxpayer possessed in  was a contingent chose
in action which was inchoate, uncertain, and contested.—united states
v. safety car heating & l. co.,  u.s.  ().
similarly, purchasers of coal lands subject to mining leases executed
before adoption of the amendment could not successfully contend that
royalties received during - were payments for capital assets
sold before march , , and hence not taxable. such an exemption,
these purchasers argued, would have been in harmony with applicable
local law whereunder title to coal passes immediately to the lessee on
execution of such leases. to the court, on the other hand, such leases
were not to be viewed "as a 'sale' of the mineral content of the soil"
inasmuch as minerals "may or may not be present in the leased premises
and may or may not be found [therein]. *** if found, their abstraction
*** is a time consuming operation and the payments made by the lessee
*** do not normally become payable as the result of a single
transaction." the result for tax purposes would have been the same even
had the lease provided that title to the minerals would pass only "on
severance by the lessee."—bankers pocahontas coal co. v. burnet, 
u.s.  (); burnet v. harmel,  u.s. , -,  ().
[] brushaber v. union pac. r. co.,  u.s.  ().
[] maclaughlin v. alliance ins. co.,  u.s. , 
[] helvering v. independent l. ins. co.,  u.s. , 
(); helvering v. winmill,  u.s. ,  ().
[] a tax on the rental value of property so occupied is a
direct tax on the land and must be apportioned.—helvering v.
independent l. ins. co.,  u.s. , - ().
[]  u.s. .—expenditures incurred in the prosecution of
work under a contract for the purpose of earning profits are not capital
investments, the cost of which, if converted, must first be restored
from the proceeds before there is a capital gain taxable as income.
accordingly, a dredging contractor, recovering a judgment for breach of
warranty of the character of the material to be dredged, must include
the amount thereof in the gross income of the year in which it was
received, rather than of the years during which the contract was
performed, even though it merely represents a return of expenditures
made in performing the contract and resulting in a loss. the gain or
profit subject to tax under the sixteenth amendment is the excess of
receipts over allowable deductions during the accounting period, without
regard to whether or not such excess represents a profit ascertained on
the basis of particular transactions of the taxpayer when they are
brought to a conclusion.—burnet v. sanford & b. co.,  u.s. 
[]  stat. , , .
[]  at .
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
historical origin 
right to vote for senators 
[pg ]
amendment 
clause . the senate of the united states shall be composed of two
senators from each state, elected by the people thereof, for six years;
and each senator shall have one vote. the electors in each state shall
have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous
branch of the state legislatures.
clause . when vacancies happen in the representation of any state in
the senate, the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of
election to fill such vacancies: provided that the legislature of any
state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments
until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may
direct.
clause . this amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the
election or term of any senator chosen before it becomes valid as part
of the constitution.
historical origin
the ratification of this amendment was the outcome of increasing popular
dissatisfaction with the operation of the originally established method
of electing senators. as the franchise became exercisable by greater
numbers of people, the belief became widespread that senators ought to
be popularly elected in the same manner as representatives. acceptance
of this idea was fostered by the mounting accumulation of evidence of
the practical disadvantages and malpractices attendant upon legislative
selection, such as deadlocks within legislatures resulting in vacancies
remaining unfilled for substantial intervals, the influencing of
legislative selection by corrupt political organizations and special
interest groups through purchase of legislative seats, and the neglect
of duties by legislators as a consequence of protracted electoral
contests. prior to ratification, however, many states had perfected
arrangements calculated to afford the voters more effective [pg ]control
over the selection of senators. state laws regulating direct primaries
were amended so as to enable voters participating in primaries to
designate their preference for one of several party candidates for a
senatorial seat: and nominations unofficially effected thereby were
transmitted to the legislature. although their action rested upon no
stronger foundation than common understanding, the legislatures
generally elected the winning candidate of the majority, and, indeed, in
two states, candidates for legislative seats were required to promise to
support, without regard to party ties, the senatorial candidate polling
the most votes. as a result of such developments, at least  states by
, one year before ratification, were nominating senators on a
popular basis; and, as a consequence, the constitutional discretion of
the legislatures had been reduced to little more than that retained by
presidential electors.
right to vote for senators
very shortly after ratification it was established that if a person
possessed the qualifications requisite for voting for a senator, his
right to vote for such an officer was not derived merely from the
constitution and laws of the state in which they are chosen but has its
foundation in the constitution of the united states.[] consistently
with this view, federal courts more recently have declared that when
local party authorities, acting pursuant to regulations prescribed by a
party's state executive committee, refused to permit a negro, on account
of his race, to vote in a primary to select candidates for the office of
united states senator, they deprived him of a right secured to him by
the constitution and laws, in violation of this amendment.[] an
illinois statute, on the other hand, which required that a petition to
form, and to nominate candidates for, a new political party be signed by
at least , voters from at least  counties was held not to impair
any right under amendment xvii, notwithstanding that % of the state's
voters were residents of one county, % were residents of  counties,
and only % resided in the  least populous counties.[]
notes
[] united states v. aczel,  f.  (), citing ex
parte yarbrough,  u.s.  ().
[] chapman v. king,  f. (d)  (); certiorari
denied,  u.s.  ().
[] macdougall v. green,  u.s.  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
validity of adoption 
enforcement 
repeal 
[pg ]
amendment 
section . after one year from the ratification of this article
the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors within,
the importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof from the united
states and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for
beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.
section . the congress and the several states shall have
concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
section . this article shall be inoperative unless it shall
have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the
legislatures of the several states, as provided in the constitution,
within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the states
by the congress.
validity of adoption
cases relating to this question are presented and discussed under
article v.
enforcement
cases produced by enforcement and arising under amendments four and five
are considered in the discussion appearing under the latter amendments.
repeal
this amendment was repealed by the twenty-first amendment, and titles i
and ii of the national prohibition act[] were subsequently specifically
repealed by the act of august , .[] federal prohibition laws
effective in various districts and territories were repealed as follows:
district of columbia—april , , and january , ;[] puerto
rico and virgin islands—march , ;[] hawaii—march , ;[]
and panama canal zone—june , .[]
taking judicial notice of the fact that ratification of the twenty-first
amendment was consummated on december , , the supreme [pg ]court held
that the national prohibition act, insofar as it rested upon a grant of
authority to congress by amendment xviii thereupon became inoperative;
with the result that prosecutions for violations of the national
prohibition act, including proceedings on appeal, pending on, or begun
after, the date of repeal, had to be dismissed for want of jurisdiction.
only final judgments of conviction rendered while the national
prohibition act was in force remained unaffected.[] likewise a heavy
"special excise tax," insofar as it could be construed as part of the
machinery for enforcing the eighteenth amendment, was deemed to have
become inapplicable automatically upon the latter's repeal.[] however,
liability on a bond conditioned upon the return on the day of trial of a
vessel seized for illegal transportation of liquor was held not to have
been extinguished by repeal when the facts disclosed that the trial took
place in  and had resulted in conviction of the crew. the liability
became complete upon occurrence of the breach of the express contractual
condition and a civil action for recovery was viewed as unaffected by
the loss of penal sanctions.[]
notes
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. , §;  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[]  stat. .
[] united states v. chambers,  u.s. , - ().
see also ellerbee v. aderhold,  f. supp.  (); united states
ex rel. randall v. united states marshal for eastern dist. of new
york,  f. (d)  ().—the twenty-first amendment containing "no
saving clause as to prosecutions for offenses theretofore committed,"
these holdings were rendered unavoidable by virtue of the
well-established principle that after "the expiration or repeal of a
law, no penalty can be enforced, nor punishment inflicted, for
violations of the law committed while it was in force ***"—yeaton
v. united states,  cr. ,  (), quoted in united states v.
chambers at pages -.
[] united states v. constantine,  u.s.  (). the
court also took the position that even if the statute embodying this
"tax" had not been "adopted to penalize [a] violations of the
amendment," but merely to ordain a penalty for violations of state
liquor laws, "it ceased to be enforceable at the date of repeal"; for
with the lapse of the unusual enforcement powers contained in the
eighteenth amendment, congress could not, without infringing upon powers
reserved to the states by the tenth amendment, "impose cumulative
penalties above and beyond those specified by state law for infractions
of *** [a] state's criminal code by its own citizens." justice
cardozo, with whom justices brandeis and stone were associated,
dissented on the ground that, on its face, the statute levying this
"tax" was "an appropriate instrument of *** fiscal policy ***
classification by congress according to the nature of the calling
affected by a tax *** does not cease to be permissible because the
line of division between callings to be favored and those to be reproved
corresponds with a division between innocence and criminality under the
statutes of a state."—ibid. , , -. in earlier cases it was
nevertheless recognized that congress also may tax what it forbids and
that the basic tax on distilled spirits remained valid and enforceable
during as well as after the life of the amendment—see united states
v. yuginovich,  u.s. ,  (); united states v. stafoff,
 u.s.  (); united states v. rizzo,  u.s.  ().
[] united states v. mack,  u.s.  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
origin of the amendment 
validity of adoption 
effect of amendment 
[pg ]
amendment 
clause . the right of the citizens of the united states to vote shall
not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on
account of sex.
clause . congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation.
origin of the nineteenth amendment
the adoption of this amendment is attributable in great measure to its
advocacy since  by certain long term supporters of women suffrage
who had despaired of attaining their goal through modification of
individual state laws. agitation in behalf of women suffrage was
recorded as early as the jackson administration, but the initial results
were meager. beginning in , kentucky did authorize women to vote in
school elections, and its action was later copied by a number of other
states. kansas in  even granted women unlimited rights to vote in
municipal elections. not until , however, when wyoming, as a
territory, accorded women suffrage on terms of equality with men and
continued to grant such privileges after its admission as a state in
, did these advocates register a notable victory. progress
thereafter proved discouraging, only ten additional other states having
been added to the fold as of ; and as a consequence sponsors of
equal voting rights for women concentrated on obtaining ratification of
this amendment.
validity of adoption
cases relating to this question are presented and discussed under
article v.
effect of amendment
although owning that the nineteenth amendment "applies to men and women
alike and by its own force supersedes inconsistent measures, whether
federal or state," the court was unable to concede that a georgia
statute levying on inhabitants of the state a poll tax payment of which
is made a prerequisite for voting but exempting females who do not
register for voting, in any way abridged the right of male citizens to
vote on account of their sex. to accept the [pg ]appellant's contention, the
court urged, would make the nineteenth amendment a limitation on the
taxing power.[]
notes
[] breedlove v. suttles,  u.s. , - ().
although other interpretive decisions of federal courts are unavailable,
many state courts, taking their cue from pronouncements of the supreme
court as to the operative effect of the similarly phrased fifteenth
amendment, have proclaimed that the nineteenth amendment did not confer
upon women the right to vote but only prohibits discrimination against
them in the drafting and administration of laws relating to suffrage
qualifications and the conduct of elections. like the fifteenth
amendment, the nineteenth amendment, according to these state tribunals,
is self-executing and by its own force and effect legally expunged the
word, "male," and the masculine pronoun from state constitutions and
laws defining voting qualifications and the right to vote to the end
that such provisions now apply to both sexes.—see state v. mittle,
 s.c.  (); writ of error dismissed,  u.s.  ();
graves v. eubank,  ala.  (); in re cavellier,  misc.
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
extension of presidential succession 
[pg ]
amendment 
section . the terms of the president and vice president shall
end at noon on the th day of january, and the terms of senators and
representatives at noon on the d day of january, of the years in which
such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and
the terms of their successors shall then begin.
section . the congress shall assemble at least once in every
year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the d day of january,
unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
section . if, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term
of the president, the president elect shall have died, the vice
president elect shall become president. if a president shall not have
been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if
the president elect shall have failed to qualify, then the vice
president elect shall act as president until a president shall have
qualified; and the congress may by law provide for the case wherein
neither a president elect nor a vice president elect shall have
qualified, declaring who shall then act as president, or the manner in
which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act
accordingly until a president or vice president shall have qualified.
section . the congress may by law provide for the case of the
death of any of the persons from whom the house of representatives may
choose a president whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon
them, and for the case of the death of any [pg ]of the persons from whom the
senate may choose a vice president whenever the right of choice shall
have devolved upon them.
section . sections  and  shall take effect on the th day
of october following the ratification of this article.
section . this article shall be inoperative unless it shall
have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the
legislatures of three-fourths of the several states within seven years
from the date of its submission.
extension of presidential succession
pursuant to the authority conferred upon it by section  of this
amendment, congress shaped the presidential succession act of [] to
meet the situation which would arise from the failure of both president
elect and vice president elect to qualify on or before the time fixed
for the beginning of the new presidential term.
notes
[]  stat. , ;  u.s.c.a. ; see p. .
[pg ]
[pg ]
 page
effect of repeal 
scope of the regulatory power conferred upon the states 
discrimination as between domestic and imported products 
regulation of transportation and "through" shipments 
regulation of imports destined for a federal area 
effect on federal regulation 
[pg ]
amendment 
section . the eighteenth article of amendment to the
constitution of the united states is hereby repealed.
section . the transportation or importation into any state,
territory, or possession of the united states for delivery or use
therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is
hereby prohibited.
section . this article shall be inoperative unless it shall
have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by conventions in
the several states, as provided in the constitution, within seven years
from the date of the submission hereof to the states by the congress.
effect of repeal
the operative effect of section , repealing the eighteenth amendment,
is considered under the latter amendment.
scope of the regulatory power conferred upon the states
in a series of interpretive decisions rendered shortly after
ratification of this amendment, the court established the proposition
that states are competent to adopt legislation discriminating against
imported intoxicating liquors in favor of those of domestic origin and
that such discrimination offends neither the commerce clause of article
i nor the equal protection and due process clauses of the fourteenth
amendment. thus, in state board of equalization v. young's market
co.[] a california statute was upheld which exacted a $ annual
license fee for the privilege of importing beer from other states and a
$ fee for the privilege of manufacturing beer; and in mahoney v.
triner corp.[] a minnesota statute was sustained which prohibited a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler from importing any brand of
intoxicating liquor containing more than % of alcohol by volume and
ready for sale without further processing, unless such brand was
registered in the united states patent office. also [pg ]validated in
indianapolis brewing co. v. liquor commission[] and finch & co. v.
mckittrick[] were retaliation laws enacted by michigan and missouri,
respectively, by the terms of which sales in each of these states of
beer manufactured in a state already discriminating against beer
produced in michigan or missouri were rendered unlawful.
conceding, in state board of equalization v. young's market co.,[]
that "prior to the twenty-first amendment it would obviously have been
unconstitutional to have imposed any fee for *** the privilege of
importation *** even if the state had exacted an equal fee for the
privilege of transporting domestic beer from its place of manufacture to
the [seller's] place of business," the court proclaimed that this
amendment "abrogated the right to import free, so far as concerns
intoxicating liquors." inasmuch as the states were viewed as having
acquired therefrom an unconditioned authority to prohibit totally the
importation of intoxicating beverages, it logically followed that any
discriminatory restriction falling short of total exclusion was equally
valid, notwithstanding the absence of any connection between such
restriction and public health, safety or morals. as to the contention
that the unequal treatment of imported beer would contravene the equal
protection clause, the court succinctly observed that a "classification
recognized by the twenty-first amendment cannot be deemed forbidden by
the fourteenth."[]
lately, however, when passing upon the constitutionality of legislation
regulating the carriage of liquor interstate, a majority of the justices
have been disposed to by-pass the twenty-first amendment and to resolve
the issue exclusively in terms of the commerce clause and state police
power. this trend toward devaluation of the twenty-first amendment was
set in motion by ziffrin, inc. v. reeves[] wherein a kentucky
statute, forbidding the transportation of intoxicating liquors by
carriers other than licensed common carriers, was enforced as to an
indiana corporation, engaged in delivering liquor obtained from kentucky
distillers to consignees in illinois; but licensed only as a contract
carrier under the federal motor carriers act. after acknowledging that
"the twenty-first amendment sanctions the right of a state to legislate
concerning intoxicating liquors brought from [pg ]without, unfettered by the
commerce clause,"[] the court then proceeded to found its ruling
largely upon decisions antedating the amendment which sustained similar
state regulations as a legitimate exercise of the police power not
unduly burdening interstate commerce. in the light of the cases
enumerated in the preceding paragraph, wherein the twenty-first
amendment was construed as according a plenary power to the states, such
extended emphasis on the police power and the commerce clause would seem
to have been unnecessary. thereafter, a total eclipse of the
twenty-first amendment was recorded in duckworth v. arkansas[] and
carter v. virginia[] wherein, without even considering that
amendment, a majority of the court upheld, as not contravening the
commerce clause, statutes regulating the transport through the state of
liquor cargoes originating and ending outside the regulating state's
boundaries.[]
intoxicating beverages brought into a state for ultimate delivery at a
national park located therein but over which the united states retained
exclusive jurisdiction has been construed as not constituting
"transportation *** into [a] state for delivery and use therein"
within the meaning of section  of this amendment. the importation
having had as its objective delivery and use in a federal area over
which the state retained no jurisdiction, the increased powers which the
latter acquired from the twenty-first amendment were declared to be
inapplicable. california therefore could not extend the importation
license and other regulatory requirements of its alcoholic beverage
control act to a retail liquor dealer doing business in the park.[]
effect on federal regulation
the twenty-first amendment of itself did not, it was held, bar a
prosecution under the federal sherman antitrust law of producers,
wholesalers, and retailers charged with conspiring to fix and maintain
retail prices of alcoholic beverages in colorado.[] in a concurring
[pg ]opinion, supported by justice roberts, justice frankfurter took the
position that if the state of colorado had in fact "*** authorized the
transactions here complained of, the sherman law could not override such
exercise of state power. *** [since] the sherman law, ***, can have
no greater potency than the commerce clause itself, it must equally
yield to state power drawn from the twenty-first amendment."[] all
other efforts to invoke the twenty-first amendment as a limitation upon
the constitutional powers of the national government, notably to
invalidate the imposition, pursuant to the war power, of federal price
controls on retail sales of liquors, have been equally abortive.[]
notes
[] ibid -. in the three decisions rendered subsequently,
the court merely restated these conclusions. the contention that
discriminatory regulation of imported liquors violated the due process
clause was summarily rejected in indianapolis brewing co. v. liquor
commission,  u.s. ,  ().
[] ibid. .
[]  u.s.  (). see also cartlidge v. rainey, 
f. (d)  (); certiorari denied,  u.s.  ().
[] arkansas required a permit for the transportation of
liquor across its territory, but granted the same upon application and
payment of a nominal fee. virginia required carriers engaged in similar
through-shipments to use the most direct route, carry a bill of lading
describing that route, and post a $ bond conditioned on lawful
transportation; and also stipulated that the true consignee be named in
the bill of lading and be one having the legal right to receive the
shipment at destination.
[] collins v. yosemite park,  u.s. , - ().
[] united states v. frankfort distilleries, inc.,  u.s.
[] ibid. -.
[] jatros v. bowles,  f. (d) ,  (); barnett
v. bowles,  f. (d) ,  (), certiorari denied,  u.s. 
(); dowling bros. distilling co. v. united states,  f. (d)
,  (), certiorari denied, (gould et al. v. united states)
 u.s.  (); rehearing denied,  u.s.  ().
[pg ]
[pg ]
section . no person shall be elected to the office of the
president more than twice, and no person who has held the office of
president, or acted as president, for more than two years of a term to
which some other person was elected president shall be elected to the
office of the president more than once. but this article shall not apply
to any person holding the office of president when this article was
proposed by congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be
holding the office of president, or acting as president, during the term
within which this article becomes operative from holding the office of
president or acting as president during the remainder of such term.
section . this article shall be inoperative unless it shall
have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the
legislatures of three-fourths of the several states within seven years
from the date of its submission to the states by the congress.
[pg ]
[pg ]
. act of september ,  ( stat. , sec. , in part).
provision that "*** [the supreme court] shall have power to issue
*** writs of mandamus, in cases warranted by the principles and usages
of law, to any *** persons holding office, under authority of the
united states" as applied to the issue of mandamus to the secretary of
state requiring him to deliver to plaintiff a commission (duly signed by
the president) as justice of the peace in the district of columbia,
held an attempt to enlarge the original jurisdiction of the supreme
court, fixed by article iii, section .
marbury v. madison,  cr.  (february , ).
. act of february ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
provisions authorizing land officers to examine into "validity of claims
to land *** which are derived from confirmations made *** by the
governors of the northwest *** territory", held not to authorize
annulment of title confirmed by governor st. clair in , nor to
validate a subsequent sale and patent by the united states. (see fifth
amendment.)
reichert v. felps,  wallace  (march , ).
. act of march ,  ( stat. , sec. , proviso).
the missouri compromise, prohibiting slavery within the louisiana
territory north of ° ', except missouri, held not warranted as a
regulation of territory belonging to the united states under article iv,
section , clause  (and see fifth amendment).
dred scott v. sandford,  howard  (march , ).
. act of february ,  ( stat. , sec. ); july ,  (
stat. , sec. ); march ,  ( stat. , sec. ), each in part
only.
"legal tender clauses", making noninterest-bearing united states notes
legal tender in payment of "all debts, public and private", so far as
applied to debts contracted before passage of the act, held not within
express or implied powers of congress under article i, section , and
inconsistent with article i, section , and fifth amendment.
hepburn v. griswold,  wallace  (february , );
overruled in knox v. lee (legal tender cases),  wallace
 (may , ).
. act of march ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
"so much of the fifth section *** as provides for the removal of a
judgment in a state court, and in which the cause was tried by a jury to
the circuit court of the united states for a retrial on the facts and
law, is not in pursuance of the constitution, and is void" under the
seventh amendment.
the justices v. murray,  wallace  (march , ).
[pg ]
. act of march ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
provision for an appeal from the court of claims to the supreme
court—there being, at the time, a further provision (sec. ) requiring
an estimate by the secretary of the treasury before payment of final
judgments, held to contravene the judicial finality intended by the
constitution, article iii.
gordon v. united states,  wallace  (march , ).
(case was dismissed without opinion; the grounds upon which
this decision was made were stated in a posthumous opinion by
chief justice taney printed in the appendix to volume  of
the u.s. reports at p. .)
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
provision that "any prize cause now pending in any circuit court shall,
on the application of all parties in interest *** be transferred by
that court to the supreme court ***", as applied in a case where no
action had been taken in the circuit court on the appeal from the
district court, held to propose an appeal procedure not within article
iii, section .
the "alicia",  wallace  (january , ).
. act of january ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
requirement of a test oath (disavowing actions in hostility to the
united states) before admission to appear as attorney in a federal court
by virtue of any previous admission, held invalid as applied to an
attorney who had been pardoned by the president for all offenses during
the rebellion—as ex post facto (art. i, sec. , clause ) and an
interference with the pardoning power (art. ii, sec. , clause ).
ex parte garland,  wallace  (january , ).
. act of july ,  ( stat. ), amending act of june , 
( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
tax on indebtedness of railroads, "*** to whatsoever party or person
the same may be payable", as applied to railroad bonds held by a
municipal corporation under authority of the state, held an
infringement of reserved state sovereignty.
united states v. baltimore & o.r. co.,  wallace  (april
. act of march ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ), amending act
of june ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
tax on income of "*** every person residing in the united states ***
whether derived from *** salaries *** or from any source whatever
***", as applied to income of state judges, held an interference
with reserved powers of state. (see tenth amendment.)
the collector v. day,  wallace  (april , ).
. act of march ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
general prohibition on sale of naphtha, etc., for illuminating purposes,
if inflammable at less temperature than ° f., held invalid [pg ]"except
so far as the section named operates within the united states, but
without the limits of any state," as being a mere police regulation.
united states v. dewitt,  wallace  (february , ).
. act of may ,  ( stat. , ch. , sees. , ).
provisions penalizing () refusal of local election officials to permit
voting by persons offering to qualify under state laws, applicable to
any citizens; and () hindering of any person from qualifying or voting,
held invalid under fifteenth amendment.
united states v. reese et al.,  u.s.  (march , ).
. act of july ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
provision making presidential pardons inadmissible in evidence in court
of claims, prohibiting their use by that court in deciding claims or
appeals, and requiring dismissal of appeals by the supreme court in
cases where proof of loyalty had been made otherwise than as prescribed
by law, held an interference with judicial power under article iii,
section , and with the pardoning power under article ii, section ,
clause .
united states v. klein,  wallace  (january , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
provision authorizing federal courts to require production of documents
in proceedings, other than criminal, under the revenue laws (the
allegations expected to be proved thereby to be taken as proved, on
failure to produce such documents), held as applied to a suit for
forfeiture under the customs laws, to constitute unreasonable search in
violation of the fourth amendment.
boyd v. united states,  u.s.  (february , ).
. revised statutes  (act of may , ,  stat. ).
provision that "all persons within the jurisdiction of the united states
shall have the same right in every state and territory to make and
enforce contracts *** as is enjoyed by white citizens ***," held
invalid under the thirteenth amendment.
hodges v. united states,  u.s.  (may , ).
. revised statutes - (act of july , ,  stat. ), and
act of august ,  ( stat. ).
original trademark law, applying to marks "for exclusive use within the
united states," and a penal act designed solely for the protection of
rights defined in the earlier measure, held not supportable by article
i, section , clause  (copyright clause), nor article i, section ,
clause  (interstate commerce).
trade-mark cases,  u.s.  (november , ).
. revised statutes , subdivision  (act of march , ,  stat.
provision penalizing "any person respecting whom bankruptcy proceedings
are commenced *** who, within  months before the commencement of
proceedings in bankruptcy, under the false color and pretense of
carrying on business and dealing in the ordinary course of [pg ]trade,
obtains on credit from any person any goods or chattels with intent to
defraud ***," held a police regulation not within the bankruptcy
power (art. i, sec. , clause ).
united states v. fox,  u.s.  (january , ).
. revised statutes  (act of may , ,  stat. , sec. ).
provision penalizing "every person who prevents, hinders, controls, or
intimidates another from exercising *** the right of suffrage, to whom
that right is guaranteed by the fifteenth amendment to the constitution
of the united states, by means of bribery ***," held not authorized
by the said fifteenth amendment.
james v. bowman,  u.s.  (may , ).
. revised statutes  (act of april , ,  stat. , ch. ,
sec. ).
section providing punishment in case "two or more persons in any state
*** conspire *** for the purpose of depriving *** any person ***
of the equal protection of the laws *** or for the purpose of
preventing or hindering the constituted authorities of any state ***
from giving or securing to all persons within such state *** the equal
protection of the laws ***," held invalid for punishment of
conspiracy within a state—as not supported by the thirteenth to
fifteenth amendments.
united states v. harris,  u.s.  (january , ).
in baldwin v.. franks,  u.s.  (march , ), an
attempt was made to distinguish the harris case, and apply it
to conspiracy against aliens, though within a state, and
held, the provision was not separable in such case.
. revised statutes of the district of columbia, section  (act of
june , ,  stat. , ch. , sec. ).
provision that "prosecutions in the police court [of the district of
columbia] shall be by information under oath, without indictment by
grand jury or trial by petit jury," as applied to punishment for
conspiracy, held to contravene article iii, section , clause ,
requiring jury trial of all crimes.
callan v. wilson,  u.s.  (may , ).
. act of march ,  ( stat. , secs. , ).
provision "that all persons within the jurisdiction of the united states
shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations
*** of inns, public conveyances on land or water, theaters, and other
places of public amusement; subject only to the conditions and
limitations established by law, and applicable alike to citizens of
every race and color, regardless of any previous condition of
servitude"—subject to penalty, held not to be supported by the
thirteenth or fourteenth amendments.
civil rights cases,  u.s.  (october , ), as to
operation within states.
butts v. merchants and miners transportation co.,  u.s.
 (june , ) as to operation outside the states.
[pg ]
. act of march ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
provision that "if the party [i.e., a person stealing property from the
united states] has been convicted, then the judgment against him shall
be conclusive evidence in the prosecution against [the] receiver that
the property of the united states therein described has been embezzled,
stolen, or purloined," held to contravene the sixth amendment.
kirby v. united states,  u.s.  (april , ).
. act of july ,  ( stat. , sec. , in part).
provision that "postmasters of the first, second, and third classes
*** may be removed by the president by and with the advice and consent
of the senate," held to infringe the executive power under article ii,
section , clause .
myers v. united states,  u.s.  (october , ).
. act of august ,  ( stat. , trademark act), see revised
statutes .
. act of august ,  ( stat. ).
clause, in a provision for the purchase or condemnation of a certain
lock and dam in the monongahela river, that "*** in estimating the sum
to be paid by the united states, the franchise of said corporation to
collect tolls shall not be considered or estimated ***," held to
contravene the fifth amendment.
monongahela navigation co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(march , ).
. act of may ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
provision of a chinese exclusion act, that chinese persons "convicted
and adjudged to be not lawfully entitled to be or remain in the united
states shall be imprisoned at hard labor for a period not exceeding 
year and thereafter removed from the united states ***" (such
conviction and judgment being had before a justice, judge, or
commissioner upon a summary hearing), held to contravene the fifth and
sixth amendments.
wong wing v. united states,  u.s.  (may , ).
. joint resolution of august ,  ( stat. , no. ).
provision authorizing the secretary of the interior to approve a second
lease of certain land by an indian chief in minnesota (granted to
lessor's ancestor by art.  of a treaty with the chippewa indians),
held an interference with judicial interpretation of treaties under
article iii, section , clause  (and repugnant to the fifth amendment).
jones v. meehan,  u.s.  (october , ).
. act of august ,  ( stat. -, secs. -).
income tax provisions of the tariff act of . "the tax imposed by
sections  and , inclusive *** so far as it falls on the income of
real estate and of personal property, being a direct tax within the
meaning of the constitution, and, therefore, unconstitutional and void
[pg ]because not apportioned according to representation [art. i, sec. ,
clause ], all those sections, constituting one entire scheme of
taxation, are necessarily invalid" ( u.s. , ).
pollock v. farmers' loan and trust co.,  u.s.  (april
, ) and rehearing,  u.s.  (may , ).
. act of january ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
prohibition on sale of liquor "*** to any indian to whom allotment of
land has been made while the title to the same shall be held in trust by
the government ***," held a police regulation infringing state
powers, and not warranted by the commerce clause, article i, section ,
clause .
matter of heff,  u.s.  (april , ) overruled in
united states v. nice,  u.s.  ().
. act of june ,  ( stat. ).
section , penalizing "any employer subject to the provisions of this
act" who should "threaten any employee with loss of employment ***
because of his membership in *** a labor corporation, association, or
organization" (the act being applicable "to any common carrier ***
engaged in the transportation of passengers, or property *** from one
state *** to another state ***," etc.), held an infringement of
the fifth amendment, not supported by the commerce clause.
adair v. united states,  u.s.  (january , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ).
stamp tax on foreign bills of lading, held a tax on exports in
violation of article i, section .
fairbank v. united states,  u.s.  (april , ).
. same ( stat. , ).
tax on charter parties, as applied to shipments exclusively from ports
in united states to foreign ports, held a tax on exports in violation
of article i, section .
united states v. hvoslef,  u.s.  (march , ).
. same ( stat. , ).
tax on policies of marine insurance, as applied to insurance during
voyage to foreign ports, held a tax on exports in violation of article
i, section .
thames and mersey marine insurance co. v. united states, 
u.s.  (april , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
section of the alaska code providing for a six-person jury in trials for
misdemeanors, held repugnant to the sixth amendment, requiring "jury"
trial of crimes.
rassmussen v. united states,  u.s.  (april , ).
[pg ]
. act of march ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
section of the district of columbia code granting the same right of
appeal, in criminal cases, to the united states or the district of
columbia as to the defendant, but providing that a verdict was not to be
set aside for error found in rulings during trial, held an attempt to
take an advisory opinion, contrary to article iii, section .
united states v. evans,  u.s.  (april , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
act providing that "every common carrier engaged in trade or commerce in
the district of columbia *** or between the several states *** shall
be liable to any of its employees *** for all damages which may result
from the negligence of any of its officers *** or by reason of any
defect *** due to its negligence in its cars, engines *** roadbed",
etc., held not supportable under article i, section , clause  as
applied to employees engaged in moving trains in interstate commerce.
employers' liability cases,  u.s.  (january , ).
[the act was upheld as to the district of columbia in hyde
v. southern r. co.,  app. d.c.  []; and as to
territories, in el paso and northeastern r. co. v.
gutierrez,  u.s.  [].]
. act of june ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
provision of oklahoma enabling act restricting relocation of the state
capital prior to , held not supportable by article iv, section ,
authorizing admission of new states.
coyle v. oklahoma (smith),  u.s.  (may , ).
. act of february ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
provision in the immigration act of  penalizing "whoever *** shall
keep, maintain, control, support, or harbor in any house or other place,
for the purpose of prostitution *** any alien woman or girl, within 
years after she shall have entered the united states," held an
exercise of police power not within the control of congress over
immigration (whether drawn from the commerce clause or based on inherent
sovereignty).
keller v. united states,  u.s.  (april , ).
. act of march ,  ( stat. ).
provisions authorizing certain indians "to institute their suits in the
court of claims to determine the validity of any acts of congress passed
since *** , insofar as said acts *** attempt to increase or
extend the restrictions upon alienation *** of allotments of lands of
cherokee citizens ***," and giving a right of appeal to the supreme
court, held an attempt to enlarge the judicial power restricted by
article iii, section , to cases and controversies.
muskrat v. united states and brown and gritts v. united
states,  u.s.  (january , ).
[pg ]. act of may ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
provision making locally taxable "all land [of indians of the five
civilized tribes] from which restrictions have been or shall be
removed," held a violation of the fifth amendment, in view of the
atoka agreement, embodied in the curtis act of june , , providing
tax-exemption for allotted lands while title in original allottee, not
exceeding  years.
choate v. trapp,  u.s.  (may , ).
. act of august ,  ( stat. ).
a proviso in section  of the federal corrupt practices act fixing a
maximum authorized expenditure by a candidate for senator "in any
campaign for his nomination and election," as applied to a primary
election, held not supported by article i, section , giving congress
power to regulate the manner of holding elections for senators and
representatives.
newberry v. united states,  u.s.  (may , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
part of section  giving the juvenile court of the district of columbia
(proceeding upon information) concurrent jurisdiction of desertion cases
(which were, by law, misdemeanors punishable by fine or imprisonment in
the workhouse at hard labor for  year), held invalid under the fifth
amendment, which gives right to presentment by a grand jury in case of
infamous crimes.
united states v. moreland,  u.s.  (april , ).
. act of march ,  ( stat. , part of par. ).
provision of the district of columbia public utility commission act
authorizing appeal to the united states supreme court from decrees of
the district of columbia court of appeals modifying valuation decisions
of the utilities commission, held an attempt to extend the appellate
jurisdiction of the supreme court to cases not strictly judicial within
the meaning of article iii, section .
keller v. potomac electric power co. et al.,  u.s. 
(april , ).
. act of september ,  ( stat. , ch. , entire).
the original child labor law, providing "that no producer *** shall
ship *** in interstate commerce *** any article or commodity the
product of any mill *** in which within  days prior to the removal
of such product therefrom children under the age of  years have been
employed or permitted to work more than  hours in any day, or more than
 days in any week ***," held not within the commerce power of
congress.
hammer v. dagenhart,  u.s.  (june , ).
. act of september ,  ( stat. , sec. (a) in part).
provision of the income-tax law of , that a "stock dividend shall be
considered income, to the amount of its cash value," held invalid (in
spite of the sixteenth amendment) as an attempt to tax something not
[pg ]actually income, without regard to apportionment under article i,
section , clause .
eisner v. macomber,  u.s.  (march , ).
. act of october ,  ( stat. , secs. , , secs.  and
, sec.  (amending  stat. , sec. )); and
act of february ,  ( stat. , secs.  and , sec. ).
income and excess-profits taxes on income of "every corporation," as
applied to income of an oil corporation from leases of land granted by
the united states to a state, for the support of common schools, etc.,
held an interference with state governmental functions. (see tenth
amendment.)
burnet v. coronado oil & gas co.,  u.s.  (april ,
. same ( stat. , sec. (f)).
the tax "upon all tennis rackets, golf clubs, baseball bats *** balls
of all kinds, including baseballs *** sold by the manufacturer,
producer, or importer ***" as applied to articles sold by a
manufacturer to a commission merchant for exportation, held a tax on
exports within the prohibition of article i, section .
spalding & bros. v. edwards,  u.s.  (april , ).
. act of october ,  ( stat. , ch. , in part).
the amendment of sections  and  of the judicial code (which
prescribe the jurisdiction of district courts) "saving *** to
claimants the rights and remedies under the workmen's compensation law
of any state," held an attempt to transfer legislative power to the
states—the constitution, by article iii, section , and article i,
section , having adopted rules of general maritime law.
knickerbocker ice co. v. stewart,  u.s.  (may ,
. act of september ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
specifically, that part of the minimum wage law of the district of
columbia which authorized the wage board "to ascertain and declare ***
(a) standards of minimum wages for women in any occupation within the
district of columbia, and what wages are inadequate to supply the
necessary cost of living to any such women workers to maintain them in
good health and to protect their morals ***," held to interfere
with freedom of contract under the fifth amendment.
adkins et al. v. children's hospital and adkins et al. v.
lyons,  u.s.  (april , )—overruled in west coast
hotel co. v. parrish,  u.s.  (march , ).
. act of february ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. , in part).
that part of section  of the revenue act of  which provided that
"*** for the purposes of this title *** the term 'gross income'
*** includes gains, profits, and income derived from salaries, wages,
or compensation for personal service (including in the case of ***
judges of the supreme and inferior courts of the united states *** the
compensation received as such) ***" [pg ]as applied to a judge in office
when the act was passed, held a violation of the guaranty of judges'
salaries, in article iii, section .
evans v. gore,  u.s.  (june , ).
miles v. graham ( u.s. , june , ), held it
invalid as applied to a judge taking office subsequent to the
date of the act.
. act of february ,  ( stat. , sec. (c)).
that part of the estate tax providing that "gross estate" of a decedent
should include value of all property "to the extent of any interest
therein of which the decedent has at any time made a transfer or with
respect to which he had at any time created a trust, in contemplation of
or intended to take effect in possession or enjoyment at or after his
death (whether such transfer or trust is made or created before or after
the passage of this act), except in case of a bona fide sale ***" as
applied to a transfer of property made prior to the act and intended to
take effect "in possession or enjoyment" at death of grantor, but not in
fact testamentary or designed to evade taxation, held confiscatory,
contrary to fifth amendment.
nichols, collector v. coolidge et al., executors,  u.s.
 (may , ).
. act of february , , title xii ( stat. , entire title).
the child labor tax act, providing that "every person *** operating
*** any *** factory [etc.] *** in which children under the age of
 years have been employed or permitted to work *** shall pay ***
in addition to all other taxes imposed by law, an excise tax equivalent
to  percent of the entire net profits received *** for such year
from the sale *** of the product of such *** factory ***," held
beyond the taxing power under article i, section , clause , and an
infringement of state authority.
bailey v. drexel furniture co. (child labor tax case), 
u.s.  (may , ).
. act of october ,  ( stat. , sec. ), amending act of
august ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
section  of the lever act, providing in part "that it is hereby made
unlawful for any person willfully *** to make any unjust or
unreasonable rate or charge in handling or dealing in or with any
necessaries ***" and fixing a penalty, held invalid to support an
indictment for charging an unreasonable price on sale—as not setting up
an ascertainable standard of guilt within the requirement of the sixth
amendment.
united states v. cohen grocery co.,  u.s.  (february
. same.
that provision of section  making it unlawful "to conspire, combine,
agree, or arrange with any other person to *** exact excessive [pg ]prices
for any necessaries" and fixing a penalty, held invalid to support an
indictment, on the reasoning of the cohen case.
weeds, inc., v. united states,  u.s.  (february ,
. act of august ,  ( stat. , ch. , future trading act).
(a) section  (and interwoven regulations) providing a "tax of 
cents a bushel on every bushel involved therein, upon each contract of
sale of grain for future delivery, except *** where such contracts are
made by or through a member of a board of trade which has been
designated by the secretary of agriculture as a 'contract market'
***," held
not within the taxing power under article i, section .
hill v. wallace,  u.s.  (may , ).
(b) section , providing "that in addition to the taxes now imposed by
law there is hereby levied a tax amounting to  cents per bushel on
each bushel involved therein, whether the actual commodity is intended
to be delivered or only nominally referred to, upon each *** option
for a contract either of purchase or sale of grain ***", held
invalid on the same reasoning.
trusler v. crooks,  u.s.  (jan. , ).
. act of november ,  ( stat. , sec. , part).
provision of revenue act of  abating the deduction ( percent of
mean reserves) allowed from taxable income of life-insurance companies
in general by the amount of interest on their tax-exempts, and so
according no relative advantage to the owners of the tax-exempt
securities, held to destroy a guaranteed exemption. (see fifth
amendment.)
national life insurance co. v. united states,  u.s. 
(june , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
a second attempt to amend sections  and  of the judicial code,
relating to jurisdiction of district courts, by saving "to claimants for
compensation for injuries to or death of persons other than the master
or members of the crew of a vessel, their rights and remedies under the
workmen's compensation law of any state ***" held invalid on
authority of knickerbocker ice co. v. stewart.
industrial accident commission of california v. rolph et
al., and washington v. dawson & co.,  u.s.  (february
. act of june ,  ( stat. ).
the gift tax provisions of the revenue act of , held invalid under
the fifth amendment as applied to bona fide gifts made before passage
of the act.
untermeyer v. anderson,  u.s.  (april , ).
. revenue act of june ,  ( stat. , sec. , in part).
excise tax on certain articles "sold or leased by the manufacturer",
measured by sale price [specifically, "() *** motorcycles ***  per
centum"]—as applied to sale of motorcycle to a municipality [pg ]for police
use, held an infringement of state immunity under the principle of
collector v. day.
indian motorcycle co. v. united states,  u.s.  (may
. act of february ,  ( stat. , ch. , in part).
(a). section  in part ( stat. ).
second sentence, defining, for purposes of the estate tax, the term
"made in contemplation of death" as including the value, over $,, of
property transferred by a decedent, by trust, etc., without full
consideration in money or money's worth, "within  years prior to his
death but after the enactment of this act", although "not admitted or
shown to have been made in contemplation of or intended to take effect
in possession or enjoyment at or after his death", held as applied to
a transfer completed wholly between the living, spoliation without due
process of law under the fifth amendment.
heiner v. donnan,  u.s.  (march , ).
(b). section  in part ( stat. ).
provision imposing a special excise tax of $, on liquor dealers in
states where such business is illegal, held a penalty, without
constitutional support following repeal of the eighteenth amendment.
united states v. constantine,  u.s.  (december ,
. act of march ,  ( stat. , sec. , in part).
clause in the economy act of  providing "*** all laws granting or
pertaining to yearly renewable term insurance are hereby repealed",
held invalid to abrogate an outstanding contract of insurance, which
is a vested right protected by the fifth amendment.
lynch v. united states,  u.s.  (june , ).
. act of may ,  ( stat. ).
agricultural adjustment act providing for processing taxes on
agricultural commodities and benefit payments therefrom to farmers,
held not within the taxing power under article i, section , clause .
united states v. wm. m. butler et al., receivers of hoosac
mills corp.,  u.s.  (january , ).
. joint resolution of june ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
abrogation of gold clause in government obligations, held a
repudiation of the pledge implicit in the power to borrow money (art. i,
sec. , clause ), and within the prohibition of the fourteenth
amendment, against questioning the validity of the public debt. [the
majority of the court, however, held plaintiff not entitled to recover
under the circumstances.]
perry v. u.s.,  u.s.  (february , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ch. , the national industrial
recovery act).
a. title i, except section .
provisions relating to codes of fair competition, authorized to be
approved by the president in his discretion "to effectuate the policy"
[pg ]of the act, held invalid as a grant of legislative power (see art.
i, sec. ) and not within the commerce power.
schechter poultry corp. v. united states,  u.s.  (may
b. section (c).
clause of the oil regulation section authorizing the president "to
prohibit the transportation in interstate *** commerce of petroleum
*** produced or withdrawn from storage in excess of the amount
permitted *** by any state law ***" and prescribing a penalty for
violation of orders issued thereunder, held invalid as a grant of
legislative power.
panama refining co. et al. v. ryan et al. and amazon
petroleum corp., et al. v. ryan et al.,  u.s. 
(january , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , sec. ).
temporary reduction of  percent in retired pay of "judges (whose
compensation, prior to retirement or resignation, could not, under the
constitution, have been diminished)", as applied to circuit or district
judges retired from active service, but still subject to perform
judicial duties under the act of march ,  ( stat. ), held a
violation of the guaranty of judges' salaries under article iii, section
booth v. united states (together with amidon v. united
states),  u.s.  (february , ).
. act of april ,  ( stat. , sec. ), amending section (i)
of home owners' loan act of .
provision for conversion of state building and loan associations into
federal associations, upon vote of  percent of the votes cast at a
meeting of stockholders called to consider such action, held an
encroachment on reserved powers of state.
hopkins federal savings & loan association v. cleary, 
u.s.  (december , ).
. act of may ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
provision for readjustment of municipal indebtedness, held invalid,
though "adequately related" to the bankruptcy power, as an interference
with state sovereignty.
ashton v. cameron county water improvement district no. ,
 u.s.  (may , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ch.  entire).
the railroad retirement act, establishing a detailed compulsory
retirement system for employees of carriers subject to the interstate
commerce act, held, not a regulation of commerce within the meaning of
article i, section , clause .
railroad retirement board v. alton r.r. et al.,  u.s. 
(may , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
the frazier-lemke act, adding subsection (s) to section  of the
bankruptcy act, designed to preserve to mortgagors the ownership and
[pg
]enjoyment of their farm property and providing
specifically, in paragraph , that a bankrupt left in possession has the
option at any time within  years of buying at the appraised
value—subject meanwhile to no monetary obligation other than
payment of reasonable rental, held a violation of property rights,
under the fifth amendment.
louisville joint stock land bank v. radford,  u.s. 
(may , ).
. act of august ,  ( stat. , ch. , title i).
agricultural adjustment act amendments, held not within the taxing
power.
rickert rice mills v. fontenot,  u.s.  (january ,
. act of august ,  ( stat. , ch. ).
bituminous coal conservation act of , held to impose not a tax
within article i, section , but a penalty not sustained by the commerce
clause.
carter v. carter coal co.,  u.s.  (may , ).
. act of june ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. (f)).
federal firearms act, section  (f), establishing a presumption of guilt
based on a prior conviction and present possession of a firearm, held
to violate the test of due process under the fifth amendment.
tot v. united states,  u.s.  (june , ).
. act of november ,  ( stat. , ch. , sec. ).
urgent deficiency appropriation act of , section , providing that
no salary should be paid to certain, named federal employees out of
moneys appropriated, held to violate article i, section , clause ,
forbidding enactment of bill of attainder or ex post facto law.
united states v. lovett,  u.s.  (june , ).
[pg ]
[pg ]
abby dodge, the
abie state bank v. bryan
ableman v. booth
 how.  ()
abrams v. united states
adair v. bank of america assn.
adair v. united states
adam v. saenger
adams v. bellaire stamping co.
adams v. milwaukee
adams v. new york
adams v. storey
 fed. cas. no.  ()
adams v. tanner
adams v. united states
adams express co. v. croninger
adams express co. v. kentucky
adams express co. v. ohio
adams express co. v. ohio
adams mfg. co. v. storen
adamson v. california
addyston pipe & steel co. v. united states
adirondack r. co. v. new york
adkins v. children's hospital
adler v. board of education
admiral peoples, the
advance-rumely thresher co. v. jackson
aero mayflower transit co. v. board of r.r. commrs.
aero mayflower transit co. v. georgia pub. serv. commission
aetna ins. co. v. hyde
aetna ins. co. v. kennedy
aetna life ins. co. v. dunken
aetna life ins. co. v. haworth
aetna life ins. co. v. tremblay
ager v. murray
agnello v. united states
ah sin v. wittman
aikens v. wisconsin
akins v. texas
akron c. & y.r. co. v. united states
alabama v. arizona
alabama v. king & boozer
alabama comm'n. v. southern r. co.
alabama power co. v. ickes
alabama state federation of labor v. mcadory
alaska v. troy
alaska fish salting & by-products co. v. smith
[pg ]
 alaska packers asso. v. industrial acci. commission
alaska packers asso. v. industrial acci. commission
albrecht v. united states
albrecht v. united states
algoma plywood & veneer co. v. wisconsin
allen v. alleghany co.
allen v. baltimore & o.r. co.
allen v. georgia
allen v. mckean
 fed. cas. no.  ()
allen v. pullman's palace car co.
allen v. regents of university system of georgia
allen v. riley
allen v. smith
allen bradley co. v. union
allen-bradley local v. employment relations board
allgeyer v. louisiana
alma motor co. v. timken-detroit axle co.
almy v. california
 how.  ()
alpha portland cement co. v. massachusetts
altman & co. v. united states
alton r. co. v. illinois comm'n.
altvater v. freeman
alward v. johnson
american communications asso. v. douds
american construction co. v. jacksonville t. & k.w.r. co.
american express co. v. caldwell
american express co. v. mullins
american federation of labor v. american sash co.
american federation of labor v. swing
american fire ins. co. v. king lumber co.
american ins. co. v. canter
 pet.  ()
american land co. v. zeiss
american manufacturing co. v. st. louis
american medical assn. v. united states
american mills co. v. american surety co.
american power & light co. v. securities & exchange commission
american publishing co. v. fisher
american school of magnetic healing v. mcannulty
american seeding machine co. v. kentucky
american steel & wire co. v. speed
american sugar refining co. v. louisiana
american surety co. v. baldwin
american telephone & telegraph co. v. united states
american tobacco co. v. united states
american tobacco co. v. werckmeister
american toll bridge co. v. railroad com. of california et al.
ames v. kansas ex rel. johnston
amos v. united states
anderson v. dunn
 wheat.  ()
anderson v. santa anna
anderson nat. bank v. luckett
andres v. united states
andrews v. andrews
andrews v. swartz
andrews v. wall
 how.  ()
angel v. bullington
[pg ]angle v. chicago, st. p.m. & o.r. co.
anglo-american provision co. v. davis provision co.
anglo-chilean nitrate sales corp. v. alabama
anniston mfg. co. v. davis
antelope, the
 wheat.  ()
anti-fascist committee v. mcgrath
antoni v. greenhow
appalachian coals, inc. v. united states
appleby v. buffalo
appleby v. delaney
appleyard v. massachusetts
arizona v. california
arizona v. california
arizona cooper co. v. hammer (arizona employers' liability cases)
arkadelphia milling co. v. st. louis s.w.r. co.
arkansas v. kansas & t.c. co. & s.f.r.
arkansas land & cattle co. v. mann
arkansas louisiana gas co. v. dept. of public utilities
arlington hotel co. v. fant
armour & co. v. north dakota
armour & co. v. virginia
armour & co. v. wantock
armour packing co. v. lacy
armour packing co. v. united states
armstrong v. united states
 wall.  ()
armstrong's foundry v. united states
 wall.  ()
arndstein v. mccarthy
arndt v. griggs
arrowsmith v. gleason
arver v. united states (selective draft law cases)
asbell v. kansas
asbury hospital v. cass county
ashcraft v. tennessee
ashcraft v. tennessee
ashe v. united states ex rel. valotta
asher v. texas
ashton v. cameron county water improvement dist
ashwander v. tennessee valley authority
askren v. continental oil co.
assaria state bank v. dolley
associated press v. national labor relations board
associated press v. united states
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. harold
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. matthews
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. o'connor
atchison, t & s.f.r. co. v. railroad commission
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. sowers
atchison, t. & s.f.r. co. v. vosburg
atherton v. atherton
atkin v. kansas
atkins v. moore
atkinson v. state tax commission
atlantic & p. teleg. co. v. philadelphia
atlantic cleaners & dyers, inc. v. united states
atlantic coast line r. co. v. daughton
[pg ]atlantic coast line r. co. v. ford
atlantic coast line r. co. v. georgia
atlantic coast line r. co. v. glenn
atlantic coast line r. co. v. goldsboro
atlantic coast line r. co. v. north carolina corp. commission
atlantic coast line r. co. v. phillips
atlantic lumber co. v. commissioner
atlantic refining co. v. virginia
atlantic works v. brady
atlee v. northwestern union p. co.
 wall.  ()
attorney general ex rel. kies v. lowrey
audubon v. shufeldt
auffmordt v. hedden
austin v. tennessee
austin v. united states
automobile workers v. o'brien
auto workers v. wis. board
avent v. united states
avery v. alabama
ayer & l. tie co. v. kentucky
ayers, ex parte
bacardi corp. v. domenech
baccus v. louisiana
bachtel v. wilson
backus v. lebanon
backus (a.) jr. & sons v. port street union depot co.
bacon v. howard
 how.  ()
bacon v. illinois
bacon v. texas
bacon v. walker
bacon & sons v. martin
badders v. united states
baender v. barnett
bagnell v. broderick
 pet.  ()
bailey v. alabama
bailey v. anderson
bailey v. drexel furniture co. (child labor tax case)
bain, ex parte
bain peanut co. v. pinson
baiz, in re
baizley iron works v. span
bakelite corporation, ex parte
baker v. baker, e. & co.
baker v. grice
baker v. morton
 wall.  ()
baker v. selden
bakery & pastry drivers v. wohl
baldwin v. franks
baldwin v. iowa state traveling men's assoc.
baldwin v. missouri
baldwin v. seelig, (g.a.f.)
ballard v. hunter
baltic min. co. v. massachusetts
baltimore & c. line v. redman
[pg ]baltimore nat. bank v. state tax comm'n.
baltimore & o.r. co. v. baugh
baltimore & o.r. co. v. hostetter
baltimore & o.r. co. v. interstate commerce comm.
baltimore & s.r. co. v. nesbit
 how.  ()
baltimore shipbuilding & dry dock co. v. baltimore
balzac v. porto rico
bandini petroleum co. v. superior court
banholzer v. new york l. ins. co.
bank of alabama v. dalton
 how.  ()
bank of augusta v. earle
 pet.  ()
bank of kentucky v. wister
 pet.  ()
bank of minden v. clement
bank of united states v. deveaux
 cr.  ()
bank of united states v. halstead
 wheat.  ()
bank of the united states v. planters' bank of ga.
 wheat.  ()
banker bros. co. v. pennsylvania
bankers pocahontas coal co. v. burnet
bankers trust co. v. blodgett
barber v. barber
 how.  ()
barber v. barber
barbier v. connolly
barbour v. georgia
barnes v. barnes
 jones l.  (n.c.)  ()
barnett v. bowles
 f. (d)  ()
barnett v. bowles
barney v. baltimore
 wall.  ()
barney v. city of new york
barnitz v. beverly
barrett v. indiana
barrett v. new york
barron v. baltimore
 pet.  ()
barron v. burnside
barrow s.s. co. v. kane
barry, ex parte
 how.  ()
barry v. mercein
 how.  ()
barry v. united states ex rel. cunningham
barsky v. united states
barsky v. united states
 f. (d)  ()
bartell v. united states
bartemeyer v. iowa
 wall.  ()
barton v. barbour
barwise v. sheppard
bas v. tingy
 dall.  ()
bass, ratcliff & gretton v. state tax commission
bassing v. cady
bates v. bodie
battle v. united states
bauman v. ross
baumgartner v. united states
baylis v. travelers' ins. co.
bayside fish flour co. v. gentry
beal v. missouri pacific r. co.
beall v. new mexico ex rel. griffin
 wall.  ()
beauharnais v. illinois
beavers v. haubert
beavers v. henkel
[pg ]beazell v. ohio
becker steel co. v. cummings
bedford v. united states
bedford co. v. stone cutters assn.
beidler v. south carolina tax commission
bekins van lines v. riley
"belfast," the, v. boon
 wall.  ()
belknap v. schild
bell v. bell
bell v. hood
bell's gap r. co. v. pennsylvania
bell tele. co. v. pennsylvania public util. com.
benner v. porter
 how.  ()
bennett v. butterworth
 how.  ()
benson v. united states
berea college v. kentucky
bergemann v. backer
berizzi bros. co. v. s.s. pesaro
bernheimer v. converse
bessette v. w.b. conkey co.
best & co. v. maxwell
bethlehem motors corp. v. flynt
bethlehem steel co. v. new york labor relations bd.
betts v. brady
biddinger v. police comr.
biddle v. perovich
bier v. mcgehee
bigelow v. old dominion copper min. & s. co.
billings v. illinois
billings v. united states
bilokumsky v. tod
bi-metallic co. v. colorado
binderup v. pathe exchange
bingaman v. golden eagle western lines
binghamton bridge, the
 wall.  ()
binney v. long
binns v. united states
bishop v. united states
black & white taxicab & t. co. v. brown & yellow taxicab & t. co.
blackmer v. united states
blackstone v. miller
blair v. chicago
blake v. mcclung
blake v. united states
blau v. united states
blau v. united states
bleistein v. donaldson lithographing co.
blinn v. nelson
block v. hirsh
blodgett v. holden
blodgett v. silberman
bloomer v. mcquewan
 how.  ()
bloomer v. millinger
 wall.  ()
bluefield waterworks & improv. co. v. pub. serv. comm.
blumenstock bros. v. curtis pub. co.
board of assessors v. new york l. ins. co.
[pg ]board of comms. v. seber
board of councilmen of frankfort v. state national bank
board of education v. barnette
board of education v. illinois
board of liquidation v. mccomb
board of public works v. columbia college
 wall.  ()
bob-lo excursion co. v. michigan
bollman, ex parte
 cr.  ()
bonaparte v. camden & a.r. co.
 fed. cas. no. , ()
bonaparte v. tax court
bond v. hume
boom co. v. patterson
booth v. illinois
booth v. indiana
booth fisheries co. v. industrial commission
borden company v. borella
borden's farm products co. v. ten eyck
borer v. chapman
börs v. preston
boske v. comingore
bosley v. mclaughlin
boston beer co. v. massachusetts
boston & montana consolidated copper & silver mining co. v. montana ore purchasing co.
boswell v. otis
 how.  ()
bothwell v. buckbee-mears co.
botiller v. dominguez
bourjois, inc. v. chapman
boutell v. walling
bowen v. johnston
bowers v. kerbaugh-empire co.
bowersock v. smith
bowles v. willingham
bowman v. chicago, & n.w.r. co.
bowman v. continental oil co.
bowman v. lewis
boyce's executors v. grundy
 pet.  ()
boyd v. nebraska ex rel. thayer
boyd v. united states
boyd v. united states
boyer, ex parte
boynton v. hutchinson gas co.
bozza v. united states
brader v. james
bradfield v. roberts
bradford electric light co. v. clapper
bradley v. lightcap
bradley v. public utilities commission
bradwell v. illinois
 wall.  ()
brady v. roosevelt s.s. co.
bragg v. weaver
branch v. haas
brannan v. stark
bransford, ex parte
branson v. bush
brass v. north dakota ex rel. stoeser
bratton v. chandler
[pg ]braxton county court v. west virginia
brazee v. michigan
breard v. alexandria
breedlove v. suttles
breese v. united states
breiholz v. pocahontas county
brennan v. titusville
brewing co. v. liquor comm'n.
bridge proprietors v. hoboken co.
 wall.  ()
bridges v. california
brig ann, the
 cr.  ()
brigantine william, the
 fed. cas. , ()
brig aurora, the
 cr.  ()
briggs v. elliott
brillhart v. excess insurance co.
brimmer v. rebman
brinegar v. united states
brinkerhoff-faris trust & sav. co. v. hill
briscoe v. bank of kentucky
 pet.  ()
briscoe v. rudolph
bristol v. washington county
broad river power co. v. south carolina ex rel. daniel
broderick v. rosner
brodnax v. missouri
brolan v. united states
bromley v. mccaughn
bronson v. kinzie
 how.  ()
brooke v. norfolk
brooks v. united states
brooks v. united states
 f. (d)  ()
brooks v. united states
brooks-scanlon co. v. railroad commission
brown v. baskin
 f. supp.  ()
brown v. duchesne
 how.  ()
brown v. elliott
brown v. fletcher
brown v. grant
brown v. houston
brown v. maryland
 wheat.  ()
brown v. mississippi
brown v. new jersey
brown v. penobscot bank
 mass.  ()
brown v. piper
brown v. smart
brown v. united states
 cr.  ()
brown v. united states
brown v. walker
brown v. western ry. co. of alabama
brown (marcus) holding co. v. feldman
browne v. strode
 cr.  ()
browning v. hooper
browning v. waycross
bruno v. u.s.
brushaber v. union pacific r. co.
bryant, in re
 fed. cas. no.  ()
buchalter v. new york
[pg ]buchanan v. warley
buck v. beach
buck v. bell
buck v. california
buck v. colbath
 wall.  ()
buck v. kuykendall
buckstaff bath house v. mckinley
budd v. new york
bugajewitz v. adams
building service employees union v. gazzam
bullen v. wisconsin
bunting v. oregon
burbank v. ernst
burdeau v. mcdowell
burdick v. united states
burford, ex parte
 cr.  ()
burgess v. salmon
burgess v. seligman
burk-waggoner oil asso. v. hopkins
burnes nat. bank v. duncan
burnet v. coronado oil & gas co.
burnet v. harmel
burnet v. sanford & b. co.
burns baking co. v. bryan
burroughs v. united states
burrow-giles lithographic co. v. sarony
burstyn (joseph), inc. v. wilson
burton v. united states
bus employees v. wisconsin board
bush & sons co. v. maloy
butchers' union co. v. crescent city co.
bute v. illinois
butler v. boston & savannah s.s. co.
butler v. goreley
butler v. pennsylvania
 how.  ()
butler v. perry
butler bros. v. mccolgan
butte city water co. v. baker
butters v. oakland
butterworth v. hoe
buttfield v. stranahan
buzard v. houston
byars v. united states
byrne v. missouri
 pet.  ()
cafeteria employees union v. angelos
cahen v. brewster
cairo & f.r. co. v. hecht
calder v. bull
 dall.  ()
calder v. michigan
caldwell v. north carolina
caldwell v. sioux falls stock yards co.
caldwell v. texas
california v. central pacific railroad
california v. deseret water, oil & irrig. co.
[pg ]california v. southern pacific co.
california v. thompson
california v. united states
california v. zook
california auto ass'n. v. maloney
california reduction co. v. sanitary reduction works
callan v. wilson
camfield v. united states
caminetti v. united states
cammeyer v. newton
campbell v. boyreau
 how.  ()
campbell v. california
campbell v. holt
canadian aviator v. united states
canadian n.r. co. v. eggen
canizio v. new york
cannon v. new orleans
 wall.  ()
canton r. co. v. rogan
cantwell v. connecticut
capital city dairy co. v. ohio ex rel. attorney general
capital traction co. v. hof
capital trust co. v. calhoun
capitol greyhound lines v. brice
cardillo v. liberty mutual co.
cardwell v. american river bridge co.
carfer v. caldwell
cargill co. v. minnesota
carlesi v. new york
carley & hamilton v. snook
carlisle v. united states
 wall.  ()
carll, ex parte
carlson v. california
carlson v. landon
carmichael v. southern coal & coke co.
carmichael v. southern coal & coke co.
carneal v. banks
 wheat.  ()
carolene products co. v. united states
carolina glass co. v. south carolina
carondelet canal co. v. louisiana
carpenter v. pennsylvania
 how.  ()
carpenter v. shaw
carpenters & joiners union v. ritter's cafe
carr v. united states
carroll v. becker
carroll v. greenwich ins. co.
carroll v. united states
carson v. roane-anderson co.
carson petroleum co. v. vial
carstairs v. cochran
carter v. carter coal co.
carter v. illinois
carter v. mcclaughry
carter v. roberts
carter v. virginia
cartlidge v. rainey
 f. (d)  ()
carver v. jackson ex dem. astor
 pet.  ()
cary v. curtis
 how.  ()
[pg ]case v. bowles
case of jefferson davis
 fed. cas. no. a ()
case of the state tax on foreign-held bonds
 wall.  ()
caskey baking co. v. virginia
cass farm co. v. detroit
cassell v. texas
cavanaugh v. looney
cavellier, in re
 misc. (n.y.)  ()
central greyhound lines, inc. v. mealey
central hanover bank & t. co. v. kelly
central land co. v. laidley
central lumber co. v. south dakota
central national bank v. stevens
central of georgia r. co. v. murphey
central of georgia r. co. v. wright
central p.r. co. v. gallatin (sinking-fund cases)
central union trust co. v. garvan
chae chan ping v. united states
chaffin v. taylor
chalker v. birmingham & m.w.r. co.
chambers v. baltimore & o.r. co.
chambers v. florida
champion v. ames (the lottery case)
champlain realty co. v. brattleboro
champlin ref. co. v. corporation commission
champlin refining co. v. united states
chandler v. dix
chandler v. wise
chanler v. kelsey
chaplinsky v. new hampshire
chapman v. brewer
chapman v. king
 f. (d)  ()
chapman v. king
chapman v. zobelein
chapman, in re
chappell v. united states
charles river bridge co. v. warren bridge co.
 pet.  ()
charleston assn. v. alderson
charlotte, c. & a.r. co. v. gibbes
charlotte harbor & n.r. co. v. welles
charlton v. kelly
chase national bank v. united states
chase securities corp. v. donaldson
chassaniol v. greenwood
chastleton corp. v. sinclair
cheatham et al. v. united states
cheever v. wilson
 wall.  ()
chelentis v. luckenbach s.s. co.
chemung canal bank v. lowery
cheney bros. co. v. massachusetts
cherokee nation v. georgia
 pet.  ()
cherokee nation v. southern kansas r. co.
cherokee tobacco, the
 wall.  ()
chesapeake & o.r. co. v. miller
chesapeake & o.r. co. v. public service commission
chicago v. sturges
chicago & a.r. co. v. tranbarger
[pg ]chicago & a.r. co. v. wiggins ferry co.
chicago & grand trunk ry. co. v. wellman
chicago & n.w.r. co. v. fuller
 wall.  ()
chicago & n.w.r. co. v. nye schneider fowler co.
chicago & n.w.r. co. v. whitton
 wall.  ()
chicago & s. airlines v. waterman steamship corp.
chicago, b. & k.c.r. co. v. guffey
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. babcock
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. chicago
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. cram
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. harrington
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. illinois ex rel. grimwood
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. iowa
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. mcguire
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. nebraska
chicago, b. & q.r. co. v. wisconsin r.r. com.
chicago board of trade v. olsen
chicago city v. robbins
 bl.  ()
chicago dock & canal co. v. fraley
chicago, i. & l.r. co. v. united states
chicago, i. & l.r. co. v. united states
chicago l. ins. co. v. cherry
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. ackley
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. iowa
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. minneapolis c. & c. asso.
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. minnesota
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. polt
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. public utilities commission
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. solan
chicago, m. & st. p.r. co. v. wisconsin
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. arkansas
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. cole
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. cramer
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. hardwick farmers elevator co.
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. mcglinn
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. perry
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. sturm
chicago, r.i. & p.r. co. v. united states
chicago, st. p., m. & o.r. co. v. holmberg
chicago title & trust co. v.  wilcox bldg. corp.
chinese exclusion case
chin tow v. united states
chirac v. chirac
 wheat.  ()
chisholm v. georgia
 dall.  ()
choate v. trapp
choctaw o. & g.r. co. v. harrison
christ church v. philadelphia county
 how.  ()
christian v. atlantic & n.c.r. co.
christmas v. russell
 wall.  ()
christoffel v. united states
church v. hubbart
 cr.  ()
church v. kelsey
church of jesus christ of l.d.s. v. united states
chy lung v. freeman
cincinnati v. louisville & n.r. co.
cincinnati v. vester
[pg ]cincinnati, n.o. & t.p.r. co. v. interstate commerce commission
cincinnati, n.o. & t.p.r. co. v. kentucky
cincinnati, p.b.s. & p. packet co. v. catlettsburg
cincinnati soap co. v. united states
cincinnati street r. co. v. snell
cities service co. v. peerless co.
cities service co. v. mcgrath
citizens nat. bank v. durr
citizens savings & loan association v. topeka
 wall.  ()
city bank farmers trust co. v. schnader
city of panama, the
civil rights cases
claflin v. houseman
clallam county v. united states
clark v. allen
clark v. barnard
clark v. graham
 wheat.  ()
clark v. nash
clark v. paul gray, inc.
clark v. poor
clark v. smith
 pet.  ()
clark v. willard
clark v. wooster
clark distilling co. v. western maryland r. co.
clark thread co. v. willimantic linen co.
clarke v. clarke
clarke, ex parte
clason v. indiana
clement nat. bank v. vermont
cleveland v. united states
cleveland v. united states
cleveland, c.c. & st. l.r. co. v. backus
cleveland electric ry. co. v. cleveland
cline v. frink dairy
clinton v. englebrecht
 wall.  ()
cloverleaf co. v. patterson
cluett v. claflin
clyatt v. united states
clyde mallory lines v. alabama ex rel. state docks commission
cochran v. kansas
cochran v. louisiana state bd. of ed.
cockrill v. california
coe v. armour fertilizer works
coe v. coe
coe v. errol
coffey v. harlan county
coffey v. united states
coffin v. coffin
 mass.  ()
coffin bros. & co. v. bennett
coffman v. breeze corporations, inc.
cohen v. beneficial industrial loan corp.
cohens v. virginia
 wheat  ()
cole v. arkansas
cole v. arkansas
[pg ]cole v. cunningham
colegrove v. green
coleman v. miller
colgate v. harvey
collector v. day
 wall.  ()
collins, ex parte
collins v. hardyman
collins v. johnston
collins v. loisel
collins v. new hampshire
collins v. texas
collins v. yosemite park & curry co.
colorado v. united states
colorado central consol. min. co. v. turck
colorado nat. bank v. bedford
colorado-wyoming co. v. comm'n.
columbia r. gas & e. co. v. south carolina
columbus & g.r. co. v. miller
commercial & railroad bank of vicksburg v. slocomb
 pet.  ()
commercial pub. co. v. beckwith
commercial trust co. of new jersey v. miller
commissioner v. wilcox
commonwealth v. blanding
 pick. (mass.)  ()
commonwealth v. gordon
 d & c (pa.)  ()
commonwealth v. pouliot
 mass.  ()
communications comm'n. v. n.b.c
compania espanola de navegacion maritima, s.a. v. the navemar
compagnie francaise de navigation à vapeur v. louisiana state board of health
concordia p. ins. co. v. illinois
concrete appliances co. v. gomery
confiscation cases, the. see united states v. clarke.
conley v. mathieson alkali works
connecticut general life insurance co. v. johnson
connecticut ins. co. v. moore
connecticut mut. l. ins. co. v. cushman
connecticut mut. ins. co. v. spratley
conner v. elliott
 how.  ()
connolly v. union sewer pipe co.
conrad v. waples
consolidated coal co. v. illinois
consolidated edison co. v. national labor relations board
consolidated rendering co. v. vermont
consumers' co. v. hatch
continental baking co. v. woodring
continental co. v. tennessee
continental ill. nat. bank & t. co. v. chicago, r.i., & p.r. co.
continental tie & lumber co. v. united states
converse v. hamilton
conway v. taylor
 bl.  ()
cook v. cook
cook v. hart
cook v. marshall county
cook v. pennsylvania
cook v. tait
[pg ]cook v. united states
cook v. united states
cooke v. united states
cooley v. board of wardens of port of philadelphia
 how.  ()
coolidge v. long
coombes v. getz
cooney v. mountain states telephone & telegraph co.
cooper v. newell
cooper v. reynolds
 wall.  ()
cooper v. united states
coppage v. kansas
corfield v. coryell
 fed. cas.  ()
corn exch. bank v. coler
corn products ref. co. v. eddy
cornell v. coyne
cornell steamboat co. v. united states
