oak. the female insect is furnished with a delicate ovipositor,
by means of which she pierces the tender shoots of
the tree, and lays her eggs therein. in the centre of the
full-grown gall, the larva is hatched and undergoes its transformations,
finally (in - months) becoming a winged insect,
and boring for itself a cylindrical exit-hole. the best commercial
galls are those which have been gathered while the
insect is still in the larval state. such have a dark olive-green
colour, and are comparatively heavy; but after the
fly has escaped, they become yellowish-brown in hue, and
lighter. hence they are distinguished in the london market
as "blue" or "green," and "white." in smyrna, they are
classified as "white," "green," and "black," the first two
sorts generally fetching nearly the same price, while the black
obtain considerably more, the approximate quotations being:
white and green, per turkish oke (of · lb.), /- piastres
(of d.); black, /- piastres. the "nuts" come mostly
from melemen, cassaba, and magnesia, also from the syrian
coasts, being plentiful on the east of the river jordan, and
are chiefly forwarded to france, england, and salonica. the
triennial yield is said to be invariably the best. they begin
to reach smyrna from the interior towards the end of july.
the crop of  was estimated at over , okes. the province
of aleppo, which used to afford ,-, quintals
(of  cwt.) annually, only exported  in . the galls
collected in the kurdistan mountains are marketed at diarbekir,
and sent thence to trebizonde for shipment. bussora,
bagdad, and bushire also export considerable quantities.
knoppern, a species of gall formed from the immature
acorns of quercus pedunculata and q. sessiliflora, are largely
used for tanning throughout austria.
the exports from aleppo (including yellow berries) in
 were:— tons, l., to great britain;  tons,
,l., france;  tons, l., italy;  tons, l.,
austria;  tons, l., turkey;  tons, l., egypt;
total,  tons, ,l. in , the figures were  tons,
,l. alexandretta exported in  (including yellow
berries):— tons, l., to england;  tons, ,l.,
france;  tons, l., italy;  tons, l., austria;
 tons, l., turkey;  tons, l., egypt; total  tons,
,l. the shipments from trebizonde by steamer in 
were (from turkey):— sacks (of  cwt.), l., to turkey;
 sacks, l., great britain;  sacks, l., france;
 sacks, l., austria and germany;  sacks, l.,
greece; total,  sacks, l.; (from persia):  sacks,
l., great britain;  sacks, l., france;  sacks, l.,
austria and germany; total,  sacks, l. bushire despatched
r. worth to india in . syra sent l.
worth to great britain in . venice exported  tons
of gall and bark, value ,l., in .
the best oak-galls contain - per cent. of tannic or
gallotannic acid, and  per cent. of gallic acid. "rove" is
a small crushed gall, containing - per cent. of gallotannic
acid. there are many other varieties of non-commercial
oak-gall.
chinese or japanese galls.—these are vesicular protuberances
formed on the leaf-stalks and branches of the rhus
semialata [bucki-amela], a tree of - ft., common in north
india, china, and japan, ascending the outer himálaya and
the khasia hills to - ft., by punctures of the female
of aphis chinensis. the galls are collected when their green
colour is changing to yellow, and are then scalded. they
are light and hollow, -/ in. long, and of very varied and
irregular form. the japanese are the smaller and paler,
and usually more esteemed. the galls contain about  per
cent. of tannic or gallotannic acid, and  per cent. of another
tannin. they are consumed mainly in germany, for the
manufacture of tannic acid.
hankow exported , piculs (of / lb.) in ; and
, piculs, value , taels (of about s.), in . in
, the total chinese export did not exceed , piculs.
hankow exported ,/ piculs in , and , piculs,
,l., in ; pakhoi, l. worth in ; canton,
/ piculs in ,  in , / in ; ichang,
/ piculs, l., in , / piculs, l., in ; shanghai,
,/ piculs in .
in china trade returns, they are always miscalled "nut-galls"
or "gall-nuts": correctly, they are wu-pei-tze. oak-galls
are exported from china resembling those of western
asia. japanese galls, kifushi, are sent in increasing quantities
from hiogo.
our imports of galls in  were:—, cwt., ,l.,
from china; , cwt., ,l., from turkey;  cwt.,
l., from other countries: total, , cwt., ,l.
our re-exports in the same year were:— cwt., ,l.,
to holland;  cwt., ,l., to germany;  cwt.,
,l., to france;  cwt., l., to belgium;  cwt.,
,l., to the united states;  cwt., l., to other
countries; total, , cwt., ,l. the approximate
london market values of galls are:—bussora, blue, -s.
a cwt.; do., white and in sorts, -s.; china, -s.;
japan, -s.
gambier, pale catechu, or terra japonica (fr.,
gambir, cachou jaune; ger., gambir).—these names are conferred
upon an extract from the leaves of uncaria gambier
[nauclea gambir] and u. acida, containing - per cent. of
a brown tannin, which rapidly penetrates leather, and tends
to swell it, but alone gives a soft porous tannage; it is largely
used in conjunction with other materials for tanning both
dressing- and sole-leather. the plants are stout climbing
shrubs, the first-named being a native of the countries
bordering the straits of malacca, and especially the islands
at the eastern end, though apparently not indigenous to
any of the islands of the volcanic band, growing also in
ceylon, where no use is made of it; while the second, probably
a mere variety, flourishes in the malay islands.
the shrubs are cultivated in plantations, often formed in
jungle clearings; the soil is very rapidly exhausted, and
further injured by excessive growth of the ineradicable
lalang-grass (andropogon caricosus). it is found advantageous
to combine pepper-culture with that of gambier, the boiled
leaves of the latter forming excellent manure for the former.
the gambier-plants are allowed to grow - ft. high, and
as their foliage is always in season, each plant is stripped
 or  times in the year. the tools and apparatus for the
manufacture of the extract are of the most primitive description.
a shallow cast-iron pan about  ft. across is built into
an earthen fire-place. water is poured into the pan, a fire is
kindled, and the leaves and young shoots, freshly plucked,
are scattered in, and boiled for about an hour. at the end
of this time, they are thrown on to a capacious sloping
trough, the lower end of which projects into the pan, and
are squeezed with the hand so that the absorbed liquor may
run back into the boiler. the decoction is then evaporated
to the consistence of a thin syrup, and baled out into buckets.
when sufficiently cool, it is subjected to curious treatment:
instead of simply stirring it round, the workman pushes a
stick of soft wood in a sloping direction into each bucket;
and, placing two such buckets before him, he works a stick
up and down in each. the liquid thickens round the stick,
and, the thickened portion being constantly rubbed off, while
at the same time the whole is in motion, it gradually sets
into a mass, a result which, it is said, would never be
produced by simple stirring: it is reasonable to suppose that
this manner of treating the liquor favours the crystallisation
of the catechin in a more concrete form than it might
otherwise assume. the thickened mass, resembling soft
yellowish clay, is now placed in shallow square boxes; when
somewhat hardened, it is cut into cubes, and dried in the
shade. the leaves are boiled a second time, and finally
washed in water, which is saved for another operation.
a second plan is as follows:—the leaves are boiled, and
bruised in a wooden mortar (lesong), from which they are put
into a kind of basket of rattan open-work, which is pressed
by a long piece of wood acting as a lever; the liquid is
received into a trough, and there allowed to settle. when
the sediment has acquired sufficient substance, it is put into
a kulit-kayo, formed like a tub without a bottom, which lets
the superfluous water drain off; when that is done, it is
taken out, made into small cakes, and dried for use. a
plantation employing  labourers contains ,-,
shrubs, and yields - catties (of / lb.) of gambier daily.
plantations were commenced in singapore in , and once
numbered ; but owing to scarcity of fuel, abundance of
which is essential to the manufacture, and dearness of labour,
the culture was fast declining in . in , it had
much recovered. it is largely pursued on the mainland
(johore), and in the rhio-lingga archipelago, s.-e. of
singapore; on bintang, the most northerly of the group,
there were  plantations of it in . none is cultivated
in sarawak, though found wild in many parts; the foreign
export from sarawak in  had a total value of , dol.
the best kind is brought largely from sumatra, but is
often adulterated with sago. the rhio product is also thus
sophisticated, and rendered heavier by the chinese purposely
packing it in baskets lined with wet cajangs, occasioning a
loss to the purchaser of about  per cent.
singapore is the great emporium for gambier, and exported
, tons in , , tons having been imported, chiefly
from rhio and the malay peninsula. in , the export
increased to over , tons of pressed block, and  tons
of cubes. in , it fell to , tons, owing to differences
with the chinese dealers concerning adulteration; of
this quantity, , tons were for london,  for liverpool,
and  for marseilles. the united kingdom imports
in  were , tons, ,l., almost all from the
straits settlements; in , they were , tons, ,l.,
from the straits, and  tons, l., from other countries;
total, , tons, ,l. our re-exports in  were:—
tons, ,l., to holland;  tons, ,l. to
germany;  tons, ,l., to russia;  tons, ,l.,
to other countries; total,  tons, ,l. the approximate
london market values are s. d.-s. d. a cwt. for
block, -s. for pressed cubes, and -s. for free cubes.
hemlock.—the bark of the hemlock or hemlock spruce
(abies canadensis), of canada and the united states, contains
nearly  per cent. of tannin. the stripping of the bark
commences in the southern parts of the united states in
spring, and lasts during april-may; in new york, michigan,
and wisconsin, the season is june-july; and farther north,
it is still later. it is said that the best product is obtained
farthest south. the destruction of the hemlock forests is
fast approaching. within the last  years, the preparation
of an extract from the bark, containing - per cent. of a
deep-red tannin, giving considerable weight and firmness to
leather, has superseded the export of crude bark. one mode
of preparing the extract is as follows:—the bark in pieces
/- in. thick, and several inches long, is soaked for about 
minutes in water at ° f. (° c.); it is then fed into a
hopper, which conducts it to a -roller machine, something like
a sugar-cane mill, through which it passes, coming out lacerated
and compressed; it next falls into a vat of hot water,
where it is agitated by a wheel, that the tannin from the
crushed cells may be dissolved in the water; hence it is
raised by a series of buckets on an endless chain, somewhat
in the manner of a grain-elevator, to another hopper, whence
it is fed to another -roller mill; here it receives its final
compression, and comes out in flakes or sheets, like coarse
paper, and almost free from tannin. the buckets are made
of coarse wire, that the water may drip through during the
elevation. in order to avoid the blackening action of iron,
wherever this metal will come into contact with the solutions
it is thickly coated with zinc. the solution is evaporated
to a solid consistency, generally by vacuum-pans. about 
tons of bark are represented by  bar. (of less than  lb.)
of extract. the chief makers are a. s. thomas, elmira, n.y.;
s. brown & co., new york; canada tanning extract co.,
st. leonard and bulstrode; j. miller & co., millerton, new
brunswick. the total production is probably over ,
tons annually, ranging in value between l. and l. a ton.
our imports are included in barks and extracts.
kino (fr., kino; ger., kino).—the term "gum kino" is
applied to a class of astringent extracts of varied origin, none
of which can accurately be called either resins or gums.
pl. ii.
e. & f. n. spon, london & new york.
() east indian or amboyna kino.—this is obtained from
pterocarpus marsupium, a common tree in the central and
southern parts of the indian peninsula, and in ceylon; and a
liquid kind from p. indicus, of south india, burma, malacca,
penang, the andamans, and malaysia. the collection of the
juice is effected in the following manner. a perpendicular
incision, with lateral offshoots, is made in the stem of the
tree when blossoming has set in, and a receptacle is placed
at the foot of the incision. the exuding juice appears like
red-currant jelly, but it soon thickens by exposure to the
air, and when sufficiently dried, is packed into wooden boxes
for exportation. it is one of the reserved timber-trees of the
government forests in madras, and its juice is collected by
natives, who pay a small fee for the permission. the
hardened juice consists of blackish-red, angular, pea-like
grains, partially soluble in water, almost entirely in spirit of
wine of sp. gr. ·, readily in caustic alkaline solutions,
and largely in a saturated solution of sugar. the liquid
kino produces a very inferior article on drying. the annual
collection of kino in madras probably does not exceed - tons.
its approximate london market value is -s. a cwt. it
is employed medicinally, and in the manufacture of wines,
and might be employed as a source of tannin in dyeing and
tanning, if sufficiently cheap.
() butea, bengal, palas or dhak kino.—this variety is
afforded by the palas or dhak tree (butea frondosa), common
throughout india and burma, and affording a dyestuff, and
a fibre, as well as by b. superba and b. parviflora. during the
hot season, there issues from natural fissures and from wounds
made in the bark of the stem, a red juice, which quickly
hardens to a ruby-coloured, brittle, astringent mass. it
occurs in small drops or tears, and in flat pieces which have
been dried on leaves, and is almost always mixed with bark-fragments.
it is transparent, freely soluble in cold water,
and does not soften in the mouth. it is unknown in european
commerce, but is employed in india as a substitute for the
kind first described.
() african or gambia kino.—this is derived from pterocarpus
erinaceus, a native of tropical west africa, from
senegambia to angola. the juice exudes naturally from
fissures in the bark, but more abundantly from incisions, and
soon coagulates to a blood-red and very brittle mass, known
to the portuguese of angola as sangue del drago ("dragon's-blood").
it is practically undistinguishable from the
officinal kind first described, but is not a regular article of
commerce.
() australian, botany bay, or eucalyptus kino.—several
species of eucalyptus afford astringent extracts, those from
the "red," "white," or "flooded" gum (e. rostrata), the
"blood-wood" (e. corymbosa), and e. citriodora, being quite
suitable for replacing the officinal kind. it is chiefly obtained
by woodcutters, being found in a viscid state in flattened
cavities in the wood, and soon becoming inspissated, hard, and
brittle. minor quantities are procured in a liquid state by
incising the bark of living trees, forming a treacly fluid
yielding  per cent. of solid kino on evaporation. it is
imported from australia, but there are no statistics to show
in what quantity.
mimosa- or wattle-bark.—the bark of numerous
species of acacia, natives of australia, contains considerable
percentages of deep-red mimo-tannic acid, which forms a
hard and heavy tannage if used strong, though soft upper-leathers
may be tanned with it in weak liquors. the chief
kinds are as follows:—the common wattle (acacia decurrens),
including its variety a. mollissima, is known also under the
names of green, black, and feathery, but must not be confounded
with the silver wattle (a. dealbata), though but
doubtfully a distinct species. the bark is obtainable in vast
abundance, and is much used by tanners. the trees are
stripped in september and the  or  months following, and
the bark, being allowed to dry, is then in a marketable condition.
this tree, which grows in the uplands, affords a
larger percentage of tannin than the silver wattle.
blackwood or lightwood (a. melanoxylon) yields tanners'
bark, which, is inferior, however, to that from a. decurrens.
the bark of a. penninervis yields of tannic acid · per
cent., and of gallic acid · per cent. the bark of the native
hickory (a. suppurosa) yields of tannic acid · per cent., and
of gallic acid · per cent.
the bark of a. saligna, of south-western australia, is
much used by tanners, as it contains nearly  per cent. of
mimo-tannin. a. harpophylla, of south queensland, furnishes
a considerable share of the mercantile wattle-bark for tanning
purposes. the bark of a. lophantha contains only about
 per cent. of tannin.
the broad-leaved or golden wattle (a. pycnantha), of victoria
and south australia, deserves extensive cultivation. it is
of rapid growth, will succeed even in sandy tracts, and yields
seed copiously, which germinates with the greatest ease. the
perfectly-dried bark contains about  per cent. of tannin.
the aqueous infusion of the bark can be reduced by boiling
to a dry extract, which in medicinal and other respects is
equal to the best indian cutch. it yields approximately
 per cent. of tannin, about half of which, or more, is mimo-tannic
acid. probably no other tanning plants give so quick
a return in cultivation as the a. pycnantha and a. decurrens
of australia. the latter varies in its proportions of tannin
from  to  per cent. in the mercantile bark, the percentage
is somewhat less, according to the state of its dryness,
it retaining about  per cent. of moisture. the bark
of the silver wattle (a. dealbata) is of less value, often even
fetching only half the price of that of the black wattle.
the bark improves by age and desiccation, and yields  per
cent. of tannin, rather more than half of which is tannic acid.
amongst all the kinds, the bark of the broad-leaved wattle
is considered the most valuable, containing the greatest
quantity of tannin; that of the silver wattle is not so
valuable, being deficient in tannin; the black wattle is considered
the most productive species; it can be barked at
 years of age, and will produce - lb. dried bark, and
full-grown trees will yield - lb. per tree.
the cultivation of wattles for commercial purposes has till
now remained undeveloped; but no doubt, as soon as it is
understood, the utilisation of many acres of land lying waste,
or which have already been exhausted and rendered unfit for
the growth of cereals, will be effected by the cultivation of
the wattle. it requires so little attention as to make it very
profitable, and wattle-growing and grazing can be combined
satisfactorily. after the first year, when the young trees
in the plantation have reached the height of - ft., sheep
can be turned in.
wattles grow in almost any soil, even the poorest, but
their growth is most rapid on loose sandy patches, or where
the surface has been broken for agricultural purposes. when
the soil is hard and firm, plough furrows should be made at
a regular distance of - ft. apart, into which the seeds are
dropped. the seed should be sown in may, having been
previously soaked in hot water, a little below boiling temperature,
in which they may be allowed to remain for a few
hours. the seed should be dropped at an average distance
of  ft. apart along the furrow, in which case, about 
seeds would suffice for one acre of land. the seed should
not be covered with more than about / in. of soil.
on loose sandy soil, it might even be unnecessary to break
up the soil in any way; the furrows may be dispensed with,
and the seed sown broadcast after the land is harrowed.
after the plants have come up, they should be thinned so
that they stand - ft. apart. when the young trees have
attained the height of - ft., the lower branches should be
pruned off, and every effort afterwards made to keep the
stem straight and clear, in order to facilitate the stripping,
and induce an increased yield of bark. it is advisable that
the black and broad-leaved should be grown separately, as
the black wattle, being of much larger and quicker growth,
would oppress the slower-growing broad-leaved one. care
should be taken to replace every tree stripped by re-sowing,
in order that there should be as little variation in the yield
as possible. the months of september-december, in victoria,
are those in which the sap rises without intermission, and the
bark is charged with tannin. analysis proves that the bark
from trees growing on limestone is greatly inferior in tannin to
that obtained from other formations, differing - per cent.
the estimated expenditure on a wattle-bark plantation of
 acres during  years is:—
s.
d.
rent of  acres for  years at s. per acre per annum
ploughing  acres in drills  ft. apart
sowing wattles and actual cultivation, including cost of seed
supervision for  years (nominal), say l. per annum
pruning the trees, taking off useless wood (necessary for  years), s. per annum
incidental and unforeseen expenses
interest on the whole amount expended during  years
actual cost of stripping and carting, as shown below
the receipts derivable from a wattle plantation of  acres,
planted in the manner proposed, would be:—
s.
d.
each acre planted with wattles,  ft. apart, would carry  trees,
 and at end of th year trees would yield say  lb. matured bark: stripping only
 every rd tree,  trees would be obtained off  acres: this, at l. per ton,
 would give for st stripping
in the th or following year, a similar number of trees would be stripped:
 the bark having increased in weight (say  lb.), the increased yield of nd
 stripping would be  tons at l. per ton
in the th year, the remaining trees would be stripped, from which a still
 greater increase would be obtained, say  tons at l. per ton
total yield of bark
the cost of stripping would not exceed s. per ton,
 on account of the facilities presented by the regularity of the trees, while carting would represent
 another s. per ton: these combined charges would be s. per ton, and on  tons,
 would be
leaving a clear profit on the  acres of
the exports of mimosa-bark in  were , tons from
victoria,  from south australia, and  from tasmania.
later returns are included in barks, p. . shanghai
imported  piculs (of / lb.) in . the approximate
london market values of mimosa-bark are:—ground, -l.
a ton; chopped, -l.; long, l.-l. s. a very superior
extract has been made from this bark.
myrobalans or myrabolams.—the fruits of several
species of terminalia constitute the myrobalans of commerce;
they are chiefly t. chebula and t. bellerica, natives of india,
the former being a tree - ft. high, and esteemed for its
timber also. the fruits contain - per cent. of gallotannic
and ellagitannic acids, producing a soft and porous tannage,
and good samples giving a bright-yellow colour. the tannin
exists in the pulp, and is absent from the very hard "stone."
the dried fruits are known locally as har, harra, or bahera,
and are used commonly for dyeing, but not for tanning.
our imports of myrobalans in  were:—, cwt.,
,l., from bombay and sind; , cwt., ,l.,
from madras; , cwt., l., from bengal and burma;
 cwt., l., from other countries; total, , cwt.,
,l. our re-exports in  were  cwt., l., to
germany; , cwt., l., to other countries; total,
, cwt., ,l. the approximate london market
values of myrobalans are -s. a cwt. for good, and -s.
for common. shanghai imported  piculs (of / lb.) in
oak-barks (fr., écorces de chêne; ger., eichenrinden).—the
barks of several species of oak have valuable tanning
properties. they are chiefly:—the common oak (quercus
robur, varieties: sessiliflora, ger. traubeneiche; pedunculata,
ger. stieleiche), which is of even greater importance as a timber-tree;
the cork-oak (q. suber); the evergreen oak (q. ilex);
and the american chestnut-oak (q. castanea). these barks are
among the most esteemed tannins as regards quality of
leather, but are incapable of giving much weight, and from
their bulk are costly to handle, containing only - per
cent. of tannin (quercitannic acid). they give a reddish
fawn-coloured leather, and deposit a good deal of bloom, but
yield little or no gallic acid. the barks of the cork-oak and
evergreen oak from southern europe, are stronger and
darker-coloured than english bark. the american chestnut-oak
contains a peculiar fluorescent principle like æsculin.
our imports of unspecified barks for tanners' and dyers'
use in  were:—, cwt., ,l., from australia;
, cwt., ,l., belgium; , cwt., ,l., united
states; , cwt., l., holland; , cwt., l.,
italy; , cwt., l., algeria; , cwt., l., other
countries; total, , cwt., ,l. our imports of
unenumerated bark-extracts in the same year were valued
at:—,l. from holland, ,l. france, ,l. united
states, ,l. british north america, ,l. belgium,
,l. other countries; total, ,l. our re-exports of
barks in  were:—, cwt., ,l., to germany;
, cwt., l., france;  cwt., l., holland;
, cwt., l., other countries; total, , cwt.,
,l.
with regard to cork-tree bark, james gordon & co., liverpool,
obligingly write that very little comes to england, the
great bulk going direct to ireland, where the consumption
is large. the imports at liverpool in  were  tons,
average value l. per ton. of oak-bark, hungary, in ,
produced , tons, of which, , were exported to
germany for tanning purposes. the approximate london
market values of oak-bark are:—english, -l. per load of
 cwt.; foreign, tree, -l. a ton; ditto, coppice, -l. in
, algiers exported ,, kilo. (of · lb.) of tanning
bark.
quebracho.—the local name quebracho, contracted from
quebra-hacho ("axe-breaker"), is applied to several south
american trees possessing hard wood, belonging to distinct
genera. they are chiefly as follows:—() aspidosperma
quebracho, the quebracho blanco, a tree growing in the
province of catamarca, argentine republic; () loxopterygium«  »
[quebrachia] lorentzii, the quebracho colorado, most
prevalent in the province of corrientes, the wood and bark
of which come largely into commerce as tanning materials;
() iodina rhombifolia, the quebracho flojo, whose wood and
bark are mixed with those of no. ; () machærium fertile
[tipuana speciosa], the tipa, which affords both wood and
bark of less tanning value than no. . it would seem that
the wood and bark of no.  are by far the most largely
employed, containing - per cent. of a bright-red tannin.
the wood and an extract from it are imported into europe.
from information kindly furnished by james gordon & co.,
and haw & co., of liverpool, it appears that the imports of
quebracho-wood into liverpool in  were  tons, value
about l. s. a ton; and of quebracho-bark, about  tons,
none of which had been sold.
sumach or shumac (fr., sumac; ger., gerbersumach,
schmack).—the commercial term "sumach" is applied to
the dried leaves of a number of south european and american
tannin-yielding plants. these are chiefly as follows:—in
sicily, the european or tanning-sumach (rhus coriaria); in
tuscany, r. coriaria, often adulterated with leaves of pistacia
lentiscus; in spain, several rhus spp., the products being
divided into  kinds—malaga or priego, malina, and valladolid;
in the tyrol, the smoke-tree or fragrant or venetian
sumach (r. cotinus); in france, coriaria myrtifolia, divided
into  sorts—fauvis, douzère, redoul or redon, and pudis; in
algeria, tezera sumach (r. pentaphylla), used by the arabs
for making morocco-leather; in north america, the smooth
or white sumach (r. glabra), the canadian sumach (r. canadensis),
the staghorn sumach (r. typhina), and the dwarf or
black sumach (r. copallina). these are found growing wild
in the countries indicated, and are further subjected to
cultivation in some districts, notably in sicily. r. glabra
and r. copallina are recommended chiefly for extended
cultivation in the united states.
the soil usually chosen for cultivation of the plants is
poor and light; but a much larger crop of leaves can be
secured from strong, rich, deep soils, and it is generally
admitted that the product in the latter case is also better.
in italy, limestone soils are considered to be especially suited
to this culture, but the american varieties appear to be well
adapted to sandy and clay soils as well. the primary
requisite in a soil is that it shall be well drained, the
presence of stagnant water about the roots being exceedingly
prejudicial. to prepare the soil for planting, it is ploughed
as deeply as possible, and laid out in rows about  ft. apart.
in italy, small holes are made about  ft. long,  in. wide,
and  in. deep, and a plant is inserted at each end. a more
convenient method would consist in marking the field in
shallow furrows in one direction  ft. apart, and then, with
a heavy plough, tolerably deep furrows the same distance
apart as, and at right angles to, the first. a plant may then
be placed in the deep furrows at each intersection, the furrow
again filled with the plough, and the earth pressed about the
plant with the foot. if this were done in early spring-time,
as soon as the earth is sufficiently dry to be conveniently
worked, there can be no doubt that it would be successful,
while it would certainly involve little cost. plants are
generally propagated from the young shoots which form
each year about the base of an older plant, but may also be
produced from cuttings made from young well-ripened wood,
rooted by setting in a nursery or in frames, as in the propagation
of grape-vines from cuttings. this latter method is
scarcely ever required, however, when the cultivation has
been started. plants are also raised from seed, and seedlings
are always found to be strong, vigorous, and thoroughly
hardy; but on account of the greater time and labour
involved in their production, this method of propagation has
not received extended application. the first-mentioned
generally gives the quickest, and probably most satisfactory
results.
in selecting plants from any source, there are certain
points to be observed:—() the shoots should come from
young vigorous plants; () they should be over  ft. long;
() those with large roots and few rootlets should be rejected;
() those having white roots, covered with a fibrous,
white, silky down, are also to be rejected, this being an
indication of the presence of a very injurious subterranean
parasitic fungus, capable of destroying the entire crop; ()
a good shoot is straight, at least / in. diam.,  in. long,
furnished with numerous buds close to each other, root short,
but covered with rootlets. shoots for planting may be collected
in autumn, after the leaves have fallen, and be preserved
in a nursery until spring; or this may be done in
early spring, when the ground is very moist and soft. in
either case, care should be observed that the rootlets are not
injured by drying, or from any other cause.
the culture to be given the plant is somewhat similar to
that required by indian corn: the earth about it should be
kept tolerably mellow and free from weeds, and such conditions
can probably be maintained to a degree sufficient for
sumach, by working several times during the growing season
with a cultivator, and passing through the rows occasionally
with a plough. all this work is not absolutely necessary
to the life of the plant, but its vigour, and consequently
its yield in leaves, may be considerably increased and
strengthened thereby. after the first year, the number of
operations may be diminished, but they should always be
sufficient to keep the ground free from weeds and grass.
shortly after planting, and when the plant is well set, the
stock is pruned to a length of - in., when the plant is left
to assume any form, and is no further pruned except by the
process of collecting the leaves, unless hand-picking is
resorted to; in such case, after the nd year, pruning takes
place each year in the fall or winter, the plant being reduced
to a height of - in. after the rd year, the plant begins
to produce the shoots from about its base, already mentioned;
these, if not needed for new plantations, should be removed
each year, for if left to develop, they weaken the plant. if
not removed during the summer, the operation should without
fail be effected during the fall or winter.
the st crop of leaves may be secured during the year
following that of planting. this develops and matures
somewhat later than that from older plants, and in italy it
is not collected until the end of august or the st of
september; but there are reasons for believing that in the
united states, especially in the northern states, the collection
of leaves from native varieties should be made much earlier,
because the summer is much shorter, and the habits of the
varieties grown differ from the sicilian. macagno has
shown (chem. soc. journ., xxxviii., p. ) that the leaves
from the upper side of the branches contain much more
tannin than those below, and that especially in the lower
leaves the percentage of tannin is much higher in june than
in august. all the leaves, except the young and tender
ones of the extremities of the branches, are stripped off and
placed in baskets, in which they are carried to a threshing-floor,
where they are spread out in thin layers to dry. here
they must be frequently stirred and turned over, for which
purpose a fork with wooden prongs is employed. in the
fall, when growth is finished, and before the leaves have had
time to become red, those remaining on the extremities are
collected. to this end, the branches are broken just below
the tuft of leaves, and the latter are allowed to remain suspended
from the branch by a piece of bark not detached, and
left in this condition until nearly or quite dry. they
are then collected and treated in the same manner as other
leaves, but the product obtained in this way is always of
inferior quality.
after the nd year, crops of larger quantity and superior
quality are obtained, and the collection is made in a different
way, and much more frequently. the two methods followed
in sicily are () pruning, and () defoliation. the first,
which is the more ancient, but much less costly, requires
less care, and is simple and rapid; but it is injurious to the
future condition of the plant, and the quantity of subsequent
crops. the second, though slower, serves to better maintain
the vigour of the plant, and the uniform quantity of the crop
from year to year; in consequence, it reduces the necessity
for frequent renewal of stocks.
harvest by pruning is carried on in italy as follows.
during may, the lower leaves, which, from greater age,
appear to have attained full maturity, and may be in danger
of loss from falling, are removed in the same manner as
described for collecting the leaves from yearling plants.
toward the end of june, and during the course of july, all
branches bearing leaves are cut away, reducing the plant to
the principal stock: by this means, the crop is harvested
and the plant is pruned at the same time. but even in
sicily, the time for this operation is limited to no absolute
period, and varies with the development of the leaf, as
indicated by cessation of growth and increase in size. in
this condition, also, the leaves will have acquired their
deepest green colour, and attained their maximum weight
and best quality. it is further stated that while this time
varies according to locality, about palermo it is never earlier
than june nor later than july. the harvest by pruning
must always be made by men accustomed to the work, and
equal to the exertion required. provided with a pruning-bill,
they cut off all leaf-bearing branches, collecting them
an the left arm, until each has cut as much as he can conveniently
carry, when he places the armful on the ground
with the butts in the direction of the prevailing wind, which,
if tolerably strong, might carry away some of the leaves if
turned in the opposite direction; finally, he presses down
the branches with his foot, to make the heap more compact,
and leave less surface exposed to the wind and sun. another
labourer deposits a second armful in the same place, presses
it with his foot in like manner, and the two deposits constitute
a bundle. at the close of the operation, there remain
the young shoots which are formed about the base of the
plant, the leaves of which are not fully developed, and consequently
not fit for collection until at least  days later.
after this time, they are removed by hand, care being
observed not to injure the buds, especially if the shoots are
to be used for stocks in the formation of plantations in the
following year.
defoliation, or collection by hand, is carried on whenever
the leaf may be fully developed and ripe, beginning at first
with the lower leaves, and continuing eventually to the ends
of the branches. it takes place at  different times during
the season: the st in may, the nd late in july or early
august, and the rd in september. at the last collection, the
extremities of the branches are broken down, and the leaves
are allowed to dry before removal from the plant, as described
under collections of the nd year. in the application of this
method, the regular pruning is effected during the fall or
winter, when the plant is dormant, and under such conditions
the operation becomes a regenerative one, giving in
this particular an advantage over the other method, in which
the pruning is effected in the summer when the plant is in
full vegetative activity, and so has a strongly deteriorating
influence. in both methods of pruning, care should be
observed to leave a long slanting section, upon which water
will be less likely to settle and promote decay.
the leaves collected by either method are dried in the
open field where they have grown, and when dried, are
carried to a threshing-floor to be beaten, or at once to the
threshing-floor and dried there. in the former, the operation
is rather more rapid, but there is greater danger of injury
by rain, the effect of which is very deleterious, especially if
it fall upon the leaves when they are partially dried. the
damage resulting from this cause is less if the leaves are not
lying upon the ground, and are so arranged that the air may
circulate freely about and under them. in the pruning
method, the leaves are dried upon the branches and in the
heaps where they are first deposited. sometimes they are
turned, but generally it is considered better not to disturb
them until completely dried, and ready for transportation to
the threshing-floor. in this way, they are protected to a
greater extent from the action of direct sunlight, which is
said to be injurious to the quality of the product. when
the leaves are collected by hand, they are dried upon the
threshing-floor, where they are spread in thin layers, and
stirred - times a day. they are then beaten with a flail
to separate the leaves from the branches and stems. if this
be done during the middle of the day, when the leaves are
most thoroughly dry and consequently brittle, they are
reduced to small particles, producing what is called "sumach
for grinding." but if it be done in the morning, or on damp
days, when the air is charged with moisture and the leaves
are tough, they are separated from the stems more nearly
entire and less broken, and the product obtained is called
"sumach for baling." the stems remaining after the separation
of sumach for baling still retain small particles of leaves
attached to them, and they are therefore again beaten when
perfectly dry for the production of a low-grade sumach,
called by the italians gammuzza. the products are classed
as follows:—
relative marketvalue.
sumach for baling
   "    "  grinding
   "  from yearling plants
   "   "  ends of branches
        collected in autumn
to prepare these different grades for ultimate consumption,
they are ground in mills similar to those employed for crushing
olives, that is, in which two large stone wheels follow
each other, revolving upon a circular bed, the whole construction
being about the same as the spanish or mexican
arrastre. the sumach thus pulverised is passed through
bolting-screens, to separate the finer from the coarser
particles.
in virginia, the leaves are collected and cured by the
country people, and sold and delivered to owners of mills for
grinding. their particular object being to secure the largest
possible quantity of product at the lowest cost, little attention
is given to the quality obtained, or the manner of collecting.
the most intelligent dealers in the raw material urge upon
collectors to observe the following particulars:—the leaf
should be taken when full of sap, before it has turned red,
has begun to wither, or has been affected by frost, to ensure
a maximum value for tanning purposes. either the leaf-bearing
stems may be stripped off, or the entire stalk may
be cut away, and the leaves upon it allowed to wither before
being carried to the drying-shed; but care must be observed
that they are neither scorched nor bleached by the sun.
when wilted, they are carried to a covered place, and spread
upon open shelving or racks to dry, avoiding the deposit in
any one place of a quantity so great as to endanger the
quality of the product by overheating and fermentation.
sumach should be allowed to remain within the drying-house
at least one month before sending to the market; in
case of bad weather, a longer period may be required. when
ready for packing for shipment, it should be perfectly dry
and very brittle, otherwise it is likely to suffer injury in
warehouses from heating and fermentation.
buyers of sumach leaves for grinding depend largely upon
colour for the determination of the value; the leaves should,
therefore, when ready for market, present a bright-green
colour, which is evidence that they have suffered neither
from rain after being gathered, nor from heating during the
process of drying. leaves having a mouldy odour or appearance
are rejected. the virginian crop reaches -
tons, and is collected at any time between july  and the
appearance of frost.
there is an important difference in the value of the european
and american products. the proportion of tannic acid
in the latter exceeds that found in the former by - per
cent., yet the former is much preferred by tanners and dyers.
by using sicilian sumach it is possible to make the finer
white leathers, in great demand for gloves and fancy shoes;
while by the employment of the american product, the
leather has a disagreeable yellow or dark colour, apparently
due to a colouring matter, which, according to loewe, consists
of quercitrin and quercetin, and exists in larger quantity
in the american than in the sicilian.
the experimental results obtained by collecting sumach at
different seasons were:—
per cent. oftannic acid.
virginia, mixed, collected in
june, gave
july,    "
    "   r. glabra   "
august, "
    "   b. copallina "
sicilian,  b. coriaria " 
it is evident, therefore, that in order to secure the maximum
amount of tannic acid, the sumach should be collected
in july, but the colouring matter of the leaves has an important
influence upon the value of the product. the leaves of
the upper extremities of the stalks are always richer in
tannic acid than those of the base; and the increase of age
of the plant is accompanied by a general diminution of this
acid. yet the collection of the crop should be delayed as
long as possible, because the diminution of tannin in the
leaves will be abundantly compensated for by the quality of
the product.
experiments upon the presence of colouring matters were
made by treating gelatine solutions, and gave the following
results:—
virginia, mixed, collected in
june, gave
a nearly white precipitate.
july,  "
a decidedly yellowish-white precipitate.
    "   r. copallina, "
august "
a dirty-yellow precipitate.
    "   b. glabra,    "
a very dirty-white precipitate.
fredericksburg mixed, "
a dirty-yellow precipitate.
sicilian             "
a slightly yellowish-white precipitate.
it is therefore advised that for the purpose of tanning
white and delicately-coloured leathers, the collection should
be made in june; while for tanning dark-coloured leathers,
and for dyeing and calico-printing in dark colours, where the
slightly yellow colour will have no injurious effect, the collection
be made in july. it appears that for all purposes,
the sumach collected after the st of august is inferior in
quality.
fig. .
fig.  shows a mill for grinding sumach-leaves; it consists
of a heavy solid circular wooden bed a,  ft. diam.,
with a depression around the edge b, a few inches deep and
 ft. wide, for the reception of the ground sumach from the
bed, and  edge-rollers c, weighing about  lb. each,
- ft. diam., and provided with numerous teeth of iron or
wood, thickly inserted. most mills have to be stopped to
allow the unloading of the bed, but this delay is obviated by
an apparatus consisting of an angular arm d, attached to a
scraper e, and worked by a lever f, which passes through the
hollow shaft g and extends to the room above, where it terminates
in a handle h. the scraper carries the ground
sumach to the opening i, whence it is taken by an elevator to
a revolving sieve or screen in a room above. after screening,
the sumach is packed in bags,  to the ton, being always sold
by that weight. the chasers and beds are inclosed in a case
or drum, and the grinding is done by the application of power
to the upright shaft g. the mills are fed from above. the
packing is sometimes done by machinery alone. the best
mills cost about l. in europe, and in some parts of the
southern states, sumach is still ground by stones revolving
on a stone bed, and the sifting is often done by hand.
e. coez & co., st. denis, near paris, make a sumach
extract. it is concentrated to a syrupy consistence in a
vacuum-pan, and keeps well, exhibiting none of the acidity
which is manifested by a simple decoction of sumach leaves.
sumach contains - per cent. of gallotannic acid, and is
somewhat similar in tanning properties to myrobalans, but
paler in colour. it is principally used for tanning morocco
and other fancy leathers.
the district of ancona yields  tons per annum of
sumach, said to be equal to and cheaper than the sicilian,
but mostly consumed locally. palermo exported of "ventilated"
sumach to the united states , bags ( =  ton)
in , and , in , the average value being l. a
ton. trieste exported  cwt. by land in ; in ,
the shipments to england were , kilo. (of · lb.),
value  fl. (of s.), and in , , kilo.  fl. rustchuk
in  exported  tons, chiefly to roumania and
austria. our imports in  were , tons, ,l.
from italy, and  tons, ,l., from other countries;
total, , tons, ,l. the approximate london market
value is s.-s. d. a cwt. for sicilian, -s. for spanish.
valonia (fr., vélanèdes; ger., valonia). this is the
commercial name for the large pericarps or acorn-cups of
several species or varieties of oak, chiefly quercus ægilops
and q. macrolepis. the former is found growing in the highlands
of the morea, roumelia, the greek archipelago, asia
minor, and palestine; the latter constitutes vast forests in
many parts of greece, and especially on the lower slopes
of taygetos, towards ætylon and mani (laconia). prof.
orphanides, of athens, alludes to a third species or variety
called porto galussa, which yields a superior kind of valonia,
and named by him q. stenophylla. the chief localities of production
in asia minor are ushak, borlo, demirdji, ghiördes,
adala, nazlü, buldur, sokia, balat, troja, aivalik, and mytilene.
the annual exports, mainly from smyrna, reach
, quintals (of  cwt.), value about ,l. in greece,
the production is chiefly centred in the following districts:
() the province of lacedemonia, which afforded , cwt.
in ; () the province of gythium, in the lower part of
mount taygetos, which gave , cwt. in ; () the
island of zea, which formerly yielded ,-, cwt.,
lately reduced to , cwt. yearly; () attica, especially
the neighbourhood of cacossalessi, grows - cwt.,
shipped from oropos, in the strait of chalcis; () the island
of eubœa, whence about  cwt. are shipped annually at
bouffalo; () the province of triphyllia raises  cwt.,
which go to trieste, viâ cyparissie; () the province of
pulos, especially the commune of ligudista, grows over
 cwt., despatched from navarino to trieste; () the
province of achaia has a yearly crop of ,-, cwt.,
shipped to trieste from courupeli and caravostassi, between
patras and cape papa; () the small towns of anatolico and
astakos (dragomestre) collect the valonia of the eastern
parts of ætylon, acarnania, and cravassaras (a port in the
gulf of arta), and of all the other western parts, to be sent
to trieste for shipment to england and italy. ætolia and
acarnania furnish abundant crops, that of  exceeding
, cwt. the total area of the greek valonia-yielding
forests is said to be about , stremme (of / sq. yd.).
the total production in  was estimated at ,,
quintals (of  cwt.); the greater part is exported, about
/ going to austria, and the rest to italy and england. the
proportions of tannic acid in the valonia from different districts
of greece are said to vary as follows: patras, -/
per cent.; gythium, /-/; zea, /-/; vonitza, -.
in turkey, the fruit ripens in july-august, when the trees
are beaten, and the fallen acorns left on the ground to dry.
the natives afterwards gather them, and transport them on
camel-back to stores in the towns, whence they go by camel
and train to smyrna, and are there placed in heaps - ft.
deep in large airy stores for some weeks, during which the
mass heats, and the acorn itself, which contains but little
tannin, and is used for feeding pigs, contracts and falls from
the cup. this incipient fermentation is attended with considerable
risk; if carried too far, a large proportion of the
valonia becomes dark-coloured and otherwise damaged.
when ready for shipment, the heaps are hand-picked, the
best being reserved for the austrian market (trieste), and
the rest going to england. in some cases, the rubbish
having been removed, the remainder is known as "natural,"
and is thus exported to england.
in greek commerce, three qualities are distinguished,
chamada, rhabdisto, and charcala. the chamada (camata and
camatina of asia minor) is the best; it is collected in april,
before the acorn is matured, hence the cup which encloses
the acorn is small and incompletely developed. the rhabdisto
is the second quality; it is collected in september-october,
and is distinguished by the fruit being larger and riper; the
name means "beaten," the fruits being beaten down from the
trees with sticks. after mid-october the collection ceases,
because the first rains cause the fallen fruit to ferment or
turn black, and they then take the name of charchala. they
are distinguished by the cups being completely open, and
containing no acorns. they are considered much inferior,
possessing little tannin.
pl. iv.
e. & f. n. spon, london & new york.
sometimes the acorn cup is attacked by a kind of honey-dew,
which deposits on the cup, and makes it very liable to
heat when gathered, the cup becoming very dark and deficient
in tannin. the turkish crop of  was much damaged
from this cause, many parcels reaching england in an unsaleable
condition. the cause of the disease is yet unknown;
it seems specially prevalent when the crop is large and the
acorn fully developed. a good sample of valonia should be
composed of medium-sized cups, with the rim or wall very
thick, and the exterior spines small and uniform. the cut
or broken cup should show a bright-drab fractured surface.
valonia contains - per cent. of a tannin somewhat
resembling that of oak-bark, but giving a browner colour
and heavier bloom. it makes a hard and heavy leather, and
is generally used in admixture with oak-bark, myrobalans,
or mimosa-bark.
the greek crop in  was much damaged by the cold
spring: it gave  tons in acarnania and ætolia,  in
cape papa, and  in mania; total,  tons. calamata
and messenia produced  tons, l. syra exported in
, l. worth to great britain, l. austria, l.
russia, l. turkey, l. egypt. hungary exported
 tons in . adana shipped l. worth in ;
and dedeagatch, in the same year, ,, lb., l.
musyna [mersineh] sent  tons, l., to italy, and 
tons, l. to austria, in ; and  tons, l., to
italy, and  tons, l., to greece, in . our imports
in  were:—from turkey, , tons, ,l.; greece,
 tons, ,l.; other countries,  tons, l.; total,
, tons, ,l. the approximate london market
values are:—smyrna, s. d.-s. d. a cwt.; camata,
s.-s.; morea, s. d.-s.
miscellaneous.—besides the foregoing tannins, which
already occupy prominent places in european and american
commerce, there are many others as yet of minor importance,
but possessing qualities which may bring them into note in
the near future. they are as follows:—
abies larix bark, the larch, contains - per cent. of a red
tannin.
acacia albicans fruits, the hiusache of mexico, are used as
substitutes for gall-nuts, costing locally about d. a lb.
a. arabica, the babul of india, yields a tannin which gives a
nearly pure-white precipitate with gelatine: the proportions
are · per cent, in trunk-bark, · in branch-bark,
· in twig-bark. the supply is unlimited. it works
well with myrobalans. a. cebil, the red cebil of the argentine
republic, contains - per cent. of tannin in the bark,
and - per cent. in the leaves; another variety, the white
cebil, contains - per cent. in the bark, and - per cent.
in the leaves. a. cavenia, the espinillo of the argentine
republic, has - per cent. of tannin in the fruit-husks.
a. penninervis bark, the "hardy" acacia of australia, contains
 per cent. of tannic acid and - of gallic.
alnus glutinosa bark, the common alder, contains about
 per cent. of tannin.
cœsalpinia cacalaco fruits, the cascalote of mexico, are very
rich in tannic and gallic acids, and are locally used for tanning.
comptonia asplenifolia leaves, the sweet-fern of the united
states, contain - per cent. of tannin.
coriaria ruscifolia bark, the tutu of new zealand, contains
- per cent. of tannin.
elæocarpus dentatus bark, the kiri-hinau of new zealand,
contains - per cent. of tannin. e. hookerianus bark, the
pokako of new zealand, contains - per cent. of tannin.
ephedra antisyphilitica, on the tablelands of arizona and
utah, gives - per cent. of tannin.
eucalyptus longifolia bark, the "woolly-butt" of australia,
contains · per cent. of tannic acid, and · of gallic. the
"peppermint"-tree contains  per cent. of tannic acid in its
bark. the "stringy-bark" (e. obliqua) gives / per cent. of
kinotannic acid. the victorian "iron-bark" (e. leucoxylon)
contains  per cent. of kinotannic acid, but is available only
for inferior leather.
eugenia maire bark, the whawhako of new zealand, contains
- per cent. of tannin. e. smithii bark, the "myrtle"-tree
of australia, contains  per cent. of tannic acid and
- of gallic.
fuchsia macrostemma root-bark is thin, brittle, and easily
exhausted; it contains about  per cent. of a bright-red
tannin, which has been successfully tried. it is the churco
bark of chili, which, however, is attributed by the kew
authorities to oxalis gigantea.
inga feuillei pods, the pay-pay of peru, contain  per cent.
of an almost colourless tannin.
laurus peumo rind is used in chili for tanning uppers.
malpighia punicifolia bark, the naucite, or manquitta bark of
nicaragua, contains - per cent. of a very light-coloured
tannin.
persea lingue bark is red-brown, soft, and easily exhausted
by water; it contains - per cent. of tannin, and much
slimy matter which promotes the swelling of the hides. it
serves in south america, especially in the chilian province
of valdivia, for tanning valdivia leather. in southern
chili are enormous forests of the tree. the imported bark
has given good results with heavy leathers.
phyllocladus tricomanoides bark, the kiri-toa-toa of new
zealand, contains  per cent. of tannin.
polygonum amphibium leaves, an annual plant abundant in
the missouri valley, contain  per cent. of tannin, and can
be mown and stacked like hay. it is largely used in chicago
tanneries, and said to give a leather which is tougher, more
durable, of finer texture, and capable of higher polish, than
that tanned with oak-bark.
punica granatum fruit-rind, the pomegranate, contains
about · per cent. of a tannin like myrobalans, and a considerable
quantity of starch; the tannin is greatest in the
bitter kind, which is used for preparing morocco leather; the
root-bark also is rich in tannin.
rhizophora mangle bark, the mangrove, of venezuela, contains
- per cent. of deep-red tannin, if obtained from
young stems; samples from the west indies have given
· per cent., probably by the gelatine process; two
samples from shanghai, by löwenthal's improved method,
gave respectively · and · per cent. calculated as oak
tannin, and · and · of woody fibre. guayaquil
exported  cwt. of the bark to peru in .
tecoma pentaphylla bark, the roble colorado of venezuela,
contains  per cent. of tannin, accompanied by a soluble
orange-red colouring matter.
wagatea spicata pods contain  per cent. of tannic acid.
the plant, a scrambling shrub, is a native of the concans.
weinmannia racemosa bark, the tawhero towai, or kamai of
new zealand, contains - per cent. of tannin.
the essential constituents of tanning materials are various
members of a large group of organic compounds called
tannins or tannic acids.[d]
[d] ger. gerbsäure; in german the word tannin denotes usually gallotannic
acid only.
these bodies often differ widely both in chemical constitution
and reaction, but have the common property of
precipitating gelatin from solution, and forming insoluble
compounds with gelatin-yielding tissues. by virtue of this
power, they convert animal hide into the insoluble and
imputrescible material called "leather." they are mostly
uncrystallisable; and all form blackish-blue or blackish-green
compounds with ferric salts, and in common with
many other organic substances are precipitated by lead and
copper acetates, stannous chloride, and many other metallic
salts, and those of organic bases, such as quinine. in some
cases, the tannin combines with the base only, liberating the
acid; but frequently the salt as a whole enters into combination.
this is the case with the precipitates formed with
lead and copper acetates. with alkalies, the tannins and
many of their derivatives give solutions which oxidise and
darken rapidly, usually becoming successively orange,
brown, and black. a. h. allen has shown that these bodies
also give instantaneously a deep-red coloration with a
solution of potassium ferricyanide and ammonia. the
reaction is one of considerable delicacy.
tannins are more or less soluble in water; and freely so
in alcohol, mixtures of alcohol and ether, and ethyl acetate,
but scarcely in dry ether alone, nor in dilute sulphuric
acid; and insoluble in carbon disulphide, petroleum spirit,
benzene, and chloroform.
from their amorphous character, tannins are extremely
difficult to purify; and when, as is frequently the case, two
or more tannins occur in the same plant, it is often quite
impossible completely to separate them. owing to their
considerable differences in character, no general method of
purification can be given, but the following processes will
be found in many cases to give good results. for the special
methods adopted by different investigators, the original
memoirs must be consulted, references to many of which will
be found in the following pages.
preparation and purification of tannins.
the oldest method of separating tannins from other constituents
is that applied by pelouze to the preparation of
commercial gallotannic acid from gall-nuts. the finely
pulverised material is placed in a percolator and exhausted
with commercial ether containing water and alcohol. the
liquid separates, on standing, into  layers of which the
lower contains most of the tannin in a tolerably pure form,
dissolved in water and alcohol with a little ether, while the
upper mainly ethereous layer contains the gallic acid. gall-nuts
thus treated yield - per cent. of tannin. if equal
parts of ether and  per cent. alcohol are used, a larger
yield is obtained, but the liquid does not separate into 
layers, and it is questionable if the product is so pure. for
chinese galls, washed ether acts better than ether alcohol.
the tannin may be still further purified by dissolving in a
mixture of  part water with  of ether, when  layers are
formed, of which the lowest contains nearly pure tannin.
these methods are applicable to the dried or highly concentrated
extracts of many tanning materials. many tannins
may be separated from their strong aqueous solution in
a state of considerable purity by first agitating with ether
to remove gallic acid, and then saturating with common salt,
and shaking well with acetic ether, which takes up the
tannin. another method is to extract with alcohol, evaporate
to a small bulk at as low a temperature as possible,
and treat at once with a considerable quantity of cold water.
the infusion is then precipitated with successive small
quantities of lead acetate; the first and last portions of the
precipitate are filtered off and rejected as contaminated with
colouring matters and other impurities, while the remainder,
after rapid washing, is suspended in water and decomposed
with sulphuretted hydrogen. the filtrate is shaken with
ether to remove gallic acid, and the aqueous portion is
evaporated at a low temperature in a partial vacuum to a
thin syrup, and the drying completed over sulphuric acid in
vacuo.
general chemistry.
the natural tannins are all compounds of carbon, hydrogen
and oxygen only. they all contain the benzene group of
carbon atoms, but their ultimate structure is, except in the
case of gallotannic acid, very imperfectly understood, and
probably differs considerably in type in different members
of the family.
in order to make clear to those readers who have not
studied modern organic chemistry, what we do know on the
subject, a few words of introduction will be necessary. all
organic compounds contain carbon, in combination with
hydrogen, and very frequently also with oxygen, nitrogen,
and other elements. a single atom of carbon is able to combine
with  atoms of hydrogen, as it does to form marsh gas,
or methyl hydride, ch. other elements may be substituted
for the hydrogen; for instance, if we replace  of the hydrogen
atoms with chlorine, we obtain chloroform, chcl. again
an atom of oxygen may be inserted between the carbon
atom and one of the hydrogen atoms, producing methyl
hydroxide or wood spirit. the group ch is called methyl,
and we may substitute in wood spirit this entire methyl
group for one of the atoms of hydrogen, when we shall have
ordinary alcohol, choh. this building-up process may
be repeated almost ad infinitum, producing a whole series of
alcohols of higher and higher boiling point as the atoms
of carbon become more numerous. again, if in wood spirit
we substitute an atom of oxygen for  of the remaining atoms
of hydrogen we obtain formic acid, cho.oh, the first
of a long series of acids, of which the second, corresponding
to ordinary alcohol, is acetic acid, and the highest members,
such as stearic acid, cho.oh, are solid fats. hence the
whole series are commonly called the fatty acids. a few
structural formulæ will serve to make these points clearer, but
it may be well to say that such formulæ must be taken
simply as indicating the order in which the different atoms
are united, and in no sense their actual position in space.
the atoms in a molecule are held together by attractions
and are in continual motion, so that they are more comparable
to the planets of the solar system than to a rigid
shape.
methyl hydride.
methyl alcohol.
common alcohol.
chloroform.
formic acid.
acetic acid.
cl
h──c──cl
cl
in benzene, ch we have a compound of another type.
there is reason to think that the carbon atoms in this case
are united in a ring, as shown,
this benzene group forms the foundation of an immense
number of bodies known as the aromatic series, to which
belong aniline, carbolic acid, picric acid, gallic acid, and a
host of other compounds important alike in a scientific and
commercial sense, and among which we may pretty safely
group the whole of the tannins. commencing with benzene,
we may, by inserting atoms of oxygen, produce a series of
alcohols or phenols, of which common phenol (usually but
incorrectly called carbolic acid) is the first.
the following table gives a general view of some of
these, so far as they are known, with their corresponding
acids:—
benzene.
phenol.
pyrocatechol(or catechol),hydroquinol,resorcinol.
pyrogallol,phloroglucol.
benzoic acid.
salycylic acid,oxybenzoic acid.
protocatechuic acid(and  other isomeric acids).
gallic acid, &c.
it will be noticed that a large proportion of the formulæ
given above represent several compounds identical in composition,
but frequently very distinct in their properties.
the explanation of these differences lies in the different
relative position of the oh and co.oh groups round the
benzene ring. thus the following diagram represents the
relative positions of the pyrocatechol series. it may be noted
that each phenol yields two isomeric[e] acids. miller (c. s.
jour., xli. ), who has investigated these acids, remarks,
"of the  phenols choh, catechol alone gives a
«  »precipitate with lead acetate, and of the  acids, cnoh,
co.oh, none yields precipitates with lead acetate, except
the  which are obtained from catechol."
[e] isomeric, of similar composition but different structure and properties.
pyrocatechol -.
resorcinol -.
hydroquinol -.
all the natural tannins with which we are acquainted,
are derived from, and yield on decomposition either catechol,
phloroglucol, or pyrogallol, and sometimes more than one of
these. artificial products, however, with many of the
reactions of tannins have been obtained from other members
of the group, and most phenols and their derived acids
give either purplish or greenish black with ferric salts.
several classifications of the tannins have been suggested.
the division most obvious to the tanner is into those tannins
which yield the whitish deposit in the surface of the leather,
called "bloom," and those which do not. stenhouse, some
years since, divided tannins into  classes, one of which
gives a bluish, and the other a greenish-black with ferric
salts. in the main these  classes correspond to the 
former, as most tannins which yield a blue-black with iron
acetate also give bloom to the leather. in some cases,
however, the difference of tint is due to accidental impurities,
and even gallotannic acid will give a decided green
with strongly acid ferric chloride. these classifications
both correspond to well-defined differences of constitution,
and it is obviously more scientific to arrange tannins according
to the products which they yield on decomposition, and
which indicate their ultimate structure, rather than on any
less essential point.
if those tannins which give bloom to leather are
cautiously heated to about ° f. (° c.), they are
decomposed, and a substance is volatilised which condenses
in feathery crystals, and which on examination
turns out to be pyrogallol. those tannins, on the other
hand, which yield no bloom, but red deposits, produce a
somewhat similar sublimate of catechol. from oak-bark
and valonia, which yield both bloom and red colouring
matters, both catechol and pyrogallol have been obtained.
we may, therefore, divide tannins broadly into derivatives
of catechol, which yield no bloom, and usually give
greenish-blacks with iron acetate, and which include hemlock,
mimosa, cutch, gambier, quebracho, &c; derivatives
of pyrogallol, which give bluish-blacks with iron, deposit
bloom in leather, and embrace galls, sumach, divi-divi,
myrobalans, pomegranate rind, &c., and tannins which contain
both pyrogallol and catechol, such as oak-bark and
valonia, and which, as is well known, yield bloom, and give
blue-blacks with iron.
if tannins are boiled with dilute sulphuric or hydrochloric
acids, and allowed to ferment under the influence of pectose
and other natural ferments, which are always present in
vegetable tanning materials, a different series of decompositions
takes place. many tannins yield glucose, or starch
sugar, as one of their products, or as that of closely associated
impurities. of this more must be said later. in
addition it will be found that the catechol tannins invariably
yield insoluble reddish-brown bodies which have
been called phlobaphenes, and which differ from the original
tannins in containing one or more molecules less water,
and which, in chemical language, are anhydrides of their
respective tannic acids. the pyrogallol tannins, on the
other hand, yield gallic acid, or ellagic acid (the deposit
forming bloom) either alone or in mixture. oak-bark and
valonia give both bloom and insoluble reds, and by digestion
with acids in sealed tubes also gallic acid.
if the red anhydrides, which are produced from the
catechol tannins, be fused with caustic potash, or in many
cases, if they be simply boiled with concentrated potash
solution, they are broken up still further, and from the
fused mass, protocatechuic acid (which bears the same relation
to catechol that gallic acid does to pyrogallol) may always
be obtained. this is in many cases accompanied by phloroglucol,
a phenol isomeric with pyrogallol, as may be seen by
the table on p. , but which tastes sweet like a sugar. cutch,
gambier, mimosa, quebracho, and probably many others, are
phloroglucide tannins. the tannins which do not yield
phloroglucol frequently give acetic acid, and other acids of
the "fatty" group, along with protocatechuic acid. we
may summarise this classification in the following table:—
tannins boiled with dilute sulphuric acid yield (frequently glucose, and)
insoluble reds, which fused with potash yield protocatechuic acid, and,──
phloroglucol, as chestnut, gambier, kino, cutch, quebracho,
rhatany, fustic, horse-chestnut, tormentil.
acetic acid, coffee, peruvian bark, male-fern.
reds and gallicand ellagic acids;no glucose
oak-bark and valonia tannins.
no reds, but gallicand ellagic acids
galls, myrobalans, sumach, divi-divi, pomegranate rind.these are probably mixtures of two tannins which yield
gallic acid only
digallic, or pure gallotannic acid.
ellagic acid only
pure ellagitannic acid.
this classification is as yet very incomplete, and there are
many tannins of which the decomposition products have
not been examined, while our knowledge of the differences
between the tannins which are classed together is extremely
limited. in order to make the information which
has been given practically available for further research,
the characteristics and mode of recognition of the different
products will be given, and as simple a scheme as possible
of treatment of the tannin to be examined will be described;
but the recognition of such products in a state of mixture
presents great practical difficulties, and the tanner will
usually be compelled to confine his attention to simpler,
though less conclusive tests, based on the work of chemical
specialists. such tests will be described later (p. ).
pl. iii.
e. & f. n. spon, london & new york.
general methods of examination of tannins.
decomposition by heat.—the ordinary method is to distil
the tannin or dried extract in a small retort, and examine
the distillate for catechol and pyrogallol. unless the heat
be very carefully regulated, much loss is caused by the destruction
of the catechol and pyrogallol with formation of
metagallic acid, &c., and their detection is greatly complicated
by the presence of secondary products. this difficulty
is somewhat lessened by passing a stream of carbon dioxide
through the retort, which carries the products quickly out
of the heated portion. a better method is to heat the
tannin in glycerin (thorpe, chem. soc. abstr., , ;
allen, 'commercial organic analysis,' nd ed.). about
 grm. of the sample is heated with  c.c. of pure glycerin
to °-° f. (°-° c.) for  minutes. after
cooling, about  c.c. of water is added, and the liquid is
shaken with an equal volume of ether, without previous
filtration. the ethereous layer, which contains the pyrogallol
and catechol, is separated from the aqueous portion,
evaporated to dryness, and dissolved in  c.c. of water.
the filtered solution is divided into several portions and
tested with lime-water, ferric chloride, and ferric acetate
(see pp. -); by these means it is easy to distinguish between
catechol and pyrogallol; and either may be detected
in presence of a small portion of the other; but if in nearly
equal quantities, their recognition is difficult. catechol may
be derived from catechin, &c., and pyrogallol from gallic
acid, and it is therefore necessary in some cases to remove
these bodies from the tannin before treatment. as a general
rule, however, catechins and catechol derivatives are only
present in any quantity with catechol-tannins, and the same
is true of gallic acid with regard to pyrogallol. (for methods
of separation see pp. , , ). catechol has been formed
by long continued heating of cellulose, starch, and other
carbohydrates with water under pressure (see p. ).
products of the decomposition of tannins by heat.—pyrogallol,
pyrogallic acid, cho, has a bitter, but not sour
taste, and feebly reddens litmus, but the addition of the
smallest trace of alkali gives it an alkaline reaction. it is
poisonous,  gr. having killed a dog. it is soluble in less
than  parts of cold water, and still more freely in hot. it
is also soluble in alcohol, ether, acetone, ethyl acetate, and
glycerin, but not in absolute chloroform, or petroleum spirit.
it fuses at ° f. (° c.) (etti), and sublimes at about
with pure ferrous sulphate it gives a white precipitate,
which redissolves to a fine blue liquid in presence of the least
trace of ferric salt. mineral acids change this to red, and
the blue tint is restored by cautious neutralisation with
ammonia, and is not destroyed, but sometimes rendered
greenish by excess of acetic, and other organic acids. any
excess of ammonia produces an amethyst-red, and acetic acid
restores the blue. its solution is turned brown by traces of
nitrous acid. with lime-water it produces a beautiful but
evanescent purple, rapidly turning brown. in presence of
alkalies it absorbs oxygen from the air with great avidity,
turning orange, brown, and black. pyrogallol does not
precipitate gelatin. its solution rapidly reduces permanganate,
fehling's solution, and salts of gold, silver,[f] mercury,
and platinum. it precipitates copper and lead acetates, and
with ammoniacal cupric sulphate it gives an intense purple-brown
coloration. gum arabic, saliva, and various other
organic matters cause solutions of pyrogallol exposed to the
air to absorb oxygen, by which purpurogallin is formed and
separates in small yellow capillary crystals. if · per cent.
of pyrogallol be added to a  per cent. solution of gum
arabic, it becomes yellow in a few hours, and purpurogallin
separates in hairlike crystals, which continue to increase for
some months. it these crystals are freed from pyrogallol by
washing with water, and a trace of alkali is added, they
dissolve with an intense blue colour. purpurogallol is also
formed by oxidation with silver nitrate, potash permanganate,
and many other reagents. pyrogallol forms compounds
with aldehydes; with formaldehyde, a body which reacts
like a tannin and precipitates gelatin is produced. if
pyrogallol be heated with hydrochloric acid, and aldehyde,
chloral, or acetone, a red substance is produced. the less
volatile portions of crude beech-tar creasote contains ethers
of pyrogallol, methyl-pyrogallol, and propyl-pyrogallol,
from which these bodies may be obtained by the action of
hydrochloric acid under pressure. methyl- and propyl-pyrogallols
differ from ordinary pyrogallol in having an
atom of hydrogen replaced by the groups ch or ch
respectively; and it is very probable that some tannins
are derivatives of such modified pyrogallols.
[f] hence its use as a "developer" in photography.
if pyrogallol be heated rapidly to ° f. (° c.) it
parts with the elements of water, and is converted into
metagallic acid, cho, a black amorphous body, insoluble
in water, soluble in alkalies. when pyrogallol is
made in the ordinary way by heating gallic or tannic acids
to ° f. (° c.), much of this body is formed, even if the
process be conducted in a stream of carbonic acid, and the
yield of pyrogallol usually amounts to only about  per cent.
of the gallic acid employed (see p. ).
catechol.—pyrocatechol, pyrocatechin, oxyphenic acid,
sources.—beside that of the decomposition of certain tannins
by heat (see p. ), catechol is produced by the dry distillation
of catechin and some allied bodies which frequently
accompany the tannins. it is also formed together with
pyrogallol and its homologues (see above) by the dry distillation
of wood, wood tar creasote consisting largely of ethers
of pyrocatechol and its homologues, methyl and pyrocatechol,
&c., and hence it is also found in crude pyroligneous acid.
it has also been produced by heating carbohydrates with
water under pressure, and is found ready formed in virginia-creeper
(ampelopsis hæderacea), and probably in other plants.
it has also been formed synthetically.
reactions.—catechol melts at ° f. (° c.) and sublimes
at about the same temperature, condensing in brilliant
laminæ like benzoic acid. it is readily soluble in water,
alcohol, and ether, and is extracted from its aqueous solution
when shaken with the latter. its aqueous solution precipitates
lead acetate but not gelatin or alkaloids. with lime-water
or caustic soda solution it becomes reddish, but remains
clear for some time. it does not colour ferrous salts, but
gives a dark green with ferric (avoiding excess); and after
some time a black precipitate. the green is changed to a
fine violet-red by alkalies and hydric sodic carbonate, and
restored by acids. to fir-wood moistened with hydrochloric
acid it gives, like phloroglucol, a violet coloration by
combination with the trace of vanillin which this wood contains.
this reaction does not seem to be given by pyrogallol
or by common phenol. catechol gives a red coloration with
citric acid, and after standing, ceases to react with iron.
decomposition of tannins by dilute acids.—it has been
stated that tannins when heated with dilute sulphuric or
hydrochloric acids are decomposed, yielding frequently
glucose, and either gallic or ellagic acids, or red anhydrides.
to determine whether glucose is produced, the tannin must
first be carefully purified from glucose, gums, or other bodies
likely to interfere, by the methods mentioned on p. .
either the tannin itself or its washed lead-salt may be used,
and must be heated to ° f. (° c.) for some hours in a
sealed tube, or tightly closed bottle with dilute hydrochloric
acid. after cooling, the mixture must be allowed to stand
for some time to separate any sparingly soluble products,
which must be filtered off. the filtrate must be shaken
with ether and acetic ether to remove gallic acid (p. ), the
aqueous solution must be boiled, neutralised with soda,
precipitated with basic lead acetate to remove any traces of
tannin or colouring matters, the liquid again filtered, and
excess of lead removed with dilute sulphuric acid, the mixture
again neutralised with soda, and heated to boiling with
fehling's copper-solution, when a yellow or red precipitate
of cuprous oxide will prove the formation of glucose. the
precipitate produced by cooling may consist (of lead chloride,
if the lead salt has been used,) of ellagic acid, or of red
anhydrides or phlobaphenes of the tannin. the lead chloride
may be removed by washing with boiling water. if the
remaining precipitate has a pale yellow or fawn colour it
probably consists of ellagic acid (see p. ), soluble in
ammonia and hot alcohol and dissolving freely in strong
nitric acid, forming an intense crimson liquid.
the ethereous layer will contain the gallic acid, if any has
been formed, and must be evaporated to dryness, and the
residue taken up with cold water, and filtered. addition of
a few drops of solution of potassium cyanide will produce a
fine red coloration if gallic acid be present, which rapidly
fades, but is restored by shaking. a solution of picric acid,
to which excess of ammonia has been added, gives a red
coloration rapidly changing to a fine green, even in very
dilute solutions of gallic acid.
it is not, however, generally necessary to resort to so
elaborate a process merely to distinguish the class to which
tannins belong. the tannin, or its infusion, may be simply
boiled with dilute hydrochloric acid for some time, replacing
the acid lost by evaporation. the solution is diluted to
 c.c. and allowed to cool. ellagic acid and phlobaphenes
may separate, and must be filtered off. if the precipitate is
pale, it is probably ellagic acid, and maybe recognised by the
nitric acid test. if red, it probably consists of phlobaphenes,
and may be treated with cold alcohol, in which phlobaphenes
are freely soluble, but ellagic acid very little. the ellagic
acid will therefore be left on the filter if present in any quantity,
while the alcoholic solution may be precipitated by the
addition of water, and the phlobaphenes further examined by
treatment with potash.
gallic acid.—dioxysalicylic acid, ch(oh)co.oh, exists
ready formed in some plants, and is a product of the fermentation
of gallotannic acid under the influence of the nitrogenous
ferment, pectase, or of its decomposition by boiling
with acids or alkalies. it crystallises in white, or yellowish
white needles, containing  mol. (· per cent.) of water,
which it loses at ° f. (° c.). it is soluble in  parts
of cold or  of boiling water, in alcohol or glycerin, and
slightly so in ether, by agitation with which it may however
be removed from its aqueous solution. gallic acid fuses at a
temperature of about ° f. (° c.) (etti, chem. soc.
jour., xxxvi. ), but at about ° f. (° c.) begins to
lose carbonic dioxide, and yields a crystalline sublimate of
pyrogallol (see p. ). if the heat be raised suddenly to
° f. (° c.) a considerable quantity of black shining
metagallic acid is formed.
aqueous solution of gallic acid gives the following reactions:—solution
of ferric chloride gives a deep blue coloration
which is destroyed by boiling. ferrous sulphate, if free
from ferric salt, gives no reaction in dilute solutions, but a
white precipitate in strong ones. the mixture rapidly
darkens by oxidation. in alkaline solution gallic acid absorbs
oxygen from the air and darkens from the formation of
tannomelanic acid. lime-water produces a white precipitate
which rapidly becomes blue from oxidation. the same reaction
is produced by baryta-water, or by the chlorides of
barium or calcium on addition of ammonia (distinction from
pyrogallol). it is distinguished from gallotannic acid by
the following:—it does not precipitate gelatin, except in
the presence of gum. it does not precipitate tartar emetic
in presence of ammonic chloride, though both tannin and
gallic acid are precipitated by tartar emetic alone. it precipitates
lead acetate but not lead nitrate, while tannin
precipitates both. a dilute solution of potassium cyanide
gives a red coloration which disappears on standing, but is
restored by shaking with air. if to even a very dilute
solution of gallic acid, sodic arsenate, or some other faintly
alkaline salts be added, the mixture absorbs oxygen and
becomes a deep green. aqueous solution of picric acid to
which excess of ammonia has previously been added gives a
red coloration, changing to green. tannic and pyrogallic
acid produce no reaction with cyanide, and with ammonic
picrate a reddish coloration only. gallic acid reduces silver
nitrate and gold chloride rapidly when hot, but not fehling's
solution, and decolorises acidified potassic permanganate.
if tannin and other oxidisable bodies be removed from its
solution it may be estimated quantitatively by titration with
permanganate in presence of indigo (see p. ). it may
be separated from tannin by gelatin or hide raspings (see
pp. , ). gallotannic and quercitannic acids may also be
removed by precipitation with ammoniacal solution of cupric
sulphate, or by cupric acetate, in presence of excess of
ammonic carbonate (see also p. ). many other tannins,
however, give precipitates with cupric salts which are
soluble in ammonia and ammonic carbonate. in absence of
such tannins it may be estimated gravimetrically by precipitation
with cupric acetate. the precipitate is rapidly washed
with water and digested with a solution of ammonic carbonate,
in which it dissolves; any insoluble cupric tannate
is filtered off, the solution is evaporated to dryness and the
residue moistened with nitric acid and ignited. the weight
of the remaining cupric oxide multiplied by · gives the
weight of the gallic acid plus a little tannin dissolved by the
ammonic solution.
gallic acid may also be separated from tannin by lead
acetate strongly acidified with acetic acid, by which tannic
acid is precipitated, while lead gallate is dissolved.
ellagic acid cho, when pure, is a sulphur-yellow
crystalline body almost insoluble even in boiling water, and
only slightly so in alcohol and ether, though by agitation
with the latter, small quantities may be completely removed
from aqueous solution. in hot alcohol it dissolves with a
yellow colour, and crystallises on cooling. solid ellagic acid
gives with ferric chloride at first a greenish, and then a black
coloration. in strong nitric acid it is soluble with a deep
crimson coloration: that from divi-divi gives a crimson
liquid on dilution with water, but from other sources it is
rather orange.
ellagic acid may be obtained in considerable quantity by
pouring a concentrated alcoholic extract of divi-divi into
water, when it separates and may be filtered off and recrystallised
from hot alcohol. it may also be obtained by
boiling the aqueous extracts of divi, myrabolans, pomegranate
rind, &c., with dilute hydrochloric acid, and purified by
the same means. it may be prepared from gallic acid by
heating the latter with dry arsenic acid to ° f. (° c.),
but is difficult to purify from traces of arsenic. ellagic acid
has not been reconverted into gallic acid. its constitutional
formula is, according to schiff,
differing from gallotannic acid only by the loss of two atoms
of hydrogen.
air-dried ellagic acid, cho + oh, contains  mol. of
water, which it loses at ° f. (° c.) but reabsorbs in
moist air. when heated to °-° f. (°-° c.) it
forms an anhydride, cho, losing another molecule of
water, which it does not recover from moist air, but is slowly
reconverted to ellagic acid by boiling with water.
the phlobaphenes or reds are chemically the anhydrides of
the different tannic acids from which they are derived, or in
other words they are formed from the tannins by the loss of
one or more molecules of water. it is in this way that they
are produced by the action of acids, and similarly they are
often formed when alcoholic or highly concentrated aqueous
extracts are poured into cold water, under which circumstances
a part of the tannin seems unable to take up water
again, and separates as a red precipitate. they exist ready
formed in most tanning materials capable of producing them.
they are soluble in alcohol, by which they may be extracted
from tanning materials or dried residues containing them.
they are also dissolved by dilute alkalies and alkaline carbonates,
and by borax, which is said to be used in the preparation
of some extracts, and was suggested by sadlon as a
means of making phlobaphenes available for tanning. many
of them are scarcely soluble in water even at a boiling temperature,
though they become more so in presence of sugar,
tannic acid, and some other substances. their solubility in
water depends on their degree of hydration, many tannins
giving a series of anhydrides of which those containing only
one molecule of water less than the original tannin are quite
soluble in water, while the higher members of the series
become less and less soluble as they lose water. those
which are soluble form the colouring matters of tanning
materials, and generally are practically tannins, precipitating
gelatin and combining with hide to form leather. hemlock
bark yields a series of such bodies, of which the lower members
are deep red soluble tannins, while the higher form the
red sediment, so well known to extract-tanners. thus it is
chemically impossible to decolorise hemlock extract without
at the same time greatly lessening its tanning power, though
by careful manufacturing and concentration at low temperature,
the proportion of the higher anhydrides formed may
be kept at a minimum. in many cases it is known, as in
gambier, and in others it is probable that the tannin itself is
merely the first anhydride of the series, and derived from a
catechin which itself is a white crystalline body destitute of
tanning properties (see p. ).
decomposition of the phlobaphenes by fusion with caustic
alkalies.—it has been mentioned (p. ) that the reds of
different tannins yielded, in addition to protocatechuic acid,
either phloroglucol, or acetic acid, or some other member of
the fatty acid series. some tannins, as those of alder and
hop, give both phloroglucol and acetic acid, but it is very
possible that this arises from the presence of two distinct
tannins in these materials. it is stated that all those tannins
which yield acetic acid on fusion with potash, also yield
considerable quantities of glucose to dilute acids, while the
phloroglucide tannins do not do so. gallic acid fused with
caustic soda has been found by barth and schroeder to produce
a small quantity of phloroglucol, and it is similarly
formed by resorcinol and common phenol (chem. soc. jour.,
xliv. ). it is therefore possible that in some cases where
phloroglucol is detected, it may have been formed by the
action of the alkali, and not have been originally a constituent
of the tannin.
the following is the best method in which to proceed to
investigate the products of the action of potash.  grm. of
the red, or of the tannin from which it is derived, or its lead
salt, is boiled with  c.c. of solution of caustic potash of
· sp. gr. for  hours, and the liquid is then concentrated
with constant stirring till it becomes pasty. it is then
cooled and treated with a volume of dilute sulphuric acid
slightly more than enough to neutralise the alkali employed.
after cooling it is filtered from potassium sulphate and other
solid matters, and the filtrate treated with sodium bicarbonate
till its wine-red reaction with litmus shows that the sulphuric
acid is neutralised. the liquid is then shaken with
an equal measure of ether, the ethereous layer drawn off and
the treatment repeated several times. on distilling off the
ether, phloroglucol is left and may be purified by solution in
water, when protocatechuic acid and other products may be
precipitated by neutral lead acetate, and filtered off, and the
phloroglucol again extracted with ether, and recognised by
its reaction with ferric chloride and bromine water, and by
its sweet taste.
phloroglucol.—phloroglucin cho is a phenol isomeric
with pyrogallol. it crystallises with  molecules of water,
which it loses at ° f. (° c.). it melts at about ° f.
(° c.), sublimes without odour, and solidifies again on
cooling. it is soluble in water, alcohol, and ether, and by
agitation with the latter it may be removed from its aqueous
solution. it is not precipitated by any metallic salt but basic
lead acetate. it is coloured deep violet red by ferric chloride.
if bromine be added to its concentrated solution in water, it
absorbs  atoms, forming tribromophloroglucol, chbro,
which separates in crystalline needles, with evolution of heat
and a very irritating odour. if a deal shaving be moistened
with solution of phloroglucol, and then with strong hydrochloric
acid, it soon takes a deep violet colour, from the
formation of phloroglucol-vanillin with the trace of vanillin
contained in all coniferous woods. pyrocatechol gives a
similar reaction, and it is stated by etti (chem. soc. jour.,
xliv. ) that pyrogallol forms a similar compound; it does not,
however, give the colour reaction on deal. it is extremely
probable that this reaction may be used to detect phloroglucide
tannins without the troublesome fusion with potash, in cases
where pyrocatechol is absent. the reaction is strongly given
by gambier, which is known to contain phloroglucol, but
not by oak bark and valonia, though these contain protocatechuic
acid. if to a dilute solution of phloroglucol a solution
of aniline or toluidine nitrate be added, and then a trace
of potassic nitrite, the liquid gradually becomes yellow or
orange, then turbid, and finally deposits a cinnabar-red
precipitate. this reaction is given by gambier, but is
also produced by oak bark infusion, which is not supposed to
contain phloroglucol; and gall tannin, pyrogallol, and other
substances give similar but browner precipitates.
protocatechuic acid.—ch(oh)co.oh, one of the six
isomeric dihydroxybenzoic acids of this formula (see miller,
chem. soc. jour., xli. ), crystallises in needles and plates
with  mol. water, which it loses at ° f. (° c.). it melts
at ° f. (° c.) and on further heating is decomposed
into pyrocatechol and carbonic acid. it is somewhat soluble
in cold water, and readily so in hot water, alcohol, and ether.
it is coloured bluish green by ferric chloride, which is
changed to red by alkalies. solutions of protocatechuates give
a violet coloration with ferric salts. it is precipitated by
lead acetate, and reduces silver ammonio-nitrate, but not
fehling's solution (see also p. ).
constitution of tannins.
having described the products of decomposition, something
must be said of the way in which these constituents are combined
to form the unaltered tannins. the only tannin of
which we have as yet anything approaching complete knowledge
is that obtained from galls, sumach, and myrabolans,
and which is thence called gallotannic acid.
gallotannic, or digallic acid exists as the principal tannic
acid of the galls of oak, tamarisk, &c.; and, in mixture with
more or less ellagitannic acid, in myrabolans, divi-divi,
sumach, pomegranate rind, and many other plant-products.
it has also been formed by schiff from gallic acid, by mixing
it, after drying at ° f. (° c.), with phosphorus oxychloride
to a thin paste, and heating, first to ° f. (° c.)
and then to ° f. (° c ). much hydrochloric acid was
evolved, and the gallic acid was converted into a yellow
powder, which after purification by washing with ether,
dissolving in water, allowing the gallic acid to crystallise
out, saturating with salt, washing the precipitated tannin in
salt solution, and redissolving in alcohol and ether, had all
the reactions of purified gall tannin, but was perfectly
reconverted into gallic acid on boiling with hydrochloric
acid, without the formation of any trace of ellagic acid, or
glucose. by analysis of the tannin and its acetyl compounds
it was shown to be digallic acid, and its constitutional formula
is almost certainly as follows:—
by boiling gallic acid with solution of arsenic acid, schiff
obtained a product which precipitated gelatin, and otherwise
reacted like tannin, and he regards this as digallic acid, but
other experimenters have failed to obtain digallic acid by this
means, and have found that on complete removal of arsenic,
the compound was reconverted to gallic acid. it therefore
remains a moot point whether digallic acid is really formed,
and reconverted into gallic acid by the prolonged action of
hydric sulphide, which is necessary to remove the arsenic, or
whether, as seems more probable, the supposed tannin is
merely an arsenical compound of gallic acid.
gallotannic acid as obtained from plants invariably yields
traces of glucose, as well as of ellagic acid, when boiled with
dilute acids. it is still an open question whether the
glucose exists in the plant as a glucoside of tannic acid or is
always the product of some impurity (as is shown by etti to
be the case with oak bark, where lævulin is always present).
it seems most probable however that natural gallotannic
acid is really a glucoside of digallic acid, or possibly, according
to the theory of hlasiwetz, a gummide, or compound of
dextrin, which, by the action of acids, is easily converted
into glucose. what has been said of gallotannic acid in this
respect, applies to many other tannins, which like it give
glucose by treatment with acids.
gallotannic acid is met with, in commerce, in the form of
light buff-coloured scales, with a faint peculiar odour and a
powerfully astringent taste. it is soluble in  parts of
cold water or glycerin, and very readily in hot. it is also
very soluble in alcohol containing water, but much less so in
absolute. it is moderately soluble in washed, but scarcely
at all in anhydrous ether, chloroform, benzene, or petroleum
spirit.
the commercial acid usually contains more or less of gallic
acid, which may be detected by dissolving in water, shaking
with ether, and after decanting and evaporating the ether,
applying the tests described under gallic acid (p. ). it
may also be frequently distinguished in the simple aqueous
solution of the tannic acid by the tests given. its quantity
may be determined (in the absence of other impurities) by
the löwenthal method (p. ), the gallic acid forming the
"not-tannin," by comparison with a solution of pure gallic
acid.
commercial tannic acid is sometimes adulterated with
starch, which is left undissolved on treating the sample with
ordinary alcohol.
for the estimation of gallotannic acid see pp.  et seq.
for its principal reactions, table, p. .
ellagitannic acid, cho, is contained in divi-divi, myrabolans,
and as a glucoside in pomegranate rind. when boiled
with dilute acids, or treated with water at ° f. (° c.)
in a sealed tube, it yields its anhydride, ellagic acid (see
p. ), cho. in its reactions ellagitannic acid closely
resembles gallotannic acid.
quercitannic acid. oak-bark tannin.—this tannin may be
prepared from oak bark by agitating an alcoholic extract
with ethyl acetate, and separating and evaporating the
ethereous layer. it is still contaminated with a brownish-green
terpene resin, and with some of the higher anhydrides
of the tannin. the resin may be removed by treating the
dried extract with ether or benzene, in which it is readily
soluble; and the phlobaphenes, or higher anhydrides, by dissolving
the tannin in ether-alcohol, or probably to a great
extent, by simple solution in cold water in which the phlobaphenes
are scarcely soluble.
it may also be prepared by evaporating the alcoholic extract,
and extracting with water, which leaves the phlobaphenes, or
higher anhydrides undissolved. the first anhydride, which
is partially soluble, may be precipitated by the addition of
salt, and the quercitannic acid extracted by shaking the
filtered solution with acetic ether. in very dilute alcohol
it yields a pure yellow precipitate with lead acetate. in
aqueous solution the precipitate is light-brown. it gives a
blue-black with ferric salts. when pure, quercitannic acid
yields nothing to pure ether or to benzene.
if quercitannic acid be heated to °-° f. (°-° c.)
it loses water, and yields a red anhydride slightly soluble in
water, which constitutes the red colouring matter of oak
bark, and which has also been called "difficultly soluble
tannin." it precipitates gelatin and is one of the class
which eitner well designates "tanning colouring matters."
it gives a brownish red with lead acetate, and a blue-black
with ferric salts; it is difficultly soluble in water and ether,
but readily so in alcohol of all strengths. together with
other anhydrides, it exists naturally formed in the bark. at
higher temperatures, or by boiling with acids, a series of
higher anhydrides may be obtained which are quite insoluble
in water, but are soluble in alcohol and caustic alkalies. no
glucose is produced by treatment of pure quercitannic acid
with acids, that formed by so treating oak-bark extract being
due to the alteration of the lævulose present. if oak-reds
are fused with potash they yield, according to johansen
(chem. soc. jour., xxxii. ), protocatechuic and butyric
acids. if heated in sealed tubes with dilute hydrochloric
acid, gallic acid only is formed, with evolution of methyl
chloride. the constitutional formula of quercitannic acid is
as yet very uncertain: it is probably a methyl derivative of
digallic acid. its formula is variously given as cho
(etti, chem. soc. jour., xliv. ), cho (ibid. xl. ,
löwe), cho (böttinger, berichte, xvi. ). for further
details the original memoirs must be consulted.
for the reactions of oak-bark and valonia infusions the
table, p. , may be consulted.
before describing the catechol-tannins it will be necessary
to speak of a group of compounds of which it is probable
that these tannins are decomposition products. these are
the catechins. it is as yet by no means certain how far they
should be considered a group, some chemists holding the
opinion that there is only one catechin, of which the rest are
merely impure preparations.
catechin is a white crystalline substance, contained to the
extent of some  per cent. in cube gambier, and in smaller
proportion in block gambier and cutch, and very probably in
all tanning materials yielding catechol-tannins. it melts at
/° f. (° c.) and yields a sublimate of catechol on
further heating. it is readily soluble in alcohol and in
boiling water, but requires  parts of cold water for its
solution. hence it separates on cooling from a hot solution
of gambier, and may be purified by redissolving in hot
water and treatment with animal charcoal, and subsequent
crystallisation. it may also be extracted from its aqueous
solution by agitation with ether. it possesses no acid
properties, though some writers have incorrectly called it
catechuic acid. the aqueous solution gives precipitates with
lead acetate and mercuric chloride, and reduces ammonia-nitrate
of silver; but, unlike tannins, it does not precipitate
gelatin, alkaloids, or tartar emetic. it is oxidised by permanganate
in presence of free acid, and hence, when in solution,
is estimated by the löwenthal method as "not tannin." it
dissolves in concentrated sulphuric acid with a deep purple
coloration. by fusion with caustic alkalies it yields protocatechuic
acid and phloroglucol together with hydrogen. its
constitution is very uncertain, but it is probable that the
phloroglucol stands in a somewhat similar relation to the
protocatechuic acid that glycerin does to the fatty acids in
natural fats; and that its decomposition by fused alkalies is
a process much akin to saponification. this constitution is
represented by the following formula:—
cho or cho
when acted on by heat and dilute acids the following
anhydrides are produced—the formulæ given must be taken
as to some extent provisional.
catechin cho
not acid; does not precipitate gelatin.
catechutannic acid
acid, precipitate gelatin.
dianydride
trianydride
insoluble in water.
catechuretin
soluble in alcohol and alkalies.
the white deposit which occurs on pit sides and in the
interior of leather where gambier is largely used, and which
is sometimes called "the whites," consists of catechin. it
may be decomposed by warm sulphuric acid. this deposit
is favoured by the use of hot gambier liquors. it is probable
that by exposure to the air and by boiling, catechin is
gradually converted into catechutannic acid during the
tanning process, and hence the practical tanning value of
cube gambier is probably greater than analysis indicates.
hunt has, however, shown (jour. soc. chem. ind., iv. )
that, as estimated by the löwenthal process, the tannin is to
some extent lessened by boiling.
kinoin, cho (etti, berl. ber., xi. ), obtained from
green or malabar kino, a product very similar to cutch,
by boiling with dilute hydrochloric acid and extraction by
agitation with ether, is very similar in its properties to
catechin. it does not itself precipitate gelatin, but like
catechin, yields a series of anhydrides or reds, which do so.
on dry distillation it yields catechol and common phenol;
and when heated with hydrochloric acid at °-° f.
(°-° c.) methyl chloride, catechol and gallic acid.
hence its constitution is probably that of methyl-catechol
gallate.
quebracho-catechin was found by p. n. arata (chem. soc.
jour., xl. ) in the wood of quebracho colorado (p. ),
but in too small quantity for detailed investigation. it
probably bears a similar relation to quebrachitannic acid
that ordinary catechin does to catechutannic acid. it is
insoluble in cold and only slightly soluble in hot water, but
very soluble in alcohol and ether. its solution is clouded by
normal lead acetate, and gives rose-coloured precipitates with
basic lead acetate and mercurous nitrate, and blackish with
ferric acetate; it reduces silver-nitrate and gold chloride, and
is coloured yellow by nitric acid, red by sulphuric acid,
yellowish by sodium hypochlorite, and green by fehling's
solution. it does not precipitate gelatin, or alkaloids.
catechutannic acid has been pretty fully described under
catechin, of which it is the first anhydride (p. ). it is
possibly identical with mimo-tannic acid, the tannin of cutch
and mimosa bark, which is chemically very similar, but
greatly differs in its practical effect in tanning. for some
further reactions of cutch and gambier infusions see p. .
it gives a greyish-green precipitate with ferric salts, and
(distinction from gallotannic acid) precipitates cupric sulphate
but not tartar emetic.
quebrachitannic acid is got from the wood of the quebracho
colorado, quebrachia lorentzii (formerly loxopterygium) which
must not be confounded with the bark of the aspidospermum
quebrachia, which is valuable, not for its tannin, but for an
alkaloid, aspidospermin, which is used for medical purposes.
it has been pretty thoroughly investigated by p. n. arata
(chem. soc. jour., xxxiv.  and xl. ). it seems, however,
a little doubtful to the writer whether the substance
investigated by arata was not the anhydride of the tannin,
rather than the tannin itself, as it presents many points of
analogy to catechu-red and was less soluble in water than
quebracho tannin appears in practice to be.
according to arata, quebrachitannic acid is a pale red
amorphous mass, having an astringent taste and yielding a
light cinnamon coloured powder. it is insoluble in carbon-bisulphide,
turpentine oil, and benzene. its aqueous solution
gives a white precipitate with both normal and basic lead
acetate, which when heated, acquires first a rose, and then a
chocolate colour; with ferric chloride a green liquid is
produced, which changes after a time to red and becomes
black on addition of sodium acetate. it forms white precipitates
with gelatin, albumen, and alkaloids. by dry
distillation it yields catechol. by fusion with potash or the
action of sulphuric acid, phloroglucol and protocatechuic
acid, while nitric acid converts it into oxalic and picric acids.
while it shows great similarity in its reactions to catechutannic
acid, it differs materially in percentage composition,
containing only · as compared with · per cent. of
carbon.
water, as obtained from rivers, wells, or water companies,
contains a variety of impurities which affect its use in
tanning, but of which in most cases the precise influence
is very imperfectly known. these may be classified into
() merely suspended matters, such as clay and mud, and
sometimes animal or vegetable organisms such as infusoria;
() dissolved mineral matters, which consist mostly of lime
and magnesia salts and which make the water hard; () and
organic dissolved impurities, such as the brown colour of
peat water and the putrefying animal matters of sewage
contamination.
mud is always objectionable. it frequently contains
organic slime and organisms which encourage the putrefaction
of hides put in it to wash or soften. it also almost
invariably contains iron as one of its constituents, and hence
stains leather, and gives bad coloured liquors. it is not
easily got rid of by filtration, as large filter-beds are expensive
and difficult to keep in order, and much space is
required to clear water by subsidence. some filter easily
cleaned offers the best chance of success. the pulsometer
company supply such a filter, consisting of sponge tightly
packed below a perforated piston. to cleanse the filter a
stream of water is passed the reverse way, and the piston
raised, and worked up and down, either by hand or power,
so as to loosen and knead the sponge. the atkins "water
scrubber," in which sand may be used as a filtering medium,
seems also well adapted for the purpose. if lime be precipitated
by clark's, or other process, it usually carries down
the mud with it.
rain water and the water of streams in mountain districts
of hard igneous rock are generally nearly free from mineral
constituents. this is the case with the glasgow water
from loch katrine, and the thirlmere water which is to
supply manchester. such water, if cold enough, and free
from mud and organic impurity, is the best for almost every
purpose in tanning. most river water, however, and all
spring water, is contaminated with mineral matter which it
has dissolved out of the soil and rocks through which it has
flowed. the principal of these mineral constituents are lime
and magnesia. these occur both as sulphates and chlorides,
and as hydric carbonates, or "bicarbonates." the sulphates
and chlorides constitute "permanent" hardness, while that
due to bicarbonates is called "temporary," from the fact that
on boiling, half the carbonic acid is driven off, and the lime or
magnesia is deposited as an insoluble neutral carbonate, thus
softening the water. any water which can be softened in this
way by boiling may also be softened by the addition of a
suitable quantity of lime, thus:—
calcic hydriccarbonate.
lime.
chalk.
water.
(co)cah
ca.(oh)
caco
this is clark's process, and the chalk may either be separated
by subsidence, which quickly takes place, or by a special
filter (porter-clark). thus the bristol water, which from
determinations by mr. w. n. evans, contains considerable
temporary hardness and but little of permanent, may be
almost completely softened by clark's method. (for method
of determining hardness and quantity of lime required, see
p. ).
the lime and magnesia constituting permanent hardness
may be removed by the addition of sodic carbonate (soda ash
or crystals); but this is expensive on a large scale, and as an
equivalent quantity of sodic sulphate or chloride is left in
the water, it is for most purposes of questionable advantage,
though in some cases useful for the feed water of boilers.
when employed for this purpose, the water should if possible
be softened and settled before using, instead of adding the
soda in the boiler itself, as is generally done. soda is
the active ingredient of many boiler compositions. for
preventing furring, most tanning materials or even waste
tan-liquors are very effective, and the danger of any corrosive
action is lessened by the addition of a portion of soda ash.
so far as is yet known, from the tanning point of view, it is
hardly necessary to make any distinction between lime and
magnesia, which may be considered simply as "hardness."
a hard water probably softens dried hides more slowly,
though it is possible that the observed difference may be due
in many cases to the lower temperature of wells from which
hard water is generally derived. in the actual limes, the
hardness of the water can have no appreciable influence,
though if sodium sulphide be used alone, a certain waste
occurs from temporary hardness, which may render it
advisable to add a little lime. it is in the washing of the
hides from lime that the influence is first distinctly felt. if
limey goods, after unhairing, are placed in a water with
much temporary hardness, the same action occurs as in
clark's water softening process, and chalk is deposited in
the surface of the hides, making them harsh and apt to
"frize" or roughen the grain in scudding, and causing bad
colour by combining with the organic acids of the liquors.
the common, but not wholly satisfactory, expedient is to
add a little lime, or better, a few pailfuls of lime liquor to
the water before putting in the hides. the best plan is to
use a properly softened water. permanent hardness is not
injurious in this way.
the hardness of water, and the dissolved carbonic acid
which it contains, are, together with its temperature, the
principal factors which determine whether a hide will plump
or fall in it. almost the only accurate investigation of this
point has been made by w. eitner ('der gerber,' iii. ).
he placed pieces of hide, unhaired by sweating, and quite flat
and fallen, in water for  days at a temperature of ° f.
(° c.), with the following results:—
in distilled water
scarcely at all plumped.
"water saturated with co
well plumped.
""with lime bicarbonate, ° german
scale of hardness
tolerably plump.
"""magnesia bicarbonate,° do.
do.do.
"" "lime sulphate,° do.
well plumped.
"" "magnesia sulphate,° do.
best plumped.
"""magnesium chloride,° do.
not at all plumped.
" " "common salt,° do.
do.do.
( german degree of hardness corresponds to  of lime in ,.)
the peculiarities which were shown by the hide pieces on
removal from the water were maintained throughout the
tanning, which was conducted in imitation of the german
method, the hide being swollen and coloured through in
weak birch-bark liquors, made with distilled water and
acidified in each case with equal quantities of lactic acid, and
finally laid away till tanned in a mixture of oak bark and
valonia. no. , from magnesia sulphate, was the best; then
no. ; no.  was less good, but all the pieces from  to  were
firm, close, and of good substance and texture, no.  having
swelled well in the sour liquor. on the other hand,  and 
scarcely swelled in liquor, but remained flat throughout, and
were looser, thinner, and of finer fibre. from this experiment
it is clear that while sulphates and carbonates exert a
favourable influence on plumping, chlorides do the reverse,
not only not plumping themselves, but placing the hides in
an unfavourable condition for the plumping action of acids
in the liquors. these experiments are quite borne out by the
writer's experience in practice. the water at the lowlights
tannery, which in dry weather is mostly obtained from beds
of what was originally sea-sand, and which consequently
contains a very abnormal proportion of chlorides (up to 
pts. nacl per ,), requires special and very careful
management to make thick leather, notwithstanding its
containing a considerable quantity of calcium and magnesium
sulphates. these facts also indicate the importance of the
thorough removal of salt from hides intended for sole-leather.
plumping is not a desirable thing in leather intended for
dressing purposes, and it is possible that the use of a small
percentage of salt in the liquors or wash waters might enable
bating to be dispensed with. like a bate, salt would
dissolve a small proportion of hide substance (see p. ).
there is no practicable means of removing chlorides from
water, but eitner suggests the addition of a small quantity
of sulphuric acid to water containing much temporary
hardness (bicarbonates), by which it is converted into
permanent (sulphates), which, as we have seen, plumps
better. for this purpose about · oz. of ordinary english
vitriol (sp. gr. ·) per  cub. ft. of water is required for
each part of lime ca(oh) per , (see p.  for testing
of water). a simpler guide is to add enough to purple, but
not to redden litmus paper, even after moving it about in the
water for some minutes. the acid must of course be well
mixed by plunging. it must be borne in mind that eitner's
experiment was on sweated hides, and that with limed hide,
which is kept plump by the dissolved lime retained in
the hide, the conditions are different, and different results as
regards carbonic acid and bicarbonates would probably be
obtained. both these would convert the lime in the hide
into chalk, which is both insoluble and inert, and the hide
would probably fall, at any rate till the lime was completely
carbonated, while hides would remain plumpest in waters
most free from substances capable of neutralising lime. one
of the waters most effective in plumping limed hides is that
of the river at lincoln. its hardness and contents in chlorine
is, as compared with lowlights water in dry weather,
per ,.
lincoln,
permanent hardness
temporary
chlorine
· pt.
lowlights,
both waters have a considerable quantity of organic
matter, and both owe their hardness in part to magnesia.
from this we might conclude, what may be à priori expected,
that the softer the water, the plumper limed hides remain
in it. i am informed, however, by mr. s. l. evans, that in
the dartmoor water, which is very soft, but peaty, hides
fall rapidly. in this case the colouring matters of the
peat, which are of the nature of very weak acids, probably
neutralise the lime. it may also be remarked, that wherever
the conditions of putrefaction or decaying organic matter is
present, hides rapidly fall, for the same reasons as they do
in a bate.
while the injurious effect of bicarbonates on limed hide
is matter of common experience, their influence on liquors
and tanning is not so well understood. it is certain that
they neutralise and combine with the organic acids of the
liquors, and probably with some species of tannin, and as
 part per , amounts to  oz. per  cub. ft., the acid
required to neutralise a very hard water amounts to something
considerable. it is well known that hard waters make
bad tea, and the influence of hardness on the extraction of
tannin is a subject well worthy of investigation, and which
the writer hopes to examine.
on dyeing, at least as regards dye-woods, the influence of
bicarbonates is distinctly favourable, and this is also stated
to be true of woad, cochineal, and indigo-carmine.
beside lime and magnesia salts, water may contain sulphates
and chlorides of soda and potash; but not carbonates
of these bases in presence of permanent hardness. in soft
waters carbonates are sometimes present, and form carbonate
of lime in limed hides. hides are said to soften rapidly in
such water. alkaline sulphates are not known to have any
injurious action, and chlorides have already been spoken of.
iron may be present in solution as bicarbonate, but not in any
other form in presence of bicarbonate of lime. it is removed
completely with the temporary hardness by clark's process,
or boiling. iron is much more common merely in suspension,
as mud, but is always objectionable. most waters contain
a little silicic acid and alumina, and some few considerable
quantities. such waters are said to harden leather, but the
writer knows of no case where they are in use in england;
and their occurrence is comparatively rare.
for comparison, analyses of a few spring and river waters
are given on p. .
analyses of various waters.
thames, at kew.
thames, at london bridge.
severn, wales.
thirlmere.
rhine, basle.
spring, witley, surrey.
spring, watford, herts.
artesian, well trafalgar square.
ripley's, well holbeck, yorks.
well, council acad., vienna.
river witham, lincoln.
beamhouse well, lowlights.
total solids
ca
mg
na
trace
cl
sio
temporary hardness
permanent hardness
it is assumed that the reader has an elementary knowledge
of chemistry, and of the common manipulations of the
laboratory; but at the risk of giving information which to
many is already familiar, the principles that underlie those
methods of testing which are most applicable to technical
purposes must be briefly explained.
standard solutions.—if  grm. of pure caustic soda
(naho) be dissolved in water, and a little tincture of
litmus added, it will be coloured a bright blue. if hydrochloric
acid be now added, drop by drop, the litmus will
at last become purple, and a single drop more would turn
it a bright red. at this point the liquid is neither acid
nor alkaline, and if it be evaporated to dryness, nothing
will be left but · grm. of common salt (nacl), while
 grm. of water will be formed and have escaped. we have
therefore used exactly · grm. of pure hcl, and if we
dissolve  grm. of caustic soda in  litre of water, and
· grm. of pure hcl in another, equal parts of these liquids
will always exactly neutralise each other, forming nothing
but common salt and water. it will be obvious that if we
have a soda solution of the strength named, we can find the
amount of hydrochloric acid in any solution of unknown
strength, by seeing how much of it is required to neutralise,
say,  c.c. (= · grm. soda) of the known solution. instead
of  grm. of caustic soda, we may take  grm. of potash to
the litre, and it will exactly neutralise an equal volume of
the hydrochloric solution containing · grm. if, again,
we make a solution containing  grm. of pure sulphuric
acid (soh) per litre, it will neutralise an exactly equal
volume of either the soda or the potash solution, thus being
precisely equivalent to the hcl solution. such solutions are
called normal, and any normal acid solution will neutralise
an equal volume of any normal alkali, and vice versâ. for
many purposes normal solutions are too strong, and solutions
containing / of the quantities required for normal solution
are preferable; such solutions are called decinormal. all solutions
containing known quantities of chemicals, and intended
for use in volumetric analysis, are called standard solutions.
indicators.—the tincture of litmus used to show when the
solution is exactly neutral is called an indicator, and many
materials are used in a similar way in different analytical
processes. thus the indigo solution in löwenthal's process
is an indicator. a more useful indicator than litmus for
tannery purposes is dr. lunge's "methyl orange," which
is indifferent to carbonic acid, and may therefore be used in
the cold with solutions of alkaline carbonates; which are
much more easily made and preserved than those of the
caustic alkalies necessary with litmus. it is very sensitive
to mineral acids, but not equally so to organic. it may be
obtained of messrs. mawson and swan, of newcastle; and
as a minute quantity only must be used for each test, it is
really cheaper than litmus, and a few grm. will last a lifetime.
it must be dissolved in water, and not
more than  or  drops taken for each titration.
(titration signifies an estimation by means of a
standard solution.) other indicators will be
named in connection with the analytical methods
in which they are used.
fig. .
instruments.—to practically carry out analysis
by standard solutions, measuring glasses are required.
one or more flasks marked in the neck
to hold exact quantities (fig. ), one at least,
holding  litre, are indispensable. one or two graduated
cylinders (fig. ), holding  c.c., and divided into
tenths of c.c., are very useful, and it is well also to have
one holding a litre, and provided with a stopper (fig. ).
this is called a "test mixer," but is not absolutely essential.
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
pipettes (fig. ) are tubes with a
mark on the stem by which exact quantities
of liquid can be taken. several
holding , , , and  c.c. are necessary,
and one holding  c.c. and divided
into tenths is advisable. most important
of all is the burette (fig. ). if
only one is to be had, it must be a
mohr's burette with a glass tap, but as alkaline solutions are
apt to set glass taps fast, it is well to have one with a tap, and
another with a pinchcock (fig. ). they should hold  or
 c.c. and be divided into tenths. the burette in use is
fixed in a stand (fig. ) and filled up to the top of the
graduation, and the quantity of solution delivered is then
shown by the scale. it is usual to read by the under side
of the hollow of the liquid, keeping the eye carefully level
with it.
fig. .
a chemical balance suitable for the preparation of standard
solutions and general analytical use, is shown in fig. .
the beam is provided with steel or rock-crystal knife-edges
at the centre, which are supported on agate planes, and
similar edges a support the pans. except at the moment of
weighing, the beam, and in good balances the pans also
(at b), are steadied by supports raised by turning the milled
head c. the long pointer d moving over a scale, shows
when the beam is horizontal; but the weighing is performed,
not by waiting till the balance comes to rest, but by noting
when the oscillations are equal on each side of the zero point.
the weights, which should run from  grm. downwards,
are usually of brass (preferably gilded) down to  grm.,
while the fractions to · grm. are of platinum foil. milligrammes
and fractions are weighed by a "rider" of wire
weighing · grm., and moved along the beam (which is
graduated for the purpose like a steelyard) by the arms e.
a fair balance should turn distinctly with · grm., and a
good one with · grm. if equal weights are placed on
each pan, they should of course balance, and if changed side
for side the balance should be maintained. if not, the arms
of the beam are unequal. weights always have trifling
errors, but if by a really good maker, these are generally so
small that they may be disregarded except in very delicate
researches. the weights should always be placed on the
scale in regular order, beginning with the heaviest, and it is
well to accustom oneself to reading the weight by the
vacant places in the box as well as by the weights on the
scale.
fig. .
while of course it is most important, and for accurate
work essential, to have as good a balance as possible,
much may be done in technical work, even with a good
pair of druggists' scales; and most standard solutions
may be bought ready made; while from two or three
accurately adjusted solutions many others may be made
volumetrically.
preparation of standard acid and alkaline solutions.—in
practice it is very difficult to obtain perfectly pure caustic
soda, free from water and carbonic acid, both of which are
greedily absorbed by it from the air, so that a standard solution
cannot practically be made by directly weighing out the
substance as suggested in the introductory paragraph. in
sodic carbonate, however, we have a substance which is
easily obtained pure and dry, and which may be used for
almost all the purposes to which a caustic solution could be
applied. a decinormal solution is strong enough for most of
the work in a tannery, though it is a convenience to have both
normal and decinormal, and a stock of the stronger solution
will last a longer time and is readily diluted to decinormal
strength by adding  part to  parts of distilled water.
to make a normal solution, about  grm. of the purest
sodic carbonate are placed in a porcelain basin or platinum
crucible and heated over a bunsen gas-burner or spirit-lamp,
nearly to redness, and allowed to cool closely covered
up. of the salt thus dried  grm. are accurately weighed
into a beaker and dissolved in distilled water. the solution
is then poured into a gauged litre flask, and carefully
filled up with water at a temperature of ° f.
(° c.) to the mark on the neck. the whole is then
poured into a good-sized stoppered bottle ( oz.) and
vigorously shaken for - minutes. this thorough shaking
is important with all standard solutions, and without experience
no one would believe how much shaking is required
uniformly to mix a solution. probably more difficulty to
beginners in analysis arises from neglect of this matter than
from any other cause. to make a decinormal solution, proceed
in precisely the same way, using · grm. instead of ;
or dilute as above.
standard acid solution.—for this purpose any one of
several acids may be used, each of which has its special
advantages.
oxalic acid is the easiest to make of any. a sufficient
quantity of pure crystallised oxalic acid is powdered and
pressed between filter paper, so as to absorb the moisture
which occasionally is retained in cavities of the crystals.
· grm. is then weighed out and dissolved in water, exactly
as was done with sodic carbonate, forming a decinormal
solution. it is used in löwenthal's tannin estimation process
and may also be employed to determine alkalies, but forms
insoluble calcium oxalate with lime salts, and does not give a
sharp reaction with methyl orange indicator. hence litmus
must be used, or a few drops of a neutral solution of calcium
chloride added to the methyl orange, when hydrochloric acid
will be liberated as soon as there is excess of the acid, and the
indicator will be promptly reddened. sulphuric acid is the
most permanent of any acid solution, and may be generally
employed. it forms insoluble sulphates with lime, baryta,
and strontia. to make a normal solution,  c.c. of the
pure concentrated acid are poured into at least  or  times
as much distilled water, and allowed to cool, and are then
made up to about  litre and well shaken. the burette is
filled with the mixture,  c.c. of the standard sodic carbonate
are measured into a beaker,  or  drops of methyl
orange solution are added, and the acid is run in with constant
stirring till the indicator is just beginning to redden.
this must be repeated, and the two titrations should exactly
agree. suppose that . c.c. are required, then  c.c. of the
trial acid are equal to  litre of the soda. if therefore  c.c.
be measured into a test mixer, and made up to  litre, the
solution should be accurately decinormal. of course great
care must be used in the whole process. if a gauged flask only
is at hand it will be easier to measure into it the water required
to make up the litre, and then fill to the mark with the trial
acid. normal hydrochloric acid may be made exactly as
described for sulphuric acid, but using about  c.c. of the
strongest acid. decinormal solutions of both these acids may
be made by the same methods; using  tenth the quantities,
or by dilution of the normal solution.
beside comparison with sodic carbonate solution, hydrochloric
acid may also be checked by determining the amount
of chlorine present, with silver nitrate (see p. )  c.c. of
decinormal acid should of course be equal to  c.c. of decinormal
silver nitrate.
table giving the quantity of the following substances contained in
or equivalent to  litre of normal or  litres of decinormal standard
solution.
sulphuric acid
grm.
soh =  grm. so
hydrochloric acid
clh = · grm. cl.
oxalic acid
coh +  aq.
acetic "
soda
naho.
sodic carbonate
naco.
lime
cao = · grm. caho.
calcic carbonate
caco.
ammonia
barium hydrate
bao = · grm. baho.
barium chloride
bacl.
zinc chloride or sulphate
zn = · grm. s. as sulphide.
silver nitrate
agno = · grm. cl.
potassic permanganate
kmno.
[g] insufficiently soluble in water to form a normal solution.
hardness (hehner's process). (a) temporary hardness.—as
has been stated (p. ), this consists of lime and magnesia
carbonates. as methyl orange is not affected by carbonic
acid, bicarbonates of alkaline earths have an alkaline reaction,
and may be estimated in solution by standard acid
like the alkalies themselves.  c.c., or in soft waters
 c.c., of the water is measured into a beaker, a drop or
two of solution of methyl orange added, and decinormal
hydrochloric or sulphuric acid run in from the burette with
constant stirring till the colour just changes to pink. this
is repeated, and the average taken. the two determinations
should not at the most differ more than / c.c. each c.c.«  »
represents  parts per , of caco or · parts of
cao; or corresponding quantities of magnesia (· parts of
mgco or  parts mgo), when  c.c. of water are used.
(b) permanent hardness.— c.c. are measured into a
beaker and boiled for  minutes with  c.c. decinormal sodic
carbonate. the mixture is then allowed to cool and made up
to  c.c.; or the flask and its contents may be weighed
before boiling and made up again to the same weight. it is
then filtered, and  c.c. representing  c.c. of the original
water, is twice titrated with decinormal acid and the
result added. if the water were pure, exactly  c.c. should
be required to neutralise the  c.c. of sodic carbonate, but if
there be permanent hardness a part of the sodic carbonate
will be already neutralised with the acids of the lime and
magnesia salts, which have been precipitated as carbonates
together with the carbonates of these bases originally present
in the water. the hardness will therefore be represented by
the loss, i. e. the number of c.c. of acid used for  c.c. of the
original water must be subtracted from  and the remainder
calculated as before, or if calculated as sulphates, each c.c.
represents · parts of caso or  parts of mgso per
,. if, as is sometimes the case, more acid is required
than is needed for the sodic carbonate used, the excess corresponds
to sodic carbonate originally present in the water.
in this case there can be no permanent hardness.
chlorine in water.—if silver nitrate be added to a solution
of any chloride, the silver is precipitated as white curdy
insoluble silver chloride. as indicator, a few drops of neutral
potassic chromate are used. so long as any chloride is present
the red silver chromate which forms is at once decomposed,
and the silver converted into white chloride. but as soon as
all the chloride is exhausted, the red chromate becomes permanent.
to prepare a standard decinormal solution of silver,
 grm. of pure recrystallised silver nitrate are dissolved in
 litre of distilled water. to perform the estimation  c.c. of
water are measured into a beaker,  or  drops of strong solution
of pure yellow potassic chromate are added, and then
silver nitrate from the burette till a permanent red is formed.
this is repeated, and the results are added together, representing
 c.c. of water. each c.c. of silver nitrate used represents
· parts of chlorine, or · parts of sodic chloride per
,. if more than  c.c. of silver solution are required to
 c.c., it is advisable to use a smaller quantity of water. if
the process be applied to other liquids than natural water, it
must be borne in mind that the solution must not contain free
acids or alkalies except carbonic acid. if this is not the case
the liquid may be rendered faintly alkaline, with lime-water
free from chlorides, and the excess of lime removed by passing
carbonic acid through it; or it may be slightly acidified
with sulphuric acid, and shaken with a little pure precipitated
calcic or baric carbonate.
detection of other impurities.—sulphuric acid (as sulphates)
is seldom wholly absent, but its presence may be proved, by
adding excess of barium chloride to the water slightly acidified
with hydrochloric acid (- c.c. of saturated solution of bacl
are sufficient for any ordinary water); if the mixture be
allowed to stand overnight in a  c.c. cylinder beside a
solution containing a known, and not very different quantity
of decinormal sulphuric acid, the quantity present may be
roughly compared by measuring the bulk of the precipitates.
lime may be similarly detected and roughly measured by
precipitation with excess of ammonic oxalate in presence of
ammonium chloride, to hinder precipitation of magnesia.
lime-water, which may be used as a standard, contains
about  parts of lime per ,.
magnesia is detected by adding ammonium phosphate to the
filtrate from the precipitated oxalate of lime. if the mixture
be allowed to stand in a warm place for  hours all the magnesia
will be precipitated as ammonio-magnesic phosphate.
silica, &c.— c.c. of the water is acidified with a little
hcl evaporated to dryness, moistened with hcl, and treated
with a little hot water. the silica or silicic acid is left
undissolved. the solution from which the silicic acid has
been filtered off is evaporated to small bulk and ammonia
added, when iron will be precipitated as brown ferric oxide,
which is coloured black by tannin or tanning liquor. if
copper be present it will give a blue solution with the
ammonia. iron may also be recognised by evaporating the
water to small bulk with a trace of hcl, and adding a little
sodium acetate, when if iron be present it will be coloured
black by tannin, red by ammonium sulphocyanide, and
blue by potassium ferrocyanide (prussiate of potash). its
quantity may be estimated (thomson, chem. soc. abstracts,
may ) by measuring  c.c. of the water to be tested
and  c.c. distilled water into two similar cylinders,
adding to each  c.c. of dilute hydrochloric acid (:)
and  c.c. of a solution of potassium sulphocyanide
( grm. per litre), and then adding to the distilled water
cylinder a very dilute standard solution of ferric salt, till its
colour matches the other. if the iron contained in the water
is in the ferrous condition, it must be oxidised with potassic
permanganate before testing.
a suitable ferric standard solution may be made by dissolving
· grm. of clean, bright, soft iron wire in a little
hydrochloric acid in a long-necked flask, adding nitric acid
so long as red fumes are produced, evaporating nearly to
dryness, and making up to  litre (more accurately  c.c.).
each c.c. will then equal · grm. fe.
lead (and copper) may be detected by passing sulphuretted
hydrogen through the water acidified with hcl, or by adding
a drop of fresh ammonium or sodium sulphide to the slightly
acidified water, when a brownish coloration clearly visible
in a deep beaker set on a sheet of white paper will be produced.
iron also gives a black with sulphides in alkaline
solution. copper may be distinguished from lead by the blue
given with ammonia, and by a reddish-brown precipitate
with potassium ferrocyanide.
for accurate quantitative estimation of these impurities,
the regular works on the subject, such as thorpe's 'quantitative
analysis,' sutton's 'volumetric analysis,' or fresenius'
'quantitative analysis,' must be consulted.
sulphuric acid  grm. may be made up to  c.c. and well
mixed, and of this  c.c. may be tested with normal sodic
carbonate in presence of methyl orange. each  c.c. of soda
solution used corresponds to · grm. or · per cent. of
hso. for most purposes, the strength may be ascertained
from the specific gravity, as measured by a hydrometer or
weighed in a specific gravity bottle. the following table
gives the strength at ° f. (° c.):—
specificgravity.
degreestwaddell.[h]
per cent.hso
specificgravity.
degreestwaddell.[h]
per cent.hso
[h] degrees of twaddell's hydrometer may be reduced to specific gravity by multiplying
by · and adding ·, thus ° tw. = · sp. gr.
the impurities of sulphuric acid most common and injurious
for tanning purposes are iron and nitrous acid. iron
is detected on neutralising with soda or ammonia, when it
falls as a yellowish precipitate, which may be recognised by
the ordinary tests (p. ). nitric and nitrous acids are
detected by pouring a strong solution of ferrous sulphate
cautiously on to the top of the strong cold acid, when a dark
ring is formed at the junction of the two liquids.
hydrochloric acid may be tested with soda solution like
sulphuric.  c.c. of normal soda = · grm. or ·
per cent. hcl. it may also be calculated from specific
gravity.
specific gravity,° c.
per cent. hcl.
the presence of iron is indicated by a yellow colour, and
may be confirmed by the usual tests as in sulphuric acid.
oxalic acid should be pure white and soluble in distilled
or rain-water. · grm. may be weighed out, and made up to
 c.c. if  c.c. of the solution for a test be used, each c.c.
of normal soda solution equals  per cent. of pure crystallised
acid, coh +  aq. the end-reaction with methyl orange
is rendered sharper by the addition of a few drops of neutral
calcic chloride towards the end of the titration.
acetic acid may be similarly determined, each c.c. of normal
alkali being equivalent to · grm. of cho. caustic
soda, or lime-water and litmus, give sharper results than
sodic carbonate and methyl orange. brown pyroligneous
acid is difficult to test from the dark compounds formed with
soda, but may be indirectly determined by the quantity of
marble, baric carbonate, or magnesia which it will dissolve
(compare p. ), or very possibly by lime-water like tan-liquors
with a little tannin as indicator.
the quantity of caustic lime in either quicklime or lime-bottoms
may be determined by weighing a quantity of
the finely powdered material containing not more than  grm.
of caustic lime, and shaking it thoroughly with  litre of
distilled water and filtering.  c.c. should be taken, and
decinormal acid, sulphuric or hydrochloric (or if oxalic,
with addition of neutral calcic chloride, or with litmus
instead of methyl orange as indicator). each c.c. of decinormal
acid corresponds to · grm. of cao. if the
filter and residue be treated with sufficient normal acid to
dissolve the whole of the carbonates, and then titrated back
with normal sodic carbonate and methyl orange, the loss
(less soda solution required than acid was originally employed)
is equal to the carbonate of lime and carbonate and
hydrate of magnesia present.  c.c. of normal acid = · grm.
of caco.
fig. .
fig. .
lime-water and lime-liquors may be titrated as above,
with sulphuric or hydrochloric acid and methyl orange; but
in the latter case ammonia (and if soda ash or "inoffensive"
is used, soda and potash also), and the lime salts of weak
organic acids will be estimated with it. it is difficult to get
a sharp end-reaction in old liquors from the organic acids
(caproic, amidocaproic, &c.) present. to determine the
ammonia, - c.c. of the liquor may be distilled in a small
retort or flask, and the escaping nh collected in a u-tube
or "nitrogen bulb" (fig. ), containing - c.c. of normal
acid, which is afterwards titrated
back with sodic carbonate and
methyl orange. kathreiner employs
the arrangement shown
in fig. .  c.c. of the liquor
to be examined is placed in a
shallow vessel on a piece of
ground-glass, and  c.c. of normal acid in a second cup,
which is supported over the other by a glass or wire triangle.
the whole is covered with a small bell-glass, of which the
edges are smeared with, vaseline. at the end of  hours,
all the ammonia will have been absorbed by the acid, which
is titrated back. the lime-liquor sample should be drawn
after well plunging the lime, and rapidly filtered into a flask
from a funnel covered with a clock-glass.
determination of gelatin and coriin in lime-liquors.—this
cannot be done directly, though considerable quantities of
dissolved hide-substance are precipitated on acidification of
the liquor with hydrochloric acid and saturation with common
salt. if the liquor be neutralised with hydrochloric acid,
and evaporated to dryness on the water-bath, nitrogen may
be determined in the residue by combustion, and the hide-substance
calculated from it (compare p. ). this method
is serviceable in determining the amount of hide dissolved by
different solutions, or under different conditions.
the total solids of lime-liquors are estimated by evaporating
- c.c. in a porcelain crucible at ° f. (° c.).
the organic matter is then found by igniting and determining
loss (using ammonia nitrate if necessary to complete
the combustion of the carbon). the ash is mostly lime
carbonate. soda, potash, and other bases may be determined
in it by the usual methods, if required.
sodium sulphide, &c.
· grm. of chemically pure zinc is dissolved in dilute
sulphuric or hydrochloric acid. this is readily accomplished
in a flask, if a piece of platinum foil, or a few drops of
platinic chloride are added to form a galvanic couple with
the zinc. after solution, sufficient ammonia is added to
redissolve the precipitate at first formed,[i] and the whole is
made up to  litre. each c.c. = · grm. sulphur or ·
grm. of sodic sulphide. this solution is added drop by drop
from a burette to the solution of sulphide, and forms a white
precipitate of zincic sulphide. the end of the reaction is
known by placing a drop (with a glass rod) side by side on a
piece of white filter paper, with a drop of solution of lead
acetate. so long as sulphide remains in solution, it will
form a black margin of lead sulphide where the drops touch.
the drops must not be placed too close, as the solid zinc
sulphide is always darkened if it comes in contact with lead
acetate. it must be noted that tank-waste liquors, and
many other sulphur solutions, contain polysulphides which
are estimated by zinc, but which do not unhair, at any rate
in an unaltered state.
[i] if any brown residue remains, the zinc is contaminated with iron.
fig. .
estimation of grease.—to determine oil and grease, a
weighed quantity (- grm.) of the leather in fine shavings
or raspings is exhausted with petroleum-ether
(gasoline) in a fat-extraction
apparatus, of which a convenient
form is represented in fig. . the leather is placed in the
upper vessel, of which the lower
opening is loosely plugged with
cotton-wool, and the petroleum-ether
in the flask, which is gently heated
in a water-bath. the petroleum-ether
boils and condenses in the
inclined condenser through the casing of which a stream
of cold water is passed, whence it drops back into the flask
through the material to be exhausted. when the exhaustion
is complete (when a drop of petroleum-ether from
the leather leaves no grease when allowed to evaporate
on a clean glass), the upper part of the apparatus is
removed, and the ether is distilled off. if the flask has
been previously weighed, it is maintained in an air-bath at
°-° f. (°-° c.) for some hours, allowed to cool,
and weighed, when the gain of weight is the grease and oil.
paraffin would also be extracted and reckoned, and probably
traces of resin if present. ordinary ethylic ether cannot be
used, since tannins and many of their products are soluble in
it. probably carbon disulphide might be substituted. care
must be taken to avoid explosion, as the vapours of petroleum
are very combustible. the residue left in the percolator
may be examined for matters soluble in water, by extracting
again with hot distilled water, or for resins (and phlobaphenes)
by extraction with alcohol.
estimation of matters soluble in water.—this is important
both to detect weighting, and to draw conclusions as to the
materials used in tanning. fine raspings or shavings may
be exhausted with warm water in a percolator, or roughly
a weighed piece ( grm.) of leather, air-dry, may be well
kneaded and worked in  c.c. of warm water in a basin.
 c.c. of this may be evaporated to dryness in a light basin
over the water-bath (or under a paper hood on a steam
boiler), and the gain of weight will give the amount dissolved
from  grm. this is more accurate and quicker
than redrying the leather and weighing loss. the residue
will contain tannins and their products, often in considerable
quantities, and may be examined by the table of reactions,
p. , though these are as yet very imperfect. it will also
contain glucose, dextrin, and soluble salts, if these have
been used to give weight and firmness. the absolute proof
of weighting with glucose or dextrin is difficult, since
tanning materials naturally contain these and analogous
principles. the residue may be powdered and exhausted
with cold water, and the tannins and colouring matter removed
by shaking with magnesia (p. ) or lead carbonate.
fehling's solution[j] is then added and the mixture is heated
nearly to boiling. a rapidly formed and considerable precipitate
of red cuprous oxide indicates weighting with glucose
or dextrin. leather extracts, however, invariably reduce
fehling's solution more or less, and a conclusion can only be
drawn after some experience and comparative tests. gallotannic
acid and pyrogallol reduce it when heated, but not
cane sugar or gum arabic. if a solution of cane sugar be
heated to ° c. for / hour with  per cent. of fuming
hydrochloric acid, it is "inverted," and then after neutralising
the acid with potash or soda, will reduce fehling's
solution when heated.
[j]  grm. cryst. cupric sulphate are dissolved in  c.c. of water; and
 grm. of neutral potassic tartrate and  grm. of fused sodic hydrate
are dissolved in  c.c. the two are mixed, made up to  c.c., and
boiled for some minutes. it should always be tested before use by boiling
a portion, which should remain perfectly clear.
the soluble mineral salts are detected by igniting the residue
left after evaporation of a separate portion in a porcelain
crucible.[k] from unweighted leather, the quantity is very
small. the ash is exhausted with a few c.c. of distilled water,
which will dissolve most sulphates and chlorides, which may
be detected in small portions of the solution by baric chloride
and silver nitrate respectively. baric chloride and lead
acetate are precipitated by a drop of sulphuric acid, and the
latter is blackened with ammonic or sodic sulphide. lime
is precipitated by addition of ammonic chloride, ammonia,
and ammonic oxalate; magnesia by the subsequent addition
of sodic phosphate (see p. ). the carbonates in the insoluble
part (mostly derived from salts of organic acids) may
be taken up by dilute hydrochloric acid and tested separately,
or the acid may be used at first. any residue undissolved
by the acid is probably lead chloride, and will be dissolved
by hot water.
[k] a platinum crucible must not be used for fear of its destruction by
lead, unless this metal has been proved absent.
estimation of ash.—the leather in small pieces (either after
or before extraction with water) is incinerated in a porcelain
crucible. the ash is extracted with hydrochloric acid. the
insoluble portion may contain barium sulphate (barytes),
lead sulphate, sand, clay, &c. for further examination,
ordinary chemical text-books must be consulted. any large
amount of ash indicates weighting. müntz found only about
· per cent. of ash from bark-tanned leather.
determination of hide substance.—it is sometimes of interest
to determine the proportion of dry hide-substance in a
sample of leather, but there is no known means of doing this
directly. if, however, the leather be dried, finely powdered
by rasping, and the nitrogen determined by combustion,
either with soda-lime (will and varrentrapp's method), or
with copper oxide (dumas), the hide-substance may be
calculated, since tannin contains no nitrogen. müntz found
unhaired skin dried at ° f. (° c.) to contain · per
cent. of nitrogen (compare also p. ).
the lime-water method mentioned on p.  is, from its
simplicity, well suited for daily use in the tannery as a
control method for ordinary working; but where it is necessary
to make very exact estimations, or to determine the
various acids separately, it is not so satisfactory as one
recently published by kohnstein and simand (dingl. polyt.
jour., , cclvi. ).
the acids usually present in liquor consist of several
members of the fatty or acetic group, which distil over with
boiling water, of other non-volatile organic acids, and sometimes
sulphuric acid, which is added to assist the swelling of
the leather.
to determine the acids of the acetic group, kohnstein and
simand proceed as follows:— c.c. of the liquor are distilled,
in a flask or retort with a good condenser, to about
 c.c., allowed to cool a little, made up again to  c.c.,
and again distilled; and this is repeated till about  c.c.«  »
have passed over. the distillate is then made up to  c.c.,
well mixed by shaking, and the acid is determined with
standard soda. methyl orange and sodic carbonate is not
so suitable for this titration, as caustic soda and litmus,
since methyl orange is not very sensitive to vegetable acids.
if it be desired to ascertain what quantity of acids of the
acetic group exist in combination with lime and other bases
in the liquor, small excess of sulphuric acid may be added to
the residue in the retort, and the distillation repeated, when
the organic salts will be decomposed and the volatile acids
come over.
to determine the total free organic acids, kohnstein and
simand shake about  c.c. of the liquor with - grm. of
freshly ignited magnesia, quite free from carbonate and from
lime, and allow to stand for some hours with frequent
vigorous shaking, till the liquor, which at first is brown or
dirty green, becomes almost colourless and gives no reaction
of either acid or tannin. the mixture is then filtered, and
the tannin and colouring matter are retained on the filter
in combination with magnesia, while the organic salts of
magnesia, which are mostly soluble, pass through with the
filtrate. - c.c. of the filtrate, according to the amount
of acid present, is evaporated to dryness, and gently ignited
so as not to decompose any magnesic sulphate present. the
residue is moistened with water saturated with carbonic
acid, to convert any magnesic oxide into carbonate, and then
dried, in order to make the mass powdery, and easier to wash,
it is next taken up with hot distilled water, filtered and well
washed. any sulphate which is present passes into the
filtrate, while the carbonate, which corresponds to the organic
salts present before ignition, remains on the filter, and after
solution in hydrochloric acid, is estimated as magnesic pyrophosphate.
to the hydrochloric solution is added excess of
ammonia and sufficient ammonic chloride to redissolve the
precipitate formed, and prevent the precipitation of the
magnesia; the solution is heated and then ammonic oxalate
solution, first dilute, and then concentrated, is added to precipitate
any lime which may be derived from lime salts
present in the liquor. after filtering out and washing the
precipitate, - c.c. of  per cent. sodic phosphate solution
is added, and the liquid is stirred with a glass rod without
touching the sides of the beaker, and allowed to stand  hours.
the crystalline precipitate is then rinsed on to a filter, and
washed with a mixture of  of ammonia and  of water, till the
washings no longer give any milkiness with silver nitrate.
the filter is then dried and the precipitate is placed in a
platinum crucible and first gently, and then strongly ignited
with the cover on; the filter paper, freed as much as possible
from the precipitate, is burnt in the usual way on the
crucible lid, the ashes are added to the precipitate in the
crucible, and the whole is again ignited and allowed to cool
in the desiccator, and finally weighed.  parts of magnesia
pyrophosphate correspond to  parts of acetic, or  parts
of lactic acid. kohnstein and simand calculate the pyrophosphate
corresponding to the acetic acid already found by
distillation, and after deducting it reckon out the remainder
as lactic acid. of course the volatile acids are really a
mixture consisting of acetic, propionic, butyric and other
members of the fatty group; but it would be difficult if not
impossible to separate them. similarly other fixed acids
exist in mixture beside the lactic acid, but as their action is
similar and lactic acid is always the most abundant, these
acids are to be reckoned as lactic.
it has been mentioned that when sulphuric acid is present
in the liquor it is found in the filtrate from the magnesia
carbonate as sulphate. after removal of the lime as oxalate,
as previously described, the magnesia may be similarly
determined as pyrophosphate, and reckoned out as sulphuric
acid ( parts of pyrophosphate being equal to  parts
sulphuric acid, hso). it may also be estimated with
barium chloride, but in this case regard must be had to the
sulphates originally present in the liquor.
since waters invariably contain both lime and magnesia
salts, a portion ( or  c.c.) must be evaporated, ignited,
and after precipitation of the lime, the magnesia must be
estimated as already described, and deducted from the amount
found in a similar amount of liquor after saturating with
magnesia. if, together with the organic acids, the liquor
contains sulphuric acid, the correction may be divided
equally between the two.
the method is not applicable in presence of phosphoric,
tartaric, or oxalic acids. to overcome this difficulty, messrs.
kohnstein and simand are at present investigating a method
dependent on decolorisation of the liquor with bone charcoal,
completely free from mineral salts, and subsequent titration
with soda.
it may be interesting to add the determinations of a
complete set of handlers in a continental upper-leather
tannery, in which larch bark is used.  c.c. of liquor
contained as follows, in grm.:—
no. ofhandler.
total acidsreckoned as acetic.
volatile acidsreckoned as acetic.
fixed organic acidsreckoned as lactic.
it is often desirable to determine from what tanning
materials an extract or liquor is made, or with what a
sample of leather is tanned. the following table gives
reactions of the principal tanning materials, which will
enable any one of them to be recognised with certainty, and
in many cases will determine the constituents in a mixture
of several, though this is naturally far more difficult. in
such cases, colour reactions are apt to mislead, that of one
tannin being modified by another, and it is safest to rely on
the categorical test of precipitate or no precipitate, coloration
or no coloration, without regard to the tint. the infusions
must be very weak, not exceeding -° bktr., or precipitates
will be formed where mere coloration or clouding is noted. in
some cases only negative peculiarities can be given, and the
material cannot be positively determined in mixture with
materials where these peculiarities are present. thus myrobalans
could not be distinguished from divi with certainty,
where any other material, such as gambier, was present,
which gave a deep coloration with concentrated sulphuric
acid. the writer will feel greatly obliged by the communication
of more distinctive reactions.
reagent.
myrabolanes.
divi-divi.
valonia.
oak bark.
chestnut wood
boiled with equal volume of sulphuric acid ( vol. to  vol. water).
pale deposit (eliagic acid) on cooling.
pale deposit (eliagic acid) on cooling.
slight pale deposit.
slight pale deposit or turbidity on cooling.
slight red deposit on cooling.
bromine water.
no pp.
no pp.
no pp.
pale pp.
no pp.
dilute ferric chloride.
blue-black pp.
dark blue pp.
blue-black pp.
bluish black pp.
blue-black pp.
add ammonia.
brown pp.
dark red pp.
red brown pp.
red brown pp.
dull red pp.
sol. tartar emetic.
no pp.
faint clouding.
no pp.
no pp.
slight clouding.
add ammonic chloride.
light pp.
dense pp.
pale pp.
whitish pp.
pale pp.
copper sulphate.
faint clouding.
slight green pp.
no pp.
slight pp.
no pp.
add ammonia.
dense dark pp.
dense dark pp.
dark reddish pp.
brown pp.
dark brown pp.
lime-water.
yellow pp. turning greenish.
yellow pp. turning purple.
yellow pp. turning red-purple.
brown pp.
purplish brown pp.
ammon. molybdate in nitric acid.
dirty yellow pp.
dark greenish pp.
dark greenish pp.
greenish pp.
dirty green pp.
with sodic sulphide exposed to air on a tile.
yellow colour.
yellow colour.
turns purpulish red.
turns red.
reddish pp.
add concentrated sulphuric acid to  drop infusion.
yellow colour.
intense crimson.
deep yellow.
deep red pp. on dilution.
dark brown.
lead nitrate
light yellow pp.
dark yellow pp.
pale pp.
brown pp.
brown pp.
cobalt acetate
buff pp.
buff pink pp.
dirty pink pp.
ditto.
dirty yellow pp.
manganese acetate.
yellow pp.
yellow pp.
dirty yellow pp.
ditto.
grey pp.
uranium acetate.
dark red colour.
dark red colour.
dark red colour.
dark brown colour.
dark red colour.
ammoniacal picric acid sol.
no pp.
no pp.
brown pp.
no pp.
no pp.
potassic dichromate.
brown pp.
brown pp.
brown pp.
brown pp.
brown pp.
chemical analysis for the tannery — continued.
hungarian larch (extract).
hemlock (extract).
mimosa bark.
cutch (pegu).
gambier (cuba).
gallotannic acid,  per cent.
yellow flocculent deposit separates quickly.
abundant red flocculent deposit.
heavy red depositon cooling.
light red depositon cooling.
reddish depositon cooling.
usually some pale deposit.
yellow pp.
yellow pp.
yellow pp.
yellow pp.
yellow pp.
no pp.
dull brown pp.
dirty green pp.
full brown pp.
green-black pp.
intense green colour.
blue-black pp.
dull red pp.
reddened pp.
purple colour.
dark red pp.
reddened pp.
reddened pp.
no pp.
no pp.
white pp.
no pp.
no pp.
no pp.
pale pp.
slight pale pp.
dense white pp.
pale pp.
faint clouding.
white pp.
slight cloud.
pale pp.
slight pp.
dense pp.
no pp.
no pp.
deep blue coloration.
dark green coloration.
deep red pp.
deep violet coloration.
dark green coloration.
brown pp.
dirty brown pp.
brown pp.
slight reddish pp.
slight cloud soluble in excess.
no pp.
pale pp. turns blue.
slight clouding.
slight pp.
brown pp.
ditto.
ditto.
yellow colour.
no change.
no change.
turns red.
slight reddening.
no change.
no change.
dark brown or crimson.
intense crimson.
intense purple-red.
deep red no pp. on dilution.
dark brown or crimson.
yellow.
pale pp.
pale pp.
clouding.
no pp.
faint clouding.
white pp.
purplish pp.
purple pp.
brown pp.
brown pp.
no pp.
purple pp.
slight clouding.
slight pp.
no pp.
no pp.
ditto.
white pp.
slight darkening.
light brown pp.
dark red colour.
dark red colour.
dark red colour.
crimson colour. brown pp.
no pp.
clouding.
no pp.
no pp.
no pp.
no pp.
ditto.
brown pp. slowly formed.
brown pp.
brown colour.
brown pp. slowly formed.
brown pp.
many processes have been proposed for the quantitative
estimation of tannins, but it cannot be said that any
method yet known is wholly satisfactory. the oldest, that
of sir h. davy, recently improved by stoddart and others,
consists in precipitating with gelatin, and drying and
weighing the precipitate. this is almost impossible to
filter off as directed by davy; but by the use of a little
alum, and by pouring hot water on the precipitate, it
becomes curdled into a mass which may be washed by
decantation. as the precipitate contains varying quantities
of tannin, according to the strength of solution employed;
as it is soluble in excess of gelatin solution, and
as it is almost if not quite impossible to wash it free
from gelatin and alum, the method can hardly lay claim to
much accuracy. a somewhat better one consists in the
employment of a standard solution of gelatin with a little
alum, determining the end of the reaction by filtering off a
portion and ascertaining if another drop of the reagent produces
a further precipitate. this method is very tedious, the
end reaction is difficult to hit, the standard solution is very
unstable, it is inapplicable to gambier and cutch because the
mixture will not filter clear, and its results are irregular,
probably from the power of tannin to combine with various
proportions of gelatin. a plan, which has a seductive
appearance of simplicity, is that of hammer; he takes the
sp. gr. of the infusion, then absorbs the tannin with slightly
moistened hide-raspings, again takes the sp. gr., and from
the difference calculates the percentage of tannin, a difference
of  per cent. of tannin corresponding to one of · sp. gr.
(° barkometer). unfortunately the hide is more or less
soluble in the liquor, and absorbs acids other than tannic
with considerable energy; the moistening of the raspings
introduces an error, and the smallness of the quantity to be
measured makes a slight error completely vitiate the results.
with extreme care, due corrections for temperature, for the
water introduced with the raspings, and for their solubility,
and by substituting evaporation of the infusions to dryness
for mere calculation from their sp. gr., the method is useful
as giving almost the only information obtainable as to the
actual weight of tannin in any material capable of being
absorbed by hide. it is, however, only suitable for use as a
check on easier and more rapid methods, such as löwenthal's,
which give accurate relative results, but no information as to
absolute weight of unknown tannins. a modification of
hammer's method has been introduced by müntz and ramspacher,
in which the liquor whence the tannin is to be
removed is forced through a piece of raw hide by pressure.
this method, except that it is more rapid, has all the evils
of hammer's in an intensified form, and gives such variable
results as to be quite useless in practice. a set of very careful
determinations of one sample of sumach gave results
ranging from  to  per cent., and similar variations
occurred when the experiment was repeated with valonia.
wagner's method by precipitation with a standard solution
of cinchonine and magenta has proved wholly unreliable.
gerland's method with a volumetric solution of tartar
emetic, used in presence of ammonic chloride, gives constant
results with sumachs, / of those given by permanganate and
neubauer's equivalent. tartar emetic does not precipitate
the tannins of cutch and gambier. fleck's, by precipitation
with copper acetate, and subsequent washing with ammonic
carbonate and gravimetric estimation, either of the tannate
dried at ° f. (° c.), or of the copper oxide left on ignition;
and carpene's, by precipitation with ammoniacal zinc
acetate, and subsequent estimation with permanganate and
indigo, though giving fairly accurate results on some tannins,
are only of limited application. they may therefore be
passed over, as well as jean's method with a volumetric
solution of iodine in presence of sodic carbonate, and allen's
method with lead acetate, which are tedious and difficult,
and present no advantage over löwenthal's improved process.
this last is easy of execution, constant in results, and
universally applicable. before proceeding to describe it in
detail, it may be well to give some hints as to the best modes
of sampling and preparing tanning materials for analysis,
since this is often more difficult and tedious than the actual
analysis.
sampling.—samples should always be drawn from at least
 sacks or separate parts of the bulk, and, in the case of
valonia, special care should be taken to have a fair average
quantity of "beard." no attention is usually paid to this
point by merchants, and the proportion varies greatly in
different parts of the same cargo. if several sacks are spread
in layers on a level floor, and then portions going quite to
the ground are taken from several parts of the floor, this will
be accomplished. where samples must be dealt with which
have not been specially drawn, it might be safest to weigh
out from each the same proportion of beard and whole cups,
bearing in mind that the beard is always the richest part of
the valonia. in sampling myrobalans, it should be remembered
that the poor and light nuts will rise to the top, and
hence the hand should be plunged well into the sack.
grinding of valonia and myrobalans when practicable is
probably best done in a small disintegrator, fitted with
gratings. the material, of which some pounds must be
used, is screened over a sieve of say  wires per in., and all
coarser parts are returned to the mill till they will pass. the
mill must grind into a close box, that no dust may be lost.
bark may be reduced to fine saw-dust by cutting a portion
of each piece in the sample with a circular saw or rasp
driven by a lathe. the advantage of these methods is that
samples can be ground without previous drying, and thus in
many cases time may be saved and separate determination of
moisture avoided. when this is not practicable, the sample
of some lbs. at least is ground in an ordinary bark-mill, well
mixed, spread out flat on a floor or table, and several portions
are taken as already described, say - grm. in all, and
dried in a water- or air-oven at ° f. (° c.). the
moisture is best determined, to save time, in a small separate
portion of  grm., which must be dried till it ceases to lose
weight, and the loss taken as moisture. it must be weighed
in a covered capsule, as it is very hygroscopic. when the
larger portion of the sample has been dried some hours, it is
passed twice through a good coffee-mill, and then returned
to the oven till thoroughly dried, for which, - hours is
generally sufficient. another method sometimes convenient
is to take each acorn, or each piece of bark of the sample to
be tested, and snip a piece from it with a pair of tinners'
shears, taking care that in the case of valonia the section
runs right to the centre of the cup; and in bark, that fair
shares of the outer and inner layers are taken. the reason
for drying before grinding is, that unless hard dried, tanning
materials cannot be passed through a small mill. bark and
valonia usually contain - per cent. of moisture.
exhaustion.— grm. of valonia, - grm. of bark, or
corresponding quantities of other material, are boiled briskly
for half an hour with  litre of distilled water, a funnel being
placed in the neck of the flask, and great care being taken at
first to avoid frothing and boiling over. the flasks used
should have a capacity of at least / litre. the whole contents
are finally rinsed into a gauged flask, allowed to cool
to ° f. (° c.), and made up to  litre. in the case of
sumach, a little more boiling even than this is desirable.
this method has been found by the writer to give better
results than boiling with successive portions of water.
another method is to boil for / hour with  c.c. of water,
then pour the whole on a filter, wash with boiling water so
long as a drop of the filtrate blackens paper moistened with
a dilute solution of ferric acetate, and finally make up to 
litre. many materials, however, clog the filter to such an
extent that washing is almost impossible. kathreiner has
used  litres of water, and corresponding quantities of
material, in a large steam-jacketed copper pan, for each
exhaustion, making the weight up finally to  kilos., with
very uniform and excellent results. (see also p. .) with
all materials which deposit ellagic acid or other insoluble
derivatives, on cooling and standing, considerably higher
results will be obtained if the titration be made as soon as
the liquor is cold, than if it be allowed to stand  hours;
in this respect, a uniform practice should be adhered to.
addition of / c.c. of glacial acetic acid renders the infusions
less liable to change.
analysis.—of all the methods which have been proposed
for the estimation of tannins, the only one which has met
with any general acceptance is that of löwenthal, and indeed
it is the only one which in rapidity of execution and
constancy of results is fitted for general use. the method,
as originally proposed, depends on the oxidation of the
astringent solution by permanganate in presence of indigo,
which not only serves as an indicator, but controls the
oxidation, limiting it to those bodies which are more oxidisable
than indigo. as, however, these include gallic acid
and other substances which are useless to either tanner or
dyer, it is necessary to remove the tannin, and by a second
titration to obtain its value by difference. this löwenthal
(zeitschrift f. anal. chemie, , p. ) accomplished by a
solution of gelatin and common salt, to which, after mixture
with the tannin infusion, a small quantity of sulphuric or
hydrochloric acid was added. it was necessary to let this stand
at least some hours before a clear filtrate could be obtained, and
the gelatin remaining in solution had a slight though generally
negligible effect on the permanganate. in some cases, even
after long standing, perfect filtration was extremely difficult
and tedious, and it was also clearly proved by simand
(ding. polyt. jour., ccxliv. ) that a certain proportion of
the tanno-gelatin precipitate, varying with the acid present,
and with the species of tannin, remained in solution, and
thus gave too low a result. he therefore proposed to revert
to the old method of separating tannin with hide raspings,
or, as an improved substitute, with the gelatinous tissue of
bones, and this is probably the most accurate method, but
has the disadvantage of requiring considerable time for its
execution. (see also p. .) the writer has therefore
tried, and he thinks successfully, so to modify löwenthal's
original method as to increase its accuracy, and at the same
time to make it more rapid and easy of execution. it was
found that by saturating the clear filtrate with salt, a further
precipitate containing tannin was formed, but unfortunately,
it was so finely divided that no amount of standing, or even
of warming, and repeated passing through the paper, would
obtain a clear filtrate. finally, he hit on the device of
mixing with the liquid, before filtration, a portion of the
pure kaolin used by photographers. the effect was instantaneous
and complete. a perfectly clear filtrate was obtained
without any of the tedious waiting which before was necessary,
and it was not only free from tannin, but also nearly so from
gelatin, so that it only gave the faintest cloudiness with
tannin solution. gelatin gives a more considerable precipitate,
but this is simply due to its insolubility in the
saturated salt solution, and it is redissolved on dilution with
water.[l]
[l] hunt (jour. soc. chem. industry, april ) states, that saturation
with salt causes partial precipitation of gallic acid when present, and that
results agreeing more closely with those obtained by absorption with hide
are obtained by employing a mixture of  c.c. liquor,  c.c.  per cent.
gelatin solution, and  c.c. saturated solution of salt containing  c.c. of
concentrated sulphuric acid per litre and a teaspoonful of kaolin. this
approaches very nearly to löwenthal's original method, but with the
addition of the kaolin, and as in it, it is to be feared that a portion of the
tannate of gelatin will remain in solution. for accurate work, therefore,
absorption by hide-raspings is preferable, though even that has been
shown by the writer to remove gallic acid and other matters beside tannin.
hunt states that raw hide also absorbs catechin.
a slight error is introduced by the presence of a trace of
oxidisable matter in the gelatin, and when very great accuracy
is required, it is well to make a blank estimation of
"not-tannin" without tannin infusion, and deduct / of the
permanganate consumed as a correction from the not-tannin;
but this may usually be disregarded. each titration should
be made twice, and successive tests should not differ by more
than · c.c. of permanganate.
reagents.—solutions are required of () pure potash
permanganate,  grm. per litre. () pure soda or potash
sulphindigotate,  grm., and concentrated sulphuric acid, 
grm. per litre. () pure oxalic acid, · grm. per litre (decinormal).
the sulphindigotate (indigo carmine), must be
filtered, and when oxidised by permanganate, should give
a pure clear yellow, free from any trace of brown or
orange. any contamination with indigo-purple, which gives
brown oxidation-products, is quite fatal to the accuracy of
the analysis. the permanganate solution is standardised by
measuring  c.c. of the (decinormal) oxalic acid solution,
adding a little pure sulphuric acid and distilled water,
warming to ° f. (° c.), and running in the permanganate
till a faint permanent pink is produced, for which about
- c.c. should be required. the indigo-carmine solution
should be of such strength that - c.c. of permanganate
are required to bleach the quantity employed, which may be
- c.c., as convenient. () gelatin solution:  grm. of
nelson's or other good gelatin are allowed to swell in distilled
water for two hours, melted by setting the glass in a pan of
boiling water, and made up to  c.c. this will not keep.
() dilute sulphuric acid:  c.c. of pure concentrated acid
are added to  c.c. of distilled water. () good table salt.
() purified kaolin.
the analysis is performed in the following manner:—
c.c. of indigo solution, and  c.c. of the infusion of tanning
material is added, in a white basin as recommended by
kathreiner, to about / litre good water, which it is best to
measure approximately, so that if it contains any impurity
which affects the permanganate it should be constant, and
thus be eliminated with the indigo. permanganate solution
is then allowed to drop in, with constant stirring till the pure
yellow liquid shows a faint pinkish rim, most clearly seen on
the shaded side. this end-reaction, which is of extraordinary
delicacy, is due to kathreiner, and is quite different to the
pink caused by excess of permanganate, being an effect
common to all pure yellow liquids. it is not needful to
make the titration so slowly as has been advised—the permanganate
may be dropped in steadily with vigorous stirring,
so long as there is large excess of indigo, but as soon as the
bottom of the basin can be seen through the solution, it must
be added very cautiously, one or two drops at a time,
and with occasional pauses, to allow time for its complete
mixture through so large a mass of fluid. the titration
is repeated twice, and the results added together and
denoted by a. then take  c.c. of the infusion, and add
· c.c. of the gelatin solution of nelson's gelatin of
 grm. to  c.c. after shaking, the mixture is saturated
with salt, which brings the volume up to  c.c., and  c.c.
of the dilute sulphuric acid (containing  vol. of concentrated
acid in ) and a teaspoonful of pure kaolin are added. it is
best to do this in a flask in which it can be well shaken,
after which, filtration may be at once proceeded with, although
it is safer to let it stand an hour or two: (the
flask may be cleansed with caustic soda solution).  c.c. of
this filtrate (=  c.c. of the original infusion) are employed
for a second pair of titrations, which are added as before, and
the result denoted b. if, further, c be the quantity of permanganate
required to oxidise  c.c. of decinormal oxalic
acid, and  grm. of the tanning material have been employed
to make  litre of infusion, c : (a - b) :: · : x, where x is the
percentage of tannin expressed in terms of crystallised oxalic
acid. if it be desired to calculate the gallic acid and non-tannin
substances contained in the infusion, the value in
permanganate of the indigo alone must be determined.
calling this d, as c is to (b - d), so is · to the percentage
of non-tannins in terms of oxalic acid, and for the present it
is best invariably to calculate results in this way, since we
do not actually know the relation of any single tannin to
permanganate, even neubauer's number for gallotannic acid
being probably too high, according to the recent investigations
of councler and schroeder,[m] and oser's for quercitannic
being at most only approximate. it happens, moreover, that
this last equivalent (· grm. of quercitannic acid =  grm.
of crystallised oxalic acid) does not differ from that of
oxalic acid more than the ordinary limits of error of such
estimation, and the substitution is therefore of no commercial
importance, while it is surely better to employ a standard
which is easily and exactly verified than one which is certain
to be modified by further research, and so to run the risk
either of having our results made useless for future comparison,
or of establishing a false or arbitrary equivalent.
what is wanted for practical purposes is not the absolute
weight of tannins in the various materials, but only a means
for the relative comparison of two samples of the same
material; cross comparisons of different tannins being simply
delusive. if, however, it is necessary at any time to give
actual percentages of gallotannic acid, it is probably best to
stick to neubauer's number for the present, as it is in general
use. neubauer states that  grm. of oxalic acid consume
as much permanganate as · grm. of gallotannic acid.
tshekawa found · as the equivalent for tannin from
japanese gall nuts (chem. news, xlii. ). councler and
schroeder on the other hand give only · grm. simand
gives · grm. as the equivalent of quercitannic acid.
commercial "pure tannin" always gives results higher than
the truth, as the gallic acid which it contains consumes more
permanganate than an equal weight of tannin, or even than
the tannin which would yield it if boiled with acid. when
this is done the equivalent used should be definitely stated,
or it will certainly lead to confusion. neubauer's equivalent
is only properly applicable to gall nuts, and possibly to
sumach and myrabolans. for oak bark oser's number or that
of oxalic acid is most likely nearly correct; and this may
also be approximately true of oak wood and valonia, but as
respects all other materials we have no information whatever,
and the oxalic equivalent is as likely to be right as any
other. (compare note, p. .)
[m] from researches by von schroeder, published since the above was
penned, it seems that the permanganate consumed by tannin is largely
influenced by the way in which the titration is conducted, see p. .
a few results are given below, not as showing the relative
values of the materials, which, of course, cannot be directly
compared by any analytical process, but for comparison with
those obtained by other methods and modes of calculation:—
tannin(as oxalic acid).
other bodies oxidised(as oxalic acid).
spent liquor
valonia (good smyrna).sample 
""sample 
""sample 
hungarian larch extract. sample 
""sample 
chestnut-wood extract, ° b.
pegu cutch
it is proved by experiment that kaolin removes nothing
which is oxidised by permanganate, but simply facilitates
the precipitation and filtration; and it is often found useful
to clarify the original infusions and liquors before the
first titration. on the other hand, there is no doubt that
the salt and acid of löwenthal's method precipitate of themselves
a large proportion of certain tannins. in the case of
cutch this amounted, in the analysis given, to  per cent. of
the whole. there is, however, good reason to believe that
this would also have been absorbed, or at least removed from
solution by hide in the process of tanning. this is shown
by the analysis of the spent liquor above given, which
originally contained the tannins of oak bark, valonia, myrabolans,
gambier, hemlock, and oak wood extracts, &c., to the
extent of  to  per cent., but which was reduced by contact
with hide to · per cent. that a portion had not
been absorbed but decomposed is proved by the large accumulation
of oxidisable impurities (equal to  per cent. of oxalic
acid); at the same time this example shows that the method
is capable of estimating a very small portion of tannin in
presence of much gallic acid and other analogous substances.
it is worth remark that such spent liquors become very pale
in colour, and also that the filtrates, freed from tannin by
precipitation, are nearly colourless, thus proving that the
colouring matters present in tanning materials are of the
nature of tannins, at least as regards their precipitability by
hide and gelatin.
simand (dingl. polyt. jour., ccxlvi. ) has recommended
instead of precipitation with gelatin, the use of the gelatinous
tissue of bones to remove the tannin. for this purpose
porous bones, such as horn piths, are coarsely powdered, and
after treatment with dilute soda solution to remove the fat,
are steeped in weak hydrochloric acid till all the calcareous
matter is dissolved. they are then thoroughly washed,
ground wet through a steel mill, washed again and dried at
a low temperature; the tannin is removed more quickly than
by raw hide, and the amount of gelatinous matter dissolved
by cold water is a very trifling one. this method, or that
with purified hide-powder, is to be recommended for scientific
research, since no element capable of precipitating substances
other than those absorbed by the hide is introduced, while
it is not certain in all cases that saturation with salt and
acidification may not remove other constituents of the liquor
besides tannins. it has, however, for technical purposes the
great disadvantage of requiring a much longer time for absorption
of the tannin than is the case with gelatin solution,
and of the process being much more difficult of execution.
if hide-powder be employed, it must be moistened with a
small quantity of water before adding to the infusion, and
this water must be taken into account in the quantity of the
filtrate employed for the titration of the "non-tannin." the
digestion with the hide- or bone-powder must be continued
till the filtered liquid does not give the faintest clouding
with a drop of clear gelatin solution, and it is always very
difficult to be sure that the tannin is so completely removed
as with gelatin and salt. hide- or bone-powder may be
employed to determine the actual weight of any unknown
tannin absorbable by hide, by evaporating equal quantities
of the original infusion and of that freed from tannin by
digestion with the powder; the difference giving the tannin
absorbed. the evaporation must be conducted as far as possible
in absence of air, for instance in vacuo, or in a current
of carbonic dioxide, and the residues both dried at ° f.
(° c.) so long as they lose weight. the amount of matter
dissolved from an equal quantity of the hide- or bone-powder
by water must also be ascertained and taken into
the calculation.
ammoniacal solution of cupric acetate or sulphate has
been employed by several chemists to remove tannin from
solutions. n. h. darton of new york, who has a large
practice in tannin analysis, employs cuprammonic sulphate
in the following manner.
the infusion, for which  grm. of hemlock bark or a
corresponding quantity of other material must be used,
is made by exhausting with  or  quantities of water
successively, first cold, and then with heat (by placing the
flask in a pan of boiling water), each portion of water being
poured off into a litre flask. the last should be almost
colourless. the liquor is thus made up to nearly  litre,
 c.c. of dilute sulphuric acid (about  vol. concentrated in
) is added, and the liquor is filtered through a small filter,
which is finally rinsed with a small quantity of water.
liquid ammonia is now added till the liquor slightly smells
of it, and, if any precipitate is formed, it is filtered off as
before;  c.c. of dilute sulphuric acid is again added (which
should give the liquid an acid reaction), and it is made up to
 litre. the titration is done as described under löwenthal's
method, but instead of precipitating with gelatin,  c.c. is
mixed with  c.c. of a solution of copper sulphate to which
sufficient ammonia has been added to redissolve the precipitate
first formed, and containing / per cent. of copper
sulphate. this is well shaken and filtered, and the "not-tannin"
is determined in the filtrate just as with gelatin; a
little dilute sulphuric acid being added in the basin to
neutralise the ammonia. the writer has examined this
method with regard to a few tanning materials. with
valonia (and therefore probably with oak bark) the preliminary
treatment is unnecessary, and copper precipitation
gives results practically identical with the improved gelatin,
while it is less troublesome. on the other hand, a sample of
miller's hungarian larch extract which gave tannin equal
to · per cent. (by the gelatin method) gave no precipitate
with cuprammonic sulphate, and hence a result in tannin of
nil by darton's method. it is worth remark that by the copper
method it is therefore possible to estimate the valonia tannin
alone in a mixture of larch and valonia tannin. probably
this mode of analysis may also be utilised to separate other
tannins. with chestnut extract the results seem satisfactory,
as regards the precipitation of the tannin by copper, the
figures agreeing very closely with those by gelatin, but the
preliminary treatment with sulphuric acid and ammonia
precipitates about  per cent. of what is usually reckoned as
tannin, leaving · per cent. of tannin only instead of ·
per cent. as reckoned by the gelatin method; which, judging by
practical results in tanning, can hardly be accepted as correct.
the results of the gelatin method are found to agree fairly
with those of direct absorption by hide-powder, which is
strong confirmation that what is estimated as tannin is what
is absorbed by the hide. it is well known that sulphuric
acid precipitates many tannins, and in an experiment with
cutch it was found by the writer that saturation with salt
and the addition of dilute sulphuric acid as for löwenthal's
process, but without the gelatin, precipitated  per cent. of
the total tannin as usually reckoned.
it is obvious that it is impossible by analysis to compare
the relative value of different tannins, such as those of
myrobalans and gambier, or hemlock and valonia. all that
analysis can reasonably be expected to do is to give the
relative values of different samples of the same substance, or
at the most, of materials of the same class. all other comparisons
are misleading; and would be so, even if the exact
percentage of each tannin could be calculated; since the
commercial and practical value of different materials does not
depend on the quantity of tannin only, but on the character
of the leather it produces, hard or soft, dark- or light-coloured
and heavy- or light-weighing.
a commission of german technical chemists, under the
presidency of dr. councler of eberswalde, and including
messrs. eberz, kathreiner, schaun, von schroeder, and
simand, have recently reported on methods of tannin estimation
('bericht über die verhandlungen der commission
zur feststellung einer einheitlichen methode der gerbstoffbestimmung,'
cassel, ). after reviewing earlier methods,
they recommend the following modifications of the löwenthal
method, for general adoption.
chemicals employed.
() permanganate solution.  grm. of the purest potash
permanganate are dissolved in  litres of distilled water.
() indigo solution.  grm. dry sulphindigotate of soda
(carminum cærul. opt., "pure indigotin i" of gehe & co.,
dresden), air-dry, are dissolved in  litres of dilute sulphuric
«  »acid ( vol. hso to  vols, water),  litres of distilled water
are added, the whole is shaken till dissolved, and filtered.
in each titration,  c.c. are used in / litre of water, and
reduce about · c.c. of permanganate.
() hide-powder must be white and in a fine woolly state
of division, and should yield to cold water no substance
capable of reducing permanganate. such a powder is prepared
by dr. both of berlin,[n] and by the vienna research
station.
[n] messrs. mawson and swan, of newcastle, have kindly undertaken to
keep these, and the other reagents mentioned in this book, in stock for the
convenience of english tanners and chemists.
mode of titration.
instead of adding the permanganate solution drop by drop,
to the mixture of indigo, water, and liquor (as described,
p. ), it is recommended to add it  c.c. at a time,[o] vigorously
stirring - seconds after each addition. when the
liquid has become bright green, - drops at a time are
cautiously added with stirring, till the liquid is pure yellow.
either a beaker on a white tile or a white basin may be used
(compare p. ). it is advantageous in strong sunlight to
shade the window with white tissue-paper.
[o] it has been noted by several chemists, and especially by kathreiner,
and later by prof. von schroeder, that the quantity of permanganate
reduced by a given amount of tannin varies within rather wide limits,
according to the rate at which the permanganate is added; and the
" c.c. method" was suggested by prof. von schroeder, to secure uniformity
in this particular. it has, however, been found by the writer, in the
course of experiments not yet completed, that the quantity of permanganate
required, was a function not simply of time, but of the rapidity
of diffusion through so large a bulk of liquid; and by the alternate use of
a simple glass rod, and of a specially constructed perforated stirrer, he was
able, while adhering strictly to prof. von schroeder's directions, to obtain
results even more divergent by the " c.c. method" than could be obtained
by the drop method previously recommended, when properly carried out.
employed in conjunction with the use of tannin for standardising, as
recommended by the commission, either method gives perfectly dependable
results.
the explanation of the variation is a simple one. the oxidation in the
löwenthal process should be limited to indigo, and bodies more oxidisable
than indigo, but there exist both ready formed in liquor, and among these
oxidation products many substances which in the absence of indigo will
readily reduce permanganate. when the latter is added rapidly, and with
insufficient stirring, it destroys the indigo and tannin in contact with it,
and proceeds also to oxidise the other matters present, although in other
parts of the beaker indigo and tannin still exist. thus more permanganate
is reduced than corresponds to the indigo and tannin, and this is especially
so towards the end of the process, when very little of either remains. the
more slowly the permanganate is added, and the more vigorously it is
stirred, the more closely it will approximate to the theoretical quantity
required merely to oxidise the indigo and tannin. it seems to the writer
more scientific to approach this as nearly as possible, than to attempt
to establish a purely arbitrary standard such as the " c.c. method;" but
he would rather refrain from committing himself to a definite opinion
till his experiments are complete.
pl. v.
e. & f. n. spon, london & new york.
standardisation of the permanganate.
to avoid the uncertainty involved in comparing tannin
(which reduces different quantities of permanganate according
to the method of titration) with so dissimilar a reducing
agent as oxalic acid, it is recommended to employ tannin,
titrated under precisely the same conditions as the tanning
material, so that whatever method be employed, the differences
will be common to both, and will so be eliminated. prof. von
schroeder has shown (report, p. ) by careful experiment,
that with the purest samples of tannin the permanganate
value estimated on the total dry substance of the tannin
varied by very little from that of the part of the tannin
absorbed by hide as determined by hammer's process, but on
the average bore the proportion of  : ·. the percentage
of water in an air-dried tannin must be estimated by drying
a portion at °-° f. (°-° c.) and determining the
loss, and a quantity equivalent to  grm. must be dissolved in
 litre of water and  c.c. titrated with indigo in the usual
way. if the permanganate value thus obtained be multiplied
by ·, it will be equivalent to that of  grm. of chemically
pure tannin. it is only necessary to determine the moisture
occasionally, if the tannin be kept in a well-closed box or
bottle.
to ascertain if a tannin is pure enough for this, use a
solution made as above described (it is not necessary to
determine the moisture) and  c.c. are titrated with permanganate
in the usual way.  c.c. are then digested in the
cold with  grm. hide-powder (previously moistened with distilled
water and well squeezed in linen) for - hours, with
frequent shaking, filtered, and  c.c. again titrated. if the
second titration ("not-tannin") does not exceed  per cent.
of the total, it is good, but it may be used so long as the "not-tannin"
does not exceed  per cent.[p] the purest tannin
examined by prof. von schroeder was schering's phar. ger.,
which may be obtained of messrs. mawson and swan.
[p] gallic acid suggests itself to the writer as being a good standard,
since it behaves with permanganate like tannin, and being crystalline is
easily purified and of definite composition.
fig. .
fig. .
the course of analysis is as follows:—
preparation of the infusions.—extracts are dissolved in hot
water, and if necessary, filtered. barks and other solid
materials are treated in prof.
von schroeder's extraction-apparatus
(fig. ) (which seems
very well adapted for its purpose).
this consists of a perfectly
cylindrical vessel of cast-tin, about · c.m. deep and 
c.m. diameter. a strainer covered
with fine muslin fits it like a
piston.[q] the powdered material
is placed in the cylinder, and
stirred up with  c.c. of cold
water. at the end of an hour,
the piston is inserted and pressed
down gently, the clear liquor is
poured off, and the process is 
times repeated with hot water,
at intervals of / hour, placing the cylinder in a water-bath.
the liquid is made up to  litre, and, if necessary, filtered
(report, p. ). the quantity of material used should be such
as to give an infusion of which  c.c. do not reduce more than
 c.c. permanganate. if it is desired to determine separately
the "easily soluble tannin" (viz. that
extracted by cold water), real's press
(fig. ) is employed, which consists
of a cylinder a, through which water
may be forced by the pressure of a
column of liquid. the small sieve d,
covered with a disc of linen, is placed
in a, next the tanning material previously
thoroughly moistened with
water, and the tap is closed. the
press is then filled with water and left
 hours under a pressure of / metres.
the tap is then opened and  litre is
allowed to run through in the course
of about  hours, and mixed by shaking.
the material is finally exhausted
like a new material in von schroeder's
apparatus to extract the difficultly
soluble tannin.
[q] both this apparatus, and the real's press, may be obtained from
c. focke, zinngiesser, grosse kirchgasse , dresden.
the titration is carried out as before
described; in each infusion separately
to determine the "not-tannin"  c.c.
are treated with  grm. hide-powder,
and  c.c. are titrated.
it may be well in conclusion for the
writer to state for the information of
the non-chemical reader, that though
for purposes of comparison of the results
of different chemists, it is most
desirable to have a standard method
of the highest possible perfection;
any of the accepted modifications of
the löwenthal method will give excellent practical results in
careful hands.
sole-leather:—preparing the hides.
the principal sources of hides for sole-leather are:—
(i.) market hides, from the cattle slaughtered for food in
the united kingdom. these are received by the tanner,
fresh, or slightly salted, and are either bought directly from
the butcher, or, now more commonly, through the auction
markets established in all large towns. the latter system,
while it perhaps slightly enhances the price of the hides to
the tanner, ensures him a better classification according to
weight, and, in some cases, as notably in that of glasgow, a
better flaying, through an organised system of inspection
and sorting. the scotch hides, being mostly from highland
cattle, are many of them small and very plump, for, as a rule,
the hides are thickest on those animals which are exposed to
cold and the hardships of out-door life. on the other hand,
the hides of highly-bred cattle are apt to be thin and
spreading; and, if they have been kept much indoors, and
negligently managed, the grain of the hide is injured by
the dung which adheres to it. the irish hides are usually
somewhat roughly flayed.
(ii.) south american hides are from the river plate,
uruguay, and rio grande. those from the river plate are
considered the best, as being stoutest and finest in texture.
they are usually cured by salting, and are known as
"saladeros," "estancias," and "mataderos," according to the
slaughter and cure. the saladeros are the best, and are
from cattle killed at large slaughtering establishments on the
coast. the estancias are from cattle killed in the interior,
and are worse in flaying than the saladeros, but free from
the objectionable dark cure of the mataderos, which are
killed by the city butchers. many hides are brought from
brazil, and are generally both salted and sun-dried, or
simply stretched out and dried. hides are also imported
from valparaiso, both dry and wet-salted.
chinese and west indian hides are mostly dried. chinese
hides are occasionally infected with bacillus anthracis, which
produces the dangerous "malignant-pustule," or "wool-sorters'
disease." hence any pimple appearing after working
with such hides should have immediate medical attention.
french market hides have been of recent years largely
imported; they are mostly well flayed, and some of them
very heavy, but are sold at original butchers' weight, and,
in the experience of some tanners, the result in leather is
- per cent. less than from english market hides. they
usually lose about  per cent. in skulling and salting.
lisbon hides are often well flayed, but are frequently
branded, and the grain is injured by insects. they yield
considerably more leather than market hides in proportion
to weight. hambro' hides are salted, but mostly wet and
ill-flayed. very heavy hides are produced in the rhine
district and in switzerland.
for further information about hides, see the commercial
section.
preparation for tanning.—market hides should be well
washed in fresh water, to remove blood and dirt, before
unhairing; but prolonged soaking dissolves a portion of
hide-substance, and probably reduces weight, though it
facilitates the action of the lime. it is very advantageous
if grease and flesh, and also dung can be removed before
liming, and if hand-labour is too costly machinery might be
employed. salted hides should be soaked somewhat longer,
and in clean water, so as to remove the salt before liming.
this water should be frequently changed, since  per cent.
brine dissolves coriin freely (see p. ). dried hides require
more lengthened treatment. before they are prepared for
tanning, they must be brought back as far as possible to the
condition of fresh hides, and, for this purpose, must be
thoroughly soaked and softened in water. there are many
ways of doing this: sometimes hides are suspended in
running water; sometimes laid in soaks, which may be
either renewed, or allowed to putrefy; sometimes in water
to which salt, borax, or carbolic acid has been added, to
prevent putrefaction.
the first of these methods, were it desirable, is rarely
possible in these days of river pollution acts; of the others,
it is difficult to say which is better, since the treatment
desirable varies with the hardness of the hide and the
temperature at which it has been dried. the great object
is to thoroughly soften the hide, without allowing putrefaction
to injure it. as dried hides are often damaged already
from this cause, either before drying, or from becoming
moist and heated on ship-board, it is frequently no easy
matter to accomplish this. the fresh hide, as has been seen,
contains considerable portions of albumen, and if the hide is
dried at a high temperature, this becomes wholly or partially
coagulated and insoluble. the gelatinous fibre and the
coriin (if indeed the latter exists ready formed in the fresh
hide) do not coagulate by heat, but also become less readily
soluble. gelatin dried at ° f. (° c.) can only be
redissolved by acids, or water at ° f. (° c.). eitner
experimented with pieces of green calf-skin of equal thickness,
which were dried at different temperatures, with results
given in the following table:—
sample.
temperature of drying.
remarks.
time ofsofteningin water.
remarks.
coriin dissolvedby saltsolution.
in vacuo
hours
withoutmechanicalwork
· per cent.
in sun
 days
in drying-closet
twice worked
refused to softensufficiently fortanning
traces.
hence it is evident that, for hides dried at low temperatures,
short soaking in fresh and cold water is sufficient, and,
except in warm weather, there would be little danger of
putrefaction. with harder drying, longer time is required,
and it may be necessary to use brine instead of water.
a well-known tanner recommends a solution of °-°
barkometer (sp. gr. ·, or about  per cent. of nacl).
this will have a double action, not only preserving from
putrefaction, but dissolving a portion of the hide-substance
in the form of coriin. although this is undoubtedly a loss
to the tanner, it is questionable if there is any process which
will soften overdried hides without loss of weight: since
even prolonged soaking in cold water at too low a temperature
to allow of putrefaction will dissolve a serious amount
of hide-substance. water containing a small quantity of carbolic
acid has been recommended for the purpose, and will
prevent putrefaction, while it has no solvent power on the
hide, but, on the contrary, will coagulate and render insoluble
albuminous matters. concentrated carbolic acid, however,
tans the grain and renders it incapable of colouring
in the liquors. borax has been proposed for the same purpose,
and, in strong solution, certainly prevents putrefaction,
but is probably too costly. sodium sulphide and other sulphides
seem to have considerable effect in softening dried
hides, from their property of attacking hard albuminous
matters, without injuring the true hide-fibre.
for some descriptions of hides, however, and notably for
india kips, putrid soaks seem actually to be an advantage,
the putrefactive action softening and rendering soluble the
hardened tissue. in india the native tanners soften their
hides in very few hours by plunging them in putrid pools,
into which every description of tannery refuse is allowed to
run. putrefactive processes are always dangerous, as the
action, through changes of temperature, or variation in the
previous state of the liquor, is apt to be irregular, and either
to attack one portion of the hide before another, or to proceed
faster than was expected. hence hides in the soaks require
constant and careful watching, and the goods must be withdrawn
as soon as they are thoroughly softened, for the
putrefaction is constantly destroying as well as softening
the hides. it is possible that putrefactive softening is less
injurious to kips, and such goods as are intended for upper-leather,
than to those for sole purposes, as it is generally
considered necessary in the former case that the albumen
and interfibrillary matter be removed, and that the fibre
be well divided into its constituent fibrils for the sake of
softness and pliability; so that the putrid soak, if acting
rightly, only accomplishes a part of the work which would
afterwards have to be done by the lime and the bate. the
actual fibre of the hide seems less readily putrescible than
the albuminoid parts; hence the putrefaction may soften
the latter better, and even at less expense of valuable hide-substance,
because more rapidly, than fresh water. on
this point, there is room for investigation. putrefaction is
a general name for a class of decompositions which are
caused by a great variety of living organisms, each of which
has its own special products and modes of action. it is
quite possible that, if we knew what precise form of putrefaction
was most advantageous, we might by appropriate
conditions be able to encourage it to the exclusion of others,
and obtain better results than at present. it will be necessary
to revert to this subject when speaking of the bates
used in preparing dressing-leather, which also owe their
activity to putrid fermentation.
beside merely soaking the hides, it is necessary to work
them mechanically, to promote their softening, which was
formerly accomplished by "breaking over" the hides on the
beam with a blunt knife. this process is now usually
superseded or supplemented by the use of the "stocks";
these consist of a wooden or metallic box, of peculiar shape,
wherein work  very heavy hammers, raised alternately
by pins in a wheel, and let fall upon the hides, which they
force up against the side of the box with a sort of kneading
action. the ordinary form of this machine is shown in
fig. . a more modern form, which seems to possess some
advantages, is the american double-shover, seen in fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
the number of hides which can be stocked at once
naturally varies with the size of both hides and stocks, but
should be such that the hides work regularly and steadily
over and over. the whole number should not be put in at
once, but should be added one after another, as they get into
regular work. the duration of stocking is - min.,
according to the condition and character of the hides. hides
should not be stocked till they are so far softened that they
can be doubled sharply, without breaking or straining the
fibre. after stocking, they must be soaked again for a short
time, and then be brought into an old lime. a small
quantity of sodium sulphide added to the soaks or in the
stocks has been recommended as of great value in softening
obstinate hides, and probably with justice, from its well-known
softening action upon cellular and horny tissues.
in continental yards, another machine is in use for
softening hides, and which seems to present some advantages
over stocks, as being less severe on the thinner portions of
the hide. it consists of a pair of rollers, arranged like
those of a wringing machine, and pressed together by
springs, but not allowed to come into actual contact. one
of them is studded with rounded pegs, which correspond in
position to grooves round the other, and the hide when
passed between them is thus subjected to a very thorough
kneading and stretching. tumbler drums of various forms
may also be used with good effect for softening purposes,
especially for skins.
sole-leather:—unhairing hides.
in england, lime is the agent almost universally employed
for loosening the hair, though every tanner admits its
deficiencies and disadvantages. it is hard, however, to
recommend a substitute which is free from the same or
greater evils, and lime has one or two valuable qualities
which will make it very difficult to supersede. one of
these is that, though it inevitably causes loss of substance
and weight, it is also impossible, with any reasonable care,
totally to destroy a pack of hides by its use; which is by no
means the case with some of its rivals. another advantage
is that, owing to its very limited solubility in water, it is a
matter of comparatively small consequence whether much or
little is used; and even if the hides are left in a few days
longer than necessary, the mischief, though certain, is only
to be detected by careful and accurate observation. with
all other methods, exact time and quantity are of primary
importance, and it is not easy to get ordinary workmen to
pay the necessary attention to such details. again, the
qualities of lime, its virtues and failings, have been matter
of experience for hundreds of years, and so far as such
experience can teach, we know exactly how to deal with it.
a new method, on the other hand, brings new and unlooked-for
difficulties, and often requires changes in other parts of
the process, as well as in the mere unhairing, to make it
successful. as our knowledge of the chemical and physical
changes involved becomes greater, we may look to overcoming
these obstacles more readily; for the power of dealing
successfully with new difficulties constitutes one of the
main advantages of a really scientific knowledge over an
empirical one.
slaked lime is soluble in water at ° f. (° c.), to the
extent of  part in . unlike most substances, it decreases
in solubility at higher temperatures, requiring  parts of
water at ° f. (° c.), and  parts at ° f. (° c.).
its action upon animal tissues increases rapidly, however,
with temperature, though no doubt it is moderated to some
extent by the lessened solubility. calculating from dalton's
numbers, pure lime-water at ° f. (° c.) contains ·
grm.[r] of cao per litre, and should require  c.c. of decinormal
acid to neutralise it. this estimate in some cases appears to
be slightly too high; e. g. a saturated lime-water from carboniferous
limestone at .° f. (° c.) required only  c.c.
of decinormal acid, which equals · grm. of cao per litre,
and this lime-water, kept with excess of lime, gave nearly
constant results for many months together. a magnesian
limestone lime-water tested at the same time required  c.c.
of decinormal acid, confirming the old observation of tanners,
that such lime is stronger than that made either from
chalk or carboniferous limestone. this increased strength
must arise from the presence of some soluble base other than
lime, and may be due to the magnesia, which, however, is
very slightly soluble. magnesian limestone contains a very
large amount of magnesia, and hence would not go so far
as a purer limestone; but as a very large proportion of the
lime ordinarily used is thrown away undissolved, this is perhaps
of little practical moment. (for the chemical examination
of limes, see p. ).
[r]  grm. per litre is very approximately equal to  oz. per cub. ft.
the action of lime on the hide has already been spoken
of to some extent. it is throughout a solvent one. the
hardened cells of the epidermis swell up and soften, the rete
malpighi and the hair-sheaths are loosened and dissolved, so
that, on scraping with a blunt knife, both come away more or
less completely with the hair (constituting "scud," as some
english tanners name it, ger. gneist or grund). the hair
itself is very slightly altered, except at its soft and growing
root-bulb, but the true skin is vigorously acted on. the
fibres swell and absorb water, so that the hides become plump
and swollen, and, at the same time, the "cement-substance"
(coriin) is dissolved, the fibres become differentiated into finer
fibrils, and the fibrils themselves become first swollen and
transparent, and finally corroded, and even dissolved. this
swelling of the fibres is produced both by alkalies and acids,
and is probably due to weak combinations formed with the
fibre-substance, which have greater affinities for water than
the unaltered hide. it is useful to the tanner, since it renders
the hide easier to "flesh" (i. e. to free from the adhering
flesh), on account of the greater firmness which it gives to
the true skin. it also assists the tanning, by opening up
the fibre, and so exposing a greater surface. this is advantageous
in dressing leather which is afterwards tanned in
sweet liquors, and must have the cement-substance dissolved
and removed for the sake of flexibility; and, in the case of
sole-leather, it is necessary for the sake of weight and firmness
that the hide be plumped; but it is probable that the
effect is produced with less loss of substance and solidity by
suitable acidity of the liquors. a more certain advantage of
lime is that it acts on the fat of the hide, converting it more
or less completely into an insoluble soap, and so hindering
its injurious effects on the after tanning process, and on the
finished leather. if strong acids are used later on, this lime
soap is decomposed, and the grease is again set free. in
sweated or very low-limed hides this grease is a formidable
evil.
the customary method of liming is simply to lay the hides
flat in milk of lime in large pits. every day, or even twice
a day, the hides are drawn out ("hauled"), and the pit is
well plunged up, to distribute the undissolved lime through
the liquor. the hides are then drawn in again ("set"),
care being taken that they are fully spread out. how
much lime is required is doubtful, but owing to its limited
solubility, an excess, if well slaked, is rather wasteful than
injurious. great differences exist in the quantity of the lime
used, the time given, and the method of working. lime, as
we have seen (p. ), is only soluble to the extent of about
· grm. per litre, or (as  cub. ft. of water weighs about
 oz.) say / oz. per cub. ft., or, in an ordinary lime-pit,
not more than / lb. per hide. only the lime in solution
acts on the hide, but it is necessary to provide a surplus of
solid lime which dissolves as that in the liquor is consumed.
jackson schultz prescribes  bush. ( lb.) of fresh lime to
- hides, and - days as sufficient time to unhair and
plump them; while a well-known english tanner states
that, after working for - days through a series of old
limes, the hides (presumably wet-salted south americans)
should have  days in a fresh lime, made with - lb. of
lime per hide. it is obvious that if the american authority
is right, the english process is wasteful in the extreme, both
in hide-substance and lime. much depends on the amount
of hauling which the hides receive, and the more frequently
they are moved the better. it is probable, however, that it
would be found impossible to unhair and flesh hides, to suit
the english market, in cold limes with the quantity and time
mentioned, and if the limes are steamed, it is quite likely
that the destructive action on the pelt may be even greater
than by the longer and slower process in the cold. most
likely a compromise between the two is the most desirable,
but about - lb. of lime per hide, according to weight, should
be amply sufficient; while a week for market hides, and 
days for heavy salted, will loosen the hair and plump the
pelt as much as is requisite. this is on the supposition that
the limes are kept at a uniform average temperature of about
° f. (° c.) in winter and summer. if they are heated
to °-° f. (°-° c.), of course much less time is required;
but there are no published experiments showing the
relative weights made by the two processes, and, from the
fact that warmed limes are principally used for descriptions
of leather where weight and solidity are not of primary
importance, it may be concluded that, in this direction, the
results are unsatisfactory. hides do not plump in warm
limes.
another undecided point is whether the best results are
obtained by making fresh limes for every pack, or by
strengthening up the old ones. an old lime becomes charged
with decomposing animal matter and with ammonia, and,
within limits, loosens the hair more effectually than a new
one. an experienced tanner states that, by using old limes,
better weights are obtained, but that the leather is thinner
than when a fresh portion of lime is used; and this is quite
possible. if, however, the old lime-liquor be retained too
long, it ceases to swell the hides as it should, and, in warm
weather, the liming proper is complicated by a putrefactive
process allied in principle to sweating.
beside considerable quantities of ammonia, old limes contain
tyrosin, leucin or amidocaproic acid, and some caproic
acid, the disagreeable goaty odour of which is very obvious on
acidifying an old lime-liquor with sulphuric acid, by which
considerable quantities of a partially altered gelatin are at
the same time precipitated. very old limes, especially in
hot weather, often contain active bacteria, which may be
seen in the microscope under a good /-in. objective. their
presence is always an indication that putrefaction is going
forward, and leather out of such limes will generally prove
loose and hollow-grained. spherical concretions of calcium
carbonate may also be seen under the microscope, resembling
on a smaller scale those found in permian limestone, and
caused perhaps in both cases by crystallisation from a liquid
containing much organic matter. it is probable that in
many tanneries the ammonia would pay for recovery from
the lime-liquors, which would be easily done by steaming
the old limes in suitable vessels, and condensing the ammoniacal
vapours in dilute sulphuric acid. (some appliances
suitable for this purpose are described in the journal of the
soc. of chem. industry, iii. .) for methods of estimation
of ammonia, see p. .
several variations in the above-described method of liming
have been proposed. the hides may be suspended on laths,
or by strings attached to pegs or notches, and the liquor
agitated by plunging in place of hauling. probably this is
an actual improvement, especially if some mechanical agitating
contrivance be substituted for hand plunging. it has,
however, the drawback that much room is required, though
this may be, to some extent, compensated by the hides liming
more quickly. the method has been long in use in america,
and had been tried in several places in england before the
patent of messrs. conyers and pullein was obtained. two
other american labour-saving methods in connection with
liming may be mentioned here. one is to have the liming-vat
double the ordinary size, and, instead of hauling the
hides, to simply draw them from one side to the other by
two strings, which are attached to the fore and hind shank of
each hide, either by sharp iron hooks or by loops. the
strings are looped over iron rods at the four corners of the pit,
or have simple knots, which are placed in notches sawn in
wood. of course, while the hides are at one side of the pit,
the other side may be plunged or warmed. the other method
(fig. ) is to have a spindle sunk below the surface of the
liquor, and with discs a, at each end, to which the hides
or sides are attached by hooks set round the edges. the
hides are turned over by revolving the spindle with a handspike
inserted in the holes c, at the ends of the cross-arms
b, and the whole spindle is also capable of being raised and
lowered in the liquor, in the slot d. in germany, hides
are frequently suspended on laths radiating from a central
upright revolving spindle in a round vat (drehkalk).
an american plan, sometimes known as the "buffalo
method," is described by jackson schultz. the hide is prepared
in the usual way, and is then thrown into a strong lime
for - hours, when it is taken out and immersed in water
heated up to ° f. (° c.), in which it remains - hours.
the warm water soaks, softens, and swells the roots of the
hair, and much the same result is obtained as in "scalding"
pigs. so little lime really permeates the inner fibre that, after
a slight wheeling, the hides may be thrown into cold water,
and allowed to cool and plump, preparatory to taking their
places in the handlers. the process is strongly recommended
for sole-leather, particularly where great firmness of fibre is
desired. the tanner who tries it must be satisfied if he gets
- sides a man unhaired and fully ready for the liquor per
diem. of course this process may be varied to any extent by
giving more liming, and less hot water, and this is frequently
done in america. about - days' cold liming in good limes,
and with hauling if possible twice daily, followed by -
hours in water at °-° f. (°-° c.), which should be
changed at least once, will give good results. the hides are of
course less plump than usual, but if properly managed in the
handlers will swell well in the tan-house. grease is obviously
less thoroughly "killed" than in the ordinary method, and
especial care must be used that the hides are well worked
on the beam, both on grain and flesh. in this method, and
indeed in all liming processes, much is gained if the fat can
be fleshed off green.
fig. .
on the continent and in america, the prevalent mode of
loosening the hair, at least for sole-leather purposes, is called
"sweating," and consists in inducing an incipient putrefaction,
which attacks the soft parts of the epidermis and root-sheaths,
before materially injuring the hide-substance proper.
the old european method of "warm-sweating" consisted
simply in laying the hides in pile, and, if necessary, in
supplying heat by covering them with fermenting tan; but
as this crude and dangerous process is everywhere being
supplanted by the american plan, where sweating at all is
adhered to, it is not necessary to do more than describe the
latter. this is called "cold sweating," but really consists
in hanging the hides in a moist chamber, kept at a uniform
temperature of °-° f. (°-° c.); or in some cases
slightly warmer.
the "sweating-pit" now in use is sometimes of wood, but
usually consists of a building of brick or stone, protected
from changes of temperature, both above, and at the sides, by
thick banks of soil or spent tan. if soil be used, it will
form an excellent bed for vines, &c., which are fertilised by
the ammonia penetrating from below, which is evolved in
large quantities and which assists the unhairing process
by its action on the epidermis.[s] though called a "pit,"
it is undesirable that it should be actually below the level of
the ground, but should be arranged so that the hides can be
wheeled in and out in barrows. it is lighted and ventilated
by a lantern roof above a central passage, and should be
divided into chambers, each capable of suspending a pack of
hides. by means of sprinklers above and steam-pipes below,
the chambers may be cooled or warmed, as required, and the
air kept so moist that globules of condensed water collect on
all parts of the hides, which are suspended from tenterhooks.
[s] hides have been unhaired by the action of gaseous ammonia alone,
but the method does not seem suited for technical use.
the process is principally used in america for dried hides,
but may be employed either for wet or dry salted, after
complete removal of the salt. it is imperatively necessary
that dried hides should be completely softened before sweating.
as the sweating process advances more rapidly in the upper
than in the lower part of the pit, and as the thick portions
are more resistant than the thin ones, the hides, after about
 days' sweating, require constant attention in changing
their positions, and in checking the forward ones by taking
down and laying in piles on the bottom of the pit.
the usual treatment for sweated hides, when the hair
is sufficiently loosened, is to throw them into the stocks,
and work out in this way the slime and most of the hair.
this has the disadvantage of working out too much of the
dissolved gelatin, and of fulling the hair so firmly into the
flesh, that it is difficult again to remove it. to overcome
these evils, some american tanners now pass the hides, after
sweating, through a weak lime. this, to a great extent,
prevents the hair fixing itself in the flesh, and tends to
counteract the injurious effect of the vitriol (which is almost
invariably used in plumping sweat stock) on the colour of the
leather. by this process, , texas and new orleans
wet-salted hides gave an average yield of leather of  per
cent. on their green weight, and the leather was excellent in
quality (schultz). if sweated or very lightly limed hides
are imperfectly worked on the grain, greasy spots are apt to
remain, which will not colour in the liquors ("white spots").
these may be made to colour by scraping and working the
grain with a knife, or by the application of a solution of soda
or soda ash, and would probably be avoided by the use of
soda ash in the soaks on greasy parcels of hides.
it must be clearly understood that all sweating depends
on partial putrefaction. this is proved both by the plentiful
production of ammonia in the pits, and by the fact that
antiseptics, such as salt or carbolic acid, entirely prevent
sweating till they are removed. although the process undoubtedly
has advantages, and especially so in the treatment
of dried hides, it is an open question whether it gives the
extreme gains over liming in weight and firmness, which are
claimed by some of its advocates.
an unhairing process, largely coming into use on the
continent, depends on the action of alkaline sulphides, and
particularly sodium sulphide, upon the hair. while all the
methods already spoken of involve the softening and destruction
of the hair-sheaths, either by lime or by putrefaction,
the sulphides are peculiar in attacking the hair itself; when
strong, they disintegrate it rapidly and completely into a sort
of paste. from very early times to the present day, arsenic
sulphide ("rusma") mixed with lime has been used in unhairing
skins for glove-leather and similar purposes. about
, böttger concluded that the efficacy of arsenic sulphide
was due simply to the sulphydrate of lime formed by combination
of the sulphur with the lime, and proposed lime
sulphydrate, formed by passing sulphuretted hydrogen into
milk of lime, as a substitute for the poisonous and expensive
arsenic compound. it proved a most effective depilatory,
but has never obtained much hold in practice. this is
probably due to the fact that it will not keep, oxidising
rapidly on exposure to the air; hence it must be prepared as
it is required, which is both troublesome and expensive. a
minor objection is the unpleasant smell of sulphuretted
hydrogen, which is inseparable from its use.
it was proposed to replace it by sodium sulphide, which,
though at first said to be only effective when mixed with
lime, so as to produce calcic sulphide, has since proved a
powerful depilatory alone. its use has been greatly extended
on the one hand by its production on a large scale,
and in the crystallised form (at first by reduction of
sulphate by heating with small coal), and on the other, by
the great interest which wilhelm eitner, the able director
of the austrian imperial research station for the leather
trades, has taken in its introduction. the substance, as
manufactured by de haen, of list, hanover, is in small
crystals, coloured deep greenish-black, by iron sulphide,
which must have been held in suspension at the time of
crystallisation. if the salt be dissolved in water, and the
solution be allowed to stand, this is gradually deposited as a
black sediment, leaving the supernatant liquor perfectly
clear and colourless. sodium sulphide is now manufactured
from tank waste in a much purer form by schaffner and
helbig's process, of which messrs. gamble of st. helens are
sole licencees. the crystallised salt is snaaq, and
therefore contains · per cent. of water.
for sole-leather, the method recommended by eitner is to
dissolve - lb. of sulphide per gal. of water, making the
solution into a thin paste (of soupy consistence) with lime or
pipe-clay. this is spread liberally on the hair side of the
hides, one man pouring it down the middle of the hide from
a pail, while another, with a mop or cane broom, rubs it into
every part. the hide is then folded into a cushion, and in
- hours will be ready for unhairing, the hair being
reduced to a paste. in the writer's experience, the concentrated
solution here prescribed will completely destroy all
hair wetted with it in - hours, and if left on longer, will
produce bluish patches, and render the grain very tender.
the hides should be thrown into water before unhairing, to
enable them to plump, and to wash off the sulphide, which is
very caustic, attacking the skin and nails of the workmen.
there is no doubt that this process gives good weight, and
tough and solid leather; but there are several difficulties
attending its use. unless the mopping is done with great
care, it will fail to completely destroy the hair, and the
patches of short hair left are very difficult to remove. the
expense of the material and the loss of hair are also important
considerations. the hides are rather difficult to
flesh, unless previously plumped by a light liming, and it is
necessary to swell them with acid or sour liquor in the tanhouse,
as the sulphide has but little plumping effect.
another method, which is much cheaper in labour and
easier in execution, is to suspend in a solution of sodium
sulphide, containing / lb. a hide or upwards; the hide should
unhair in  hours. very weak solutions loosen the hair, without
destroying it; but it is always weakened, as the specific
action of the sulphides is on the hair itself. after or before
unhairing, the hides may receive a light liming, to plump
them, or lime may be added to the solution of sulphide, which
by forming calcium sulphide, and liberating caustic soda,
considerably increases the unhairing and plumping effect.
the pit may be several times strengthened for successive
packs, but the loosened hair must be fished out, or it will
quickly spoil the solution. when hides have been suspended
in sodium sulphide solution, the hair is very quickly
loosened by a short liming. squire, claus, and j. palmer
have all taken out patents for the use of tank-waste as a
depilatory. it consists of impure calcium sulphides, and
when brought into the form of soluble sulphydrate, either
by boiling in water, or by the oxidising action of the air,
it will unhair hides. the conversion is, however, very
imperfect in either case, and its action is uncertain and slow;
while the iron present is apt to cause unsightly stains. it
is probable that the weights obtained may somewhat exceed
those by liming. palmer employs sulphuric acid to plump
the hide and remove stains, and then reduces it by a bate of
whiting and water. he claims that this prepares the hide
for rapid and heavy tanning, but the swelling and subsequent
reduction almost certainly entail loss of weight and quality,
and to get good results the bate should at most only be allowed
to have a superficial effect. professor lufkin proposed the
use of a mixture of various sulphides of lime and soda, formed
by mixing  lb. each of soda ash and sulphur, kneading to
a paste with a little moist slaked and then mixing warm in a
cask with  lb. stone lime slaked to a paste. this quantity
will unhair  hides in the same way and in about the same
time as an ordinary lime. the pelt is not much plumped
and is easily reduced by a few minutes' wheeling in warm
water. (j. s. schultz.)
various other depilatories have been proposed, but as they
have not come into general use, brief mention of the most
important will suffice. anderson, in , patented the use
of wood-charcoal, applied in a similar manner to lime in the
ordinary process. the hair is probably loosened simply by
putrefaction, as in sweating, while the charcoal acts as a
deodoriser, very little smell being produced, and the action
proceeding with considerable uniformity. john palmer has
patented a process for unhairing, in which the hides are alternately
steeped in water and exposed to the air till the hair
loosens. in this, very similar principles to those of the
charcoal method are involved. caustic potash and soda will
loosen hair, but seem to have no decided advantage over
lime, though it is quite possible that in skilful hands good
results might be obtained. they are more costly, and their
corroding action on the hide-substance is more powerful, but
they form soluble soaps with the grease of the hide. unless
used in very dilute solution, the pelt is so swollen as to fix
the hair, and the leather is dark-coloured and spongy. soda-ash
or crystals (sodic carbonate) may be used to strengthen
ordinary limes, in which caustic soda is formed. the time
of liming is shortened, the hides are more swollen, and the
grease is better "killed" than when lime alone is used. the
patent for moret's "inoffensive" claimed the use of the
carbonate or caustic potash formed from calcined wool-washings,
for unhairing. this is more costly than, and has no
advantage over soda. i am not aware whether "inoffensive,"
as now sold, has other constituents.
whatever method of loosening the hair may be adopted,
the next step is to remove it by mechanical means. this is
usually accomplished by throwing the hide over a sloping
beam, and scraping it with a blunt two-handled knife
(fig. ), the workman pushing the hair downwards and
away from him. the beam is now usually made of metal.
the knife employed is also shown at c, fig. .
when a hide is lightly limed, it is often easy to remove
the long hair, but excessively difficult to get rid of the short
under-coat of young hairs, which are found in spring, and
which can sometimes only be removed by the dangerous
expedient of shaving with a sharp knife. the reason of this
difficulty is obvious: not only do the short hairs offer very
little hold to the unhairing knife, but, as has been explained
in describing the anatomical structure of the skin, their roots
are actually deeper seated than those of the old hairs they
replace. several attempts have been made to unhair by
machinery, but so far without such success as to lead to their
general adoption. the fleshing-machine invented by garric
and terson, and manufactured in this country by t. haley
and co., of bramley (fig. ), is furnished with a special
wheel for unhairing. an american machine for the purpose,
invented by j. w. macdonald, and said to be capable of
unhairing  sides a day, is shown in fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
when the hair is very thoroughly loosened, as by sweating,
or destroyed, as by sodium sulphide, it is not uncommon to
work it off by friction in the stocks; but it is very doubtful
whether the saving of labour is not more than compensated
by the loss of weight, consequent upon submitting the hide
while its gelatin is in a partially dissolved condition, to such
rough usage.
fig. .
after unhairing, the loose flesh and fat are removed from
the inner side of the hide by a sharp-edged knife e (fig. ),
partly by brushing or scraping, partly by paring. it is
necessary not only to cut off the visible adhering fat, but to
work the hide well, so as to force out that contained in the
loose areolar tissue, which would not only impede tanning,
but is liable to soak completely through the hide, producing
most unsightly blotches. several machines have been introduced
to supersede hand-fleshing, but with only partial
success. one of the best is garric and terson's machine
(fig. ), which gives a very level flesh, free from galls, and
without so much loss of weight, but scarcely so clean as
desirable, while the saving in labour is not great. molinier's
machine (fig. ), and that of jones and rocke, are well
adapted for skins, but hardly capable of fleshing an entire
hide. all these machines are very similar in principle, the
working parts consisting of drums with oblique or spiral
knives.
when unhaired and fleshed, the hides intended for sole-leather
are, in england, almost invariably "rounded," or
separated into () "butts," which are the best and thickest
parts, and receive the most solid tannage, and () "offal,"
which is thinner, and for which a cheaper and more rapid
tannage is sufficient. fig.  shows the customary division.
frequently the butt is divided down the centre, and the
halves are then called "bends." a piece called a "middle"
is sometimes taken between the butt and the shoulder.
fig. .
after rounding, it is necessary to get rid of the lime, as
completely as possible, before taking into the tan-house.
for this purpose, the butts are usually suspended in fresh
water for - hours, and frequently shaken up in it to
remove adhering lime and dirt. if the water is hard, it is
best to add to it, before putting in the butts, a few pailfuls
of clear lime-water, to precipitate the lime bicarbonate,[t]
which would otherwise cause a deposit of chalk on the
surface of the butts; this would not only make the grain
harsh, but afterwards, by combining with the tannin of the
liquors, would cause bad colour. for the same reasons, it is
important that limey hides should be as little exposed to the
air as possible, as the latter always contains a small amount
of carbonic acid, which renders the lime insoluble.
[t] lime softens water containing lime bicarbonate in solution by combining
with half the carbonic acid, when the whole is precipitated as
normal carbonate or chalk. cao + caco . hco = caco + oh.
this is clark's process. see also p. .
this suspension in water is frequently considered sufficient
for sole-leather, but it removes the lime very imperfectly.
in olden days, it was customary not only to wash the hides
much more thoroughly in water, but to "scud" them (i.e.
work them over with a blunt knife), to remove lime, and the
detritus of hair-roots and fat-glands, and this should never
be omitted from sole-leather treatment where bright colour
and clean buff are desired. some tanners go so far as to
bate best butts slightly with hen-dung, but with such treatment
firmness and weight are lost. washing in weak
solution of sugar, or ammonic chloride or sulphate, or of
sulphuric, or hydrochloric acid, may be adopted. it is
essential to use acids nearly free from iron, as it may be precipitated
on the butts and give a bluish colour in the liquors,
and the acid must be of such a strength as neither to allow
the iron to be precipitated, nor, on the other hand, perceptibly
to plump the butts, which in this stage would endanger buff
and colour.  cc. may neutralise - cc. of lime-water for
this purpose. hydrochloric acid and chlorides have a tendency
to prevent plumping, and are therefore better adapted
for dressing than for sole leather. great care must also be
taken to prevent putrefaction, or the use of putrid solutions,
if firmness and plumpness are desired.
sole-leather.—tanning materials.
before describing the management of the hides in the tan-house,
it is necessary to say a few words about one or two of
the principal materials used, and the methods of preparing
them for use. further details of their nature and origin
have been given in the section on tannins, p. .
oak-bark is one of the oldest of tanning materials, and
the leather produced by its aid is still considered for many
purposes the best. for sole-leather, its weakness in tannin
(- per cent.), the slowness of its action, and the light weight
of the leather produced, render it unavailable alone except
for the very finest class of work. it is, however, generally
used in admixture with stronger and cheaper materials, such
as valonia.
valonia, the acorn-cup of an evergreen oak growing in
greece and the levant, is perhaps the most important of
materials to the english sole-leather tanner. it contains
- per cent. of a tannin somewhat similar to oak-bark,
and, like it, communicating a light-coloured bloom to the
leather, but giving much greater firmness and weight, and a
browner colour.
myrabolanes or myrobalans, the fruit of an indian shrub,
contains about as large a percentage of tannin as valonia,
and gives a similar bloom, and excellent colour; but it can
only be used very sparingly on butts, since it produces a soft
and porous leather.
divi-divi is a south american bean, which contains much of
a brown tannin in the pod, being considerably stronger than
valonia. it makes a heavy and solid, but somewhat horny
leather. its great danger arises from a tendency to sudden
fermentation in thundery weather, which, produces brown or
red stains on the leather. at all times it is liable to give a
bluish or violet colour, which is most obvious in the interior
of the leather, and which resists both acids and alkalies.
mimosa-bark is the product of several australian acacias,
and is probably nearly as strong as valonia. it gives a hard
and heavy leather, but of a dark-red colour.
hemlock-extract is a deep-red syrupy extract of the bark
of the hemlock pine of america.
chestnut-extract is a similar product from the rasped wood
of the spanish chestnut. its colour is paler and yellower
than that of the hemlock, and hence it is often employed to
correct the red tone produced by the latter.
oakwood extract is an analogous preparation from oak
saw-dust.
grinding and exhaustion of tanning materials.
before tanning materials can be exhausted, it is almost
invariably necessary to crush or grind them, so as to enable
the water to get freely at the tannin, which, in most cases, is
enclosed in the cellular tissue of the plant. it may be
thought that for this purpose it would scarcely be possible to
crush too finely, but in practice, a very fine powder is
extremely difficult to spend, as it cakes into compact and
clay-like masses, through which liquor will not percolate.
the object, therefore, is to grind finely enough to allow the
liquor ready access to the interior, but not so finely as to
prevent liquids running through the mass. the mill most
usually employed for this purpose consists of a toothed cone,
working inside another cone, also toothed on its interior,
precisely like those of a coffee-mill. as bark is frequently
delivered "unhatched," or in long pieces, it is necessary to
crush it preparatory to grinding, and this is usually accomplished
by rollers composed of toothed discs, called breakers.
in fig.  is illustrated such a mill, as made by newall and
barker, of warrington, combining both utensils. fig. 
shows a section of the well-known american "keystone"
mill, in which the preliminary breaking is accomplished by
the arms a; the bark is then finely ground by the toothed
cones n, and discharged at the spout r by the revolving
shover m. fig.  shows a
somewhat similar mill, made by
gläser of vienna, in which the
axis is horizontal, and driven
directly by a belt. it is better
to drive bark-mills by a belt
than by toothed gearing, as in
event of iron getting into them
there is less danger of breakage.
in america, a cheap cast-iron
coupling is frequently used,
weak enough to give way before
serious damage is done. safety
"friction" clutches are generally
ineffective. american
bark-mills are run faster than
english, up to about  rev. per minute, and where the bark
is to be used immediately it is frequently damped by a small
jet of steam below the mill, which lays dust, and prevents
danger of fire. bark which is damp before grinding can
scarcely be ground in these toothed mills, but must be dried,
or a disintegrator used.
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
now that a large variety of other materials besides bark
are required by tanners, the mills just described are not always
sufficient for the purpose. myrobalans and mimosa-bark
have proved specially troublesome, the former from its very
hard stones and clogging character, and the latter from its
combined hardness and toughness. "disintegrators" of
various makes have proved admirably adapted for grinding
both of these materials, their advantage being the universality
of their reducing powers, ranging from oak-bark to bones or
brick-dust, and their disadvantages, the somewhat considerable
power they consume, and the rather large portion of fine
dust they make. their principle is that of knocking the
material to powder by rapidly revolving beaters, which, in
the smaller mills, are driven at so high a speed as -
rev. a minute. wilson's is shown in fig. , as an example.
it is one of the oldest tanners' disintegrators, and probably
still one of the best. in the figure, it is opened, showing the
disc with its steel beaters attached. when myrobalans are
only required roughly crushed, a machine with fluted or
toothed rollers (fig. ) acts better than a disintegrator,
making less dust, and requiring less power. such a machine
also crushes valonia very satisfactorily.
fig. .
fig. .
in england, the tanning material is generally carried
from the mill, to the pits where it is exhausted, in baskets or
barrows; in america, this is frequently accomplished by a
"conductor," or horizontal spout, in which a double belt, or
malleable iron "drive chain,"[u] with wooden cross-pieces,
carries the bark forward, on the same principle as the
elevators of corn-mills. fig.  shows the conveyors used
in a chicago tannery. another american plan is to use
circular tubs for extraction. these are mounted on wheels,
and are worked on a railway, coming up to the mill to be
filled, and thence under a series of sprinklers like those used
by brewers, and finally "dumping" their contents before the
boilers, which are heated solely by wet bark, burnt in a
peculiar furnace with brick chambers. this furnace for
burning wet bark seems worthy of extended adoption in
europe, as spent tan is frequently not only valueless, but
costly to get rid of. full details and scale drawings may be
found in jackson s. schultz's book on 'leather manufacture'
and in fig.  is shown a modification of it, patented by
huxham and brown, which has been very successfully used
in burning wet tan, either alone or with a portion of coal.
in american sole-leather tanneries, where the bark is resinous
and almost unlimited in quantity, sufficient steam may be
raised with tan wet from the leaches; but in england, where
material is more sparingly used, it is advisable partially to
dry it before burning. this is accomplished by powerful
roller-presses, as shown in fig. . gläser, of vienna, constructs
tan-burning furnaces
on a different principle from
the american, the essential
point being the use of a
"ladder-grate" (treppenrost),
on which the burning tan is
exposed to a draught of air
playing over its surface.
fig.  shows a portable stove
of this construction. gläser
also makes furnaces of larger
size for heating air for drying-rooms,
and for boiler
purposes. the essentials of
successful tan-burning are
good draught, a large grate-surface,
and a high temperature
of the combustion-chamber,
and hence the
ordinary cornish or lancashire
boiler, with its limited
grate-area, surrounded by the
comparatively cool boiler-tube,
is peculiarly ill-adapted
for the purpose. the writer
has profitably burnt a mixture
of wet tan and very
small coal in such a boiler by
the aid of a steam-jet under-grate
blower, but such a
method can only be regarded as a makeshift in default of
better appliances.
[u] such chains with attachments for elevators and conveyers, are manufactured
in this country by ley's malleable casting company, in derby.
fig. .
fig. 
in england, the tanning material is usually exhausted in
pits called "leaches," "latches," or "taps." these, in large
yards, are made capable of holding about  cwt. of material.
the new material is first flooded with a pretty strong
liquor. when this has gained as much strength as possible,
it is pumped off, and is followed by a weaker one, and so on
till the material is exhausted. much of the economy of a
tan-yard depends on the way, systematic or otherwise, in
which this is done. it is customary to complete the
exhaustion with hot liquors, or water, but opinions differ on
the expediency of the practice. by the use of heat, however,
stronger liquors and more rapid spending are attained; and
with some materials, such as mimosa, complete exhaustion is
impossible in the cold.
fig. .
fig. .
the worst tap is frequently boiled by inserting a steam-pipe;
but if heat is used at all, it would probably be better
to heat a strong liquor by a steam-coil, and run it on the
new material, which would be softened and swollen, and
yield a much larger proportion of its strength to the first
liquor; while it is stated by eitner that the colouring
matters of tanning materials are much less soluble in strong
than in weak infusions. boiling weak old liquors containing
lime is specially prejudicial, causing great darkening and
discoloration.
careful tanners also cast their material over from one
pit into another, before throwing away, so as to lighten
it up, and allow the liquor to penetrate to every part.
in bark-yards, latches are frequently worked in series,
which are connected by pipes, so that the liquor flows
from the bottom of one upon the top of the next stronger.
this is an excellent plan for bark, which is open and porous,
but is scarcely adapted to such materials as valonia or myrabolans,
which have a tendency to form compact masses,
through which the liquor does not circulate. the same
objection, in an almost higher degree, must be urged against
the allen and warren, or sprinkler leach, in which the liquor,
distributed on the surface by a rotary sprinkler, is allowed
to percolate downwards, and run freely away at the bottom.
in this case, it is almost sure to form channels, instead of flowing
uniformly, and, in addition, the material is constantly exposed
to the action of the air, which causes oxidation, with its
attendant discoloration and loss of tannin. various attempts
have been made to exhaust tanning materials in closed vessels.
dr. kohlrausch applied the diffuseur used in extracting beet-root
sugar, and which consists of a series of closed copper
vessels in which the coarsely ground material is placed, of
which the bottom of one is connected with the top of the next
by a pipe, through which the liquor is forced by steam pressure.
this apparatus is in use at the large tannery of gerhardus,
flesch, and co., of vienna, and is said to give satisfaction,
though it is very costly, and the liquors produced are not of
great strength. gläser, of vienna, has patented an apparatus
of which a model is illustrated in fig. , in which the
materials are used finely powdered, and very rapidly exhausted
by the combined action of heat and mechanical
agitation. of its mechanism i have not been able to obtain
any detailed description, but it is said to be capable of exhausting
 tons of valonia per diem, to  per cent., giving only
° liquors, clear and of good colour, while good bark is exhausted
to · per cent. giving ° liquors. the cost of the
apparatus is very heavy, but if the results claimed are
realised in practice it would pay well for an extensive tannery.
i have not been able to ascertain where it is to be
seen in use.
fig. .
it is one of the great attractions of extracts that they
avoid almost all the expense and labour inseparable from
the exhaustion of other tanning materials. it is usually
necessary to dissolve the fluid extracts in water or liquor of
as high a temperature as has been employed in their preparation,
as otherwise, from some unexplained chemical change, a
large portion of the tannin is precipitated, probably as an
anhydride of the tannin. gambier is usually dissolved by
boiling or steaming, but is said to give a better colour when
dissolved cold. this may be accomplished in a rotating
latticed drum, sunk in a pit of liquor.
where circumstances permit, it is a great advantage to
place the taps either on a higher or a lower level than the
layers and handlers, so that liquors may be run one way
without pumping.
sole-leather.—treatment in the tan-house.
on first coming into the yard, the butts are usually suspended
by the shoulder or butt ends from sticks placed across
the pits. they should be kept in almost constant movement,
either by raising and shaking them by hand, or by supporting
them on frames, which are rocked, or otherwise worked.
perhaps the best device for this purpose is the "travelling
handler" of w. n. evans, which consists of a frame supported
on wheels, and worked slowly backwards and forwards
by power. this frame should extend the length of a range
of pits sufficient to take in at least a  days' stock of butts,
which should be tied to sticks resting crossways upon it.
it should have a stroke of - ft., repeated, say  times a
minute. the power required is very small.
the american rocker consists of a wooden frame balanced
on its centre, and made to oscillate by power. it is a cheap
and efficient machine, its defects being that the butts at the
ends are much more moved than those in the centre, and
that their upper parts, being lifted out of the liquor, are
liable to become blackened.
the suspender pits should be supplied with old handler
liquors, which, if the tannage is a mixed one, may range
from ° to ° barkometer, as a large proportion of the
weight consists only of lime-salts, gallic acid, and other
worthless products. it must here be explained that the
barkometer (also called "barkrometer" or "barktrometer")
is a hydrometer, graduated to show the sp. gr. thus—° bark.
= · sp. gr. in using it the temperature of the liquor
must be at or near ° f. (° c.). it is, of course, affected
by any other matters in solution, precisely the same as by
tannins. in the lowlights tannery the waste liquors
are constantly about ° bark., and contain tannin equal
to less than · per cent. (expressed as crystal oxalic acid),
and gallic acid and similar matters equal to o· to · per
cent. if the tannage is pure bark, it may perhaps be advisable
to let the strength be somewhat less, but something
depends on whether the exhausted liquors are returned with
all their impurities to the "taps" or liquor-brewing pits, or
whether the liquors are made with water, and hence purer. in
any case, the free acid in the suspenders should always be
sufficient in quantity to neutralise the lime brought in by
the butts, or bad colour will certainly result, making itself
visible in the shed, or as the tanning proceeds. if the butts,
when first brought into liquor, take a lemon-yellow colour,
especially in places that have been imperfectly exposed to it,
this is an indication of danger which must not be disregarded.
it may be met either by cleansing the butts more thoroughly
before bringing into the yard, or by adding acid (acetic,
hydrochloric, or sulphuric) to the liquor. if this be done,
great care must be taken not to over-do it, and an acid free
from iron must be used. the use of sulphurous acid for the
purpose has been patented, and presents some advantages.
sulphites have been observed by the writer to give a pink
or purple reaction even with very dilute infusions of valonia
(see p. ); but any coloration from this cause would probably
disappear as the tannage proceeds. the difficulty
can, however, often be remedied, either by altering the
way of working the liquors, so as to bring more sour liquor
down to the suspenders, or by using a larger proportion of
materials capable of yielding acetic acid by fermentation,
such as myrobalans. it is a common error to call all the
free acid of sour liquors "gallic," as this is scarcely present
in pure bark-yards, and at the best is a very feeble acid.
the most abundant acid is usually acetic, though butyric,
lactic, and other acids are frequently present in varying
proportions, according to the tanning materials employed.
in the english process, with its comparatively short layers,
in which the butts almost float in strong liquors, but little
souring takes place, and we have nothing comparable to the
german "sour bark" and "sour liquor" from long layers
with weak liquor, and much dusty material. these contain
large quantities of acetic and lactic acids, and plump almost
like vitriol. though the american tanners generally use
the latter, their hemlock liquors sour much more intensely
than those of english yards. it must always be borne in
mind, in comparing english with american and continental
tanning, that, in the first, the opening up of the fibre is
effected by lime, and the swelling is maintained in the liquors,
not so much by acids, which are only present in very small
proportion, as by the careful and gradual working forward
into infusions stronger and stronger in tannin; while in the
two latter, lime, if used at all, is simply employed to loosen
the hair, and the swelling and differentiation of the fibre is
first accomplished in the liquors either by vegetable or mineral
acids. hence good results cannot be expected in english
yards from such processes as sweating or painting with sodium
sulphide, which does not plump, without a radical modification
of the whole tanning process. this point has been ably
treated by eitner in a series of papers on extract-gerberei,
published during the last few years in 'der gerber,' which
will well repay attentive perusal by english as well as
german tanners.
the butts should at first be brought into the weakest liquor;
a circulation system, by which the liquors are all pumped in
at one end of a set of suspenders, and run out at the other,
the butts being moved forward in the opposite direction,
seems to have much to recommend it. in this case, the top
of one pit should be connected by a wooden box with the
bottom of the next.
it is usually advisable to run away the first liquor into
which butts are brought from the lime-yard, as it is very
completely spent, and highly charged with lime salts and
impurities. whether other exhausted liquors are to be retained
or rejected is largely a question of climate, and mode
of working. in hot weather, such liquors, charged with
organised ferments (moulds, bacilli, and bacteria), are apt to
cause ropiness, and other fermentive diseases of the liquors.
this danger may be lessened by boiling all spent liquors, so
as to kill the ferments, before running on the taps, or prevented
by the free use of antiseptics, such as carbolic acid.
small doses of carbolic acid, however, are useless; at least
/ per cent. must be employed; and it must be borne in
mind that antiseptics prevent souring as well as other fermentations,
and hence, where they are employed, other
means must be adopted to maintain the necessary acidity.
such liquors are very liable to darken if boiled.
the suspender liquors should be acid enough freely to
redden litmus-paper. the present author has published a
simple volumetric method for the determination of the
free acid;  cc. of the carefully filtered liquor is placed
in a beaker, and clear lime-water is run in from a burette
till permanent cloudiness is produced. the quantity of
lime-water employed is that which the acid is capable of
neutralising, without producing discoloration of the leather,
and care must be taken that the lime introduced with the
butts does not exceed this proportion. the explanation
of the reaction is that dark-coloured tannates of lime are
formed, which are dissolved by the free acid so long as it
remains in excess. it must be remembered that this process
estimates all acids capable of retaining tannates of lime in
solution, including some so feeble as to have practically no
plumping effect. a liquor may have acidity equal to several
cc. of lime-water, and yet react absolutely alkaline to methyl-orange
(see p. ), a colour which is distinctly reddened by
small excess of acids, even so weak as gallic, which is barely
acid to the taste. hence, the acidity of a liquor available for
plumping may be taken as represented by the lime-water required
to change the red of methyl-orange to yellow, and if
the liquor does not redden methyl-orange it is incapable of
plumping. if  or  drops of orange solution be added to
the pale filtered liquor from suspenders, there is no difficulty
in approximately hitting the point of change, but great
accuracy is not to be expected. if the liquor will not filter
clear, kaolin (see p. ) may be used to clear it. it is well
to test the lime-water occasionally on  cc. of decinormal
sulphuric or oxalic acid (p. ), to make certain of its constancy.
lime-water should be kept in a bottle with excess
of lime, shaken occasionally, and a small quantity filtered off
as required. liquors are frequently miscalled "sour" which
are not acid, but putrid. such liquors will not plump, but
reduce and soften hides placed in them. (compare also
p. ). suspender liquors usually consist mainly of liquors
from the handler shift. if liquors be used direct from the
leaches, they generally produce harsh grain and bad colour.
from the suspenders, the butts are transferred to the
"handlers," where they are laid flat in the liquor. they are
usually pulled over by hooks, which are very apt to scratch
the grain. sometimes strings are used, attached to the
corners and held in notches or on pegs at the edge of the pit.
other tanners place a frame below the pack, with ropes at
the four corners, by which it is raised sufficiently for the
men to grasp the top butts with their hands. this is only
practicable in pits of ample size. in american yards, the
handling is almost universally performed by tying the sides
with strings or fastening them in a long band by drawing
the slit tail of one side through a hole in the nose of the next,
and inserting a wooden "key." the string of the sides is
then wound from one pit to another over a skeleton reel
(fig. ). this method is also used in the lime-yard, and is
frequently employed in england to handle offal, but it is not
well adapted for butts. fig.  shows the application of
mechanical power in a chicago yard for the same purpose,
by means of ewart's drive-chain, which is manufactured in
this country by ley's malleable castings co., at derby, to
whom i am indebted for the block.
fig. .
the handlers are generally worked in sets, to each of which
a fresh liquor is daily run, and the most forward pack is pulled
over into it, and is often also dusted down with a little fine
bark or myrabolans. the second pack follows into the
liquor out of which the first has been taken; the third into
that of the second, and so on. frequently the greenest
packs are handled up a second time in the course of the day,
and put down again in the same liquor. the strength of
liquors, and the length of time for which butts are retained
in the handlers, are varied; but a time of - months, and
liquors of °-° bark. are usual. it is well to divide the
handlers into at least two sets. gambier is very useful,
especially to the greener goods, and if hemlock and other
extracts are employed, their appropriate place is in the
forward handlers or earlier layers. new valonia liquors
must be avoided, but old layer liquors of considerable
strength (up to ° bark. where the handling is long
continued) may be employed.
fig. .
at the end of this period, the butts are taken to the
"layers" or "bloomers," in which they are laid down with
stronger liquors and much larger quantities of "dust"; the
latter is usually bark or valonia, though mimosa is occasionally
used. the liquors vary from ° to ° or ° bark.
in strength in mixed tannage, and the duration of each layer
from  days in the earlier stages to a month in the later
ones. for the best heavy tannages, - layers are required.
each time the butts are raised, they should be mopped on the
grain, to remove dirt and loose bloom. strong valonia
liquors, or heavy valonia dusting, causes a brown sandy
crust to form on the freely exposed parts of the butts. this
is removed in striking, but is sometimes very troublesome
on rough dried dressing leather. in pure bark tannage,
which, however, is gradually becoming extinct, the liquors
used are of necessity much weaker, as it is extremely difficult
to obtain liquors of more than °-° bark. from this
material. the last layer, however, should always have
liquors of the greatest strength which can possibly be
obtained, or the leather will be deficient in firmness.
after receiving their last layer, the butts are well mopped
or brushed and washed up in a clear liquor, and thrown
over a horse to drain before going into the shed. in america,
the howard scrubber (fig. ) is generally employed instead
of hand labour at this stage. it consists of  rotating wooden
frames at the top of a pit, provided with brushes or birch-brooms,
and, when in use, enclosed by a cover a, through a
slit g in which the sides are inserted and drawn back, while
water is supplied by the pump b. sometimes the brush-drums
are placed one above another, and the leather is passed in at
the side.
pl. vi.
e. & f. n. spon, london & new york.
fig. .
in mixed tannages, where the colour is dark, the leather
is frequently handled or suspended in a warm sumach or
myrobalanes liquor, and occasionally in dilute sulphuric or
oxalic acids. if these acids are not effectually removed before
drying, the toughness of the leather will be destroyed, and
in extreme cases the leather will become brittle and refuse to
take black. in any case, strong acids are prejudicial to the
durability of the leather. in america, alternate baths of
vitriol and sugar of lead are frequently used for bleaching
and weighting the leather, but the colour given is not
durable.
the great point to aim at, in arranging the mode of work
of a tannery, is to contrive that butts should always receive
the strongest liquors they can bear with safety, and that the
strength should constantly increase in a regular and systematic
way. to attain this end, very frequent handling and change
of liquor are requisite in the early stages, when the butts
rapidly absorb the tannin presented to them. as the process
advances, the exterior part of the butt becomes thoroughly
tanned, and the liquor only slowly reaches the interior,
which is yet susceptible of its action, and hence longer
layers in stronger liquors are permissible.
the varied requirements of the trade render it difficult to
give any practical information as to the selection of tanning
materials. as a general rule, it is important at the outset to
give the required colour; and if materials undesirable in
this respect are to be used for the sake of cheapness, they
should be introduced in the form of liquors in the middle
stages of the process, i. e. in the later handlers or earlier
layers. materials used as dust generally have more effect in
producing bloom and colouring the leather, than those used
in liquors at this stage. some information as to the respective
qualities of the different tanning materials will be found
in the chapter on tannins; but even practical men are very
deficient in accurate information on these points, since many
materials are never used alone, but invariably in connection
with others which mask their effects.
the use of extracts, and the demand for low-priced leathers,
to compete with the american tannages, has introduced
still more rapid methods than those described, and very fair-looking
heavy leather has been tanned in - weeks.
these tannages are very various, but their main feature is
the free use of hot liquors, composed principally of extracts
and gambier. this treatment imparts great firmness, or
more properly speaking, hardness; but the leather is
deficient in toughness, and the grain usually cracks on
bending sharply. extract properly used is, however,
capable of making excellent leather; it is employed in at
least one of the highest priced tannages in the country.
it may be noted here, that when continental writers
speak of extracts and extract tannage, what we should call
liquor tannage only is meant, and not specially the use of
the concentrated extracts, to which alone in england the
term is applied.
sole-leather.—treatment in the shed.
fig. .
the butts, after being treated as above described, are
frequently oiled lightly on the grain, and are taken into
the drying-lofts, where they are hung on poles till about
half dry. they are then laid on the floor in piles, and
covered up till they heat or "sweat" a little, which facilitates
the succeeding operation of "striking." this is performed
by laying the butt over a horizontal "beam" or
"horse," and scraping its surface with a triangular pin,
shown at d in fig. . this pin has an even, though tolerably
sharp, edge, and is so used that it stretches and smooths
out the grain, without breaking it; and at the same time
it removes a portion of the white deposit called "bloom,"
which has been mentioned. common goods are frequently
struck by the machine introduced by priestman, of preston
brook, shown in fig. ; but the work is not very uniform,
and the leather is much compressed and stretched. for offal,
the machine is a very useful one, and perfectly satisfactory.
fig. .
fig. .
butts are now generally struck by the very ingenious
machine of wilson, whose name has also been mentioned in
connection with the disintegrator, and which is shown in
fig. . the arms carry blunt brass or steel knives or
sleekers, and work outwards from the centre, while the butt
is carried backwards and forwards over the drum. stones
may be substituted for the sleekers, when it is required to
remove the bloom. the machine requires a firm foundation,
as its reciprocating motion causes considerable vibration.
fig. .
after a light oiling and a little further drying, the butt
is laid on a flat "bed" of wood or zinc, and is rolled with
a brass roller loaded with heavy weights. various machines
are also in use for this purpose. in fig. , is shown wilson's
spring butt-roller, in which the pressure is produced by
springs immediately above the roller, which works backward
and forward over a flat table, beneath a fixed girder. in the
later patterns of this machine the roller is automatically
reversed by a mechanical finger before coming to the edge of
the butt. fig.  shows an adaptation of the american
pendulum roller, which is specially suited for refinishing
singapore kip sides and the commoner class of goods, giving
great firmness and a high gloss. fig.  represents a
machine in which the roller is fixed, and works over a brass
drum; it is specially adapted for offal, and, when used for
butts, is apt to make them "baggy." in this machine, the
reversing motion is obtained by using two belts, one being
crossed.
fig. .
the leather is now frequently coloured on the grain with
a mixture, for which each tanner has a recipe of his own,
but usually consisting mainly of yellow ochre with size or
liquor and oil in order to give a gloss, and to hide uneven
or dull colour, and, when sufficiently dry, is well brushed by
hand or power, rolled a second time, and dried-off in a room
gently heated by steam. this is the bristol method of
finishing. in the lancashire district, butts are generally
struck out much wetter, and "stoned," so as to remove the
whole of the bloom, and show the natural brown "bottom"
of the grain. when sufficiently dry, they are struck a
second time, to set the grain, and rolled as described, the
painting being omitted. this method has the disadvantage
of requiring more labour, and causing a loss of weight; but
leather so got up brings a higher price, as the finish is
only applicable to such tannages as make a fair colour. the
usual london plan is a compromise between the bristol and
lancashire methods; the leather is sammed, or tempered
by partial drying and piling before striking; stoning is not
resorted to, but the bloom is thoroughly removed from the
surface with the pin and scrubbing-brush. colour is not
generally used.
it is very important, and especially so with heavy mixed
tannages, that the drying should be conducted in the dark,
and not too rapidly. no artificial heat should be used,
except in frosty weather, to wet leather; and it should be
carefully protected from harsh drying winds. after the
leather is finished, it should be dried off in a well-ventilated
drying-shed, heated to about ° f. (° c.). the same
observations apply to the drying of rough dressing-leather,
except that artificial heat should be avoided. frost makes
dressing-leather porous, and prevents it carrying a proper
quantity of grease in currying. on the construction of drying-sheds,
see pp. -.
hides which are intended for purposes where softness and
flexibility are required, as for instance, for the upper-leathers
of boots, and for saddlery purposes, are called
"dressing" or "common" hides, or, if they are shaved
down to reduce their thickness before tanning, they are
denominated "shaved" hides. hides for this purpose are
limed much in the same way as has been described for
butts; but if they are required very soft and flexible, a
somewhat longer liming is permissible. after unhairing,
fleshing, and washing in water, they are usually transferred
to a "bate," composed of pigeon- or hen-dung, in the proportion
of about  peck to - hides.
in this they are retained for some days, being handled
frequently. they completely lose their plumpness, and
become soft and slippery; the caustic lime is entirely
removed; and the remaining portions of hair-sheaths and
fat-glands are so loosened that they are easily worked out by
a blunt knife on the beam. this final cleansing process is
called "scudding." the theory of the action of the "bate,"
or "pure," as it is sometimes called, is somewhat imperfect.
it is frequently attributed to the action of ammonia
salts, and phosphates, contained in the fermenting dung.
ammonia salts certainly will remove caustic lime, free
ammonia being liberated in its place, and weak solutions of
ammonia sulphate or chloride will rapidly reduce hides,
and remove or neutralise the lime. the phosphates in
dung are mostly, if not entirely, in the form of lime
phosphate, which is quite inert. in point of fact, the
process seems to be a fermentive one, the active bate swarming
with bacteria; to this, rather than to its chemical
constituents, its action must be attributed. the bacteria
act not only on the organic constituents of the dung, but
on those of the hide, producing sulphuretted hydrogen,
together with tyrosin and leucin, and other weak organic
acids, which neutralise and remove the lime, and, at the
same time, soften the hide by dissolving out the coriin,
and probably also portions of the gelatinous fibre. the
truth of this theory is supported by the fact that, in warm
weather, the activity of the bate is greatly increased, and
that, if one pack of hides is over-bated, the next following
is much more severely affected, the hides having in fact
themselves furnished food for the multiplication of the
bacterian ferment from the destruction of their own tissues.
it also explains the effective use (as a substitute)
of warm water with a very small portion of glucose, which,
in itself, would be insufficient to dissolve the lime, but
with a small quantity of nitrogenous matter, forms an
excellent nidus for the multiplication of these organisms.
an american invention for bating is the use of old lime-liquor
neutralised with sulphuric acid, an idea which is
much more scientific than would at first sight appear.
old lime-liquors, as we have seen (p. ) contain much
ammonia and weak organic acids, such as caproic, amidocaproic
(leucin), and tyrosin. on adding sulphuric acid,
the lime forms an inert sulphate, and the sulphate of
ammonia and the weak organic acids which remain dissolved
are just what are required in a chemical bate. the
lime-liquor should of course be filtered or settled clear
before using, and enough acid added barely to neutralise
the lime, and the liquor again settled or filtered. by this
means both the dissolved gelatin and the iron of the acid
will be got rid of. the liquor might then be slightly acidified
before use. the writer has no experience of the method,
but imagines that used as described it might be worth trying,
although it would have a very unpleasant smell. in this
connection may be mentioned the fact that, when bran
drenches are used, in which lactic acid is developed, the
butyric fermentation is liable, in hot weather, to take its
place, and as butyric acid is a powerful solvent of gelatinous
tissue, and the dissolved tissue itself feeds the fermentation,
rapid destruction of the skins is the result. cleanliness,
scalding out of the drench vats, and washing the bran before
using with cold water to remove adhering flour, are useful
precautions.
if the removal of the lime be the only object aimed at in
bating, the ordinary process is most wasteful, as well as
disgusting, from the loss of pelt it entails. it is easy to
find chemical reagents which will remove the lime; but the
resultant leather has been found wanting in softness, and it
is probable that the solution of the inter-fibrillar matter is
in many cases advantageous. probably one reason for the
non-use of such chemicals is their expense. maynard has
patented the use of sulphurous acid for the purpose.
if sugar, glucose, or ammonia salts be used, and the
alkalinity of the solution nearly neutralised after each lot
of hides by common vitriol, the same liquor may be used
again and again. in this case, if iron is contained in the
acid it will be precipitated by the ammonia and must be
settled out. the writer is convinced, from his own experience,
that with suitable tannage such bating would
yield better weights and quite as satisfactory leather for
many purposes as the ordinary mode. french tanners, by
the free use of water, and careful working at the beam, and
the employment of very weak liquors at the commencement
of tanning, make excellent dressing leather without bating
and this is also true of the celebrated french calf.
the bating required may be shortened, and probably with
advantage, by washing the hides with warm water in a
"tumbler," or rotating drum, fig. , prior to putting them
into the bate, or the whole bating may be done in the
tumbler. after a short bating, also, the hides may be
softened and cleansed by stocking for - minutes. warm
bates act much more rapidly than cold ones.
fig. .
various machines have been proposed to take the place of
hand-labour in the beam work, and, at least as regards the
smaller skins, with considerable success. as a type of
these, may be mentioned molinier's hide-working machine,
fig. , which consists of a drum covered with helical
knives, rotating at a speed of about  rev. a minute, over
a cylinder coated with india-rubber. the skin is allowed to
be drawn in between these drums, and the two being pressed
together by a treadle, it is drawn out by a mechanical
arrangement in a direction contrary to the rotation of the
knives, which scrape off the flesh, or work off the hair.
after bating, "shaved" hides are reduced in thickness in
the stronger parts by a shaving-knife, on an almost perpendicular
beam. the workman stands behind the beam, and
works downwards. the knife is represented at a, fig. ,
and is a somewhat peculiar instrument. the blade is of
softish steel, and after sharpening, the edge is turned completely
over by pressure with a blunt tool, so as to cut at
right angles to the blade. there is an obvious economy in
shaving before tanning, since the raw shavings are valuable
for glue-making, while, if taken off by the currier, they are
useless for this purpose. the hide also tans faster.
instead of shaving, the untanned hide is frequently split,
by drawing it against a rapidly vibrating knife. the piece
removed is tanned for some inferior purpose, if sufficiently
perfect. in sheep-skins, which are split by a special machine,
the grain-side is tanned for french morocco or basil, while
the flesh-side is dressed with oil, and forms the ordinary
chamois or wash-leather (see p. ). such a machine is
shown in fig. .
fig. .
tanned leather is frequently split by forcing it against a
fixed knife, as in the american "union" machine, fig. .
this is however being gradually superseded by the band-knife
splitting machine, fig. , in which an endless steel
blade travels over two pulleys like a belt, and is kept constantly
sharpened by a pair of emery-wheels seen below the
machine. i am indebted for the block to messrs. haley and
co., who have made great numbers of these machines.
fig. .
after bating, scudding, and shaving, the hides are taken
into the tan-house, where they are grained, either by frequent
handling, or by working in a paddle-tumbler (a vat
agitated with a paddle-wheel, and known in america as an
"england wheel"), with a liquor of suitable strength.
what this strength should be depends on whether a well-marked
grain is required or not. the stronger the liquor,
the more it contracts the hide, wrinkling the surface into a
network of numberless crossing furrows, which form the
well-known marking of "grain-leather." in bark tannage,
the after management is much like that described with sole-leather,
except that weaker infusions are employed, and acid
liquors, which would swell the hide and produce a harsh
leather, are avoided. in old-fashioned country yards, which
produce some of the best bark-tanned shaved hides, the
liquors rarely range above °-° of the barkometer, and
the time employed is - months. the hides, after passing
through a set of handlers, of gradually increasing strength,
in which they are at first moved every day, are laid away with
bark liquor and a good dusting of bark, receiving perhaps
- layers of - weeks each. unfortunately, these tannages
are so unprofitable that they are rapidly being supplanted by
quicker and cheaper methods.
fig. .
these more rapid and cheap tannages mostly depend on
the use of "terra" (block or cube gambier) in combination
with bark, valonia, mimosa, and myrobalanes. liquors
warmed to ° or even ° f. (°-° c.) are frequently
employed, and a bright colour is finally imparted by handling
in a warm sumach or myrobalanes liquor, which dissolves
out much of the colour imparted by terra or extracts. the
tannage is helped forward by frequent handling, by working
in tumblers, or sometimes by suspension on rocking or travelling
frames, after the american fashion.
to this class of tannage belongs that of east india kips,
which is largely carried on in the neighbourhood of leeds.
these kips are the hides of the small cattle of india, and are
imported in a dried condition, and with their flesh-side protected
(and loaded) with a coat of salt and whitewash or
plaster. they are usually softened in putrid soaks, and unhaired
with lime, and are used in england for many of the
purposes for which calf-skins were formerly employed. a
variety of east india kips, called "arsenic kips," are treated
(instead of plastering) with a small quantity of arsenic before
drying, to prevent the ravages of insects, which are often
very destructive to these goods. many kips tanned in india
have also been imported of late years, and have greatly
interfered with the profits of english tanners.
in yards where the leather is intended to be sold uncurried,
it is taken up into the drying-sheds, well oiled on the grain
with cod-liver oil, and either simply hung on the poles to
dry, or stretched with a "righter," a tool shaped somewhat
like a spade-handle, and finally set out with it to a smooth
and rounded form. as in the case of sole-leather, too much
light or wind must be avoided, and it is very difficult to use
artificial heat successfully in the early stages of the process.
it is, however, now very common for the tanner who produces
such leather also to curry it, and, as this effects a
considerable economy, both in labour and material, it is
likely to become universal. when leather is to be sold
rough, it is necessary to tan it in such a way as to give it
a white appearance, from the deposit of "bloom" already
mentioned; this being regarded by curriers as an essential
mark of a good tannage, although the first step in the
currying process is to completely scour it out. when the
tanner curries his own leather, he of course aims at putting
in as little bloom as possible, thus economising both tanning
material and labour. in addition, the leather goes direct
from the tan-house to the currying-shops, thus saving both
drying and soaking again, and, it is said, giving better
weight and quality. the tanner, too, is enabled to shave his
hides or skins more completely, utilising the material for
glue-stuff, which, had the leather been for sale in the rough,
must have been left on to obtain a profitable weight.
in general terms, the process of currying consists in softening,
levelling, and stretching the hides and skins which are
required for the upper-leathers of boots, and other purposes
demanding flexibility and softness, and in saturating or
"stuffing" them with fatty matters, not only in order to
soften them, but to make them watertight, and to give them
an attractive appearance.
it is obvious that great differences must be made in the
currying process, according to the character of the skin and
the purpose for which it is intended, since the preparation
of french calf for a light boot, and of the heaviest leather
for machine belting, equally lie within the domain of currying.
in this case, however, as in that of tanning, the clearest
idea of the general principles involved will be gained by
taking a typical case, and afterwards pointing out the
different modifications needed for other varieties. the
french method of currying waxed calf is selected as an
example, since the well-known excellence of this leather
makes it interesting to compare the details with the methods
ordinarily in use in this country.
after raising the skins from the pits, and beating off the
loose tan, they are hung in the sheds till partially dry
(essorage), great care being taken that the drying is uniform
over the whole skin. in modern shops, this drying is usually
accomplished at once, and in a very satisfactory manner, by
means of a hydraulic press. if dried in the air, they must
be laid in pile for a short time to equalise the moisture, and
then brushed over on flesh and grain. the next process
consists in paring off loose flesh and inequalities (dérayage).«  »
this is done on a beam, and with a knife similar to that
used in bate-shaving, and shown in a, fig. . this knife
has the edge turned by rubbing with a strong steel, and is
called couteau à revers.
next follows the mise au vent. the skins are first placed
in a tub with water or weak tan-liquor for  hours; they
are then folded and placed in a tub with enough water to
cover them, and beaten with wooden pestles for / hour. at
the present day, stocks (foulon vertical), or a "drum-tumbler"
(tonneau à fouler), a machine on the principle of the barrel-churn,
usually take the place of this hand-labour. the skin
is next placed on a marble table, flesh upwards, and with
one flank hanging somewhat over the edge, and is worked
with a "sleeker" or stretching-iron (étire), b, fig. . the
first  strokes are given down and up the back, to make the
skin adhere to the table, and it is then worked out regularly
all round the side on the table, so as to stretch and level it.
the flesh is then washed over with a grass-brush (brosse à
chien-dent), the skin is turned, and the other flank is treated
in the same way. it is lastly folded in , and steeped again
in water. the next process is the cleansing of the grain.
the skin is spread again on the table, as before, but grain
upwards, and is worked over with a stone (cœurse), set in
handles, and ground to a very obtuse edge. this scours out
the bloom; after washing the grain with the grass-brush, it
is followed by the sleeking-iron, as on the flesh.
the next step is resetting (retenage). for this, except in
summer, the skins must be dried again, either by press or in
the shed. this is another setting out with the sleeker, and,
the skin being dried, it now retains the smoothness and extension
which is thus given to it. the skins are now ready
for oiling in the grain, for which whale-oil or cod-liver oil is
generally employed. olive-oil, castor-oil, and even linseed-oil
may, however, be used, and are sometimes made into an
emulsion with neutral soap and water. after oiling the
grain, the skins are folded and allowed to lie for - days
before oiling the flesh.
the oiling on the flesh is done with a mixture of dégras
and tallow, in such proportions as not to run off during
the drying. dégras is the surplus oil from the chamois-leather
manufacture, which in france is effected by daily
stocking the skins with oil, and hanging in the air for
oxidation. the dégras (toise, moëllon) is obtained, not by
washing the skins in an alkaline lye, as in the english and
german method, but by simple pressing or wringing. this
oil, altered by oxidation, is so valuable for currying purposes
that skins are frequently worked simply for its production,
being oiled and squeezed again and again till not a
rag is left. it is generally mixed in commerce with more
or less of ordinary fish-oil. eitner recommends, where the
dégras is of indifferent quality, a mixture of  parts dégras,
 of neutral soap (i. e. soap without the usual excess of
alkali), and  of soft tallow. after oiling the flesh, which
is accomplished by extending the skin on the marble table
with the sleeker, and applying grease with a sheep-skin pad,
it is hung to dry at a temperature of °-° f. (°-° c.).
after drying, the surplus oil is removed by a fine sleeker
from both flesh and grain, and the skins are ready for
"whitening" (blanchissage). this consists in taking a thin
shaving off the flesh, and was originally accomplished by the
shaving-knife on the currier's beam, and some curriers are still
in favour of this method. it is now, however, usually done
by a sleeker with a turned edge. the grain then undergoes
a final stoning and sleeking, to remove the last traces of
adhering oil, and the skin is grained by rubbing it in a
peculiar way under a pommel covered with cork. it is then
coated on the flesh with a mixture, of which the following is
a specimen:— parts of lamp-black are rubbed with  of
linseed-oil, and  parts of fish-oil are added;  parts of
tallow and  of wax are melted together and added to the
mixture; and, after cooling,  parts of treacle. this compound
is put on with a brush, and allowed to dry for some
days. finally, the skins are sized over with a glue-size,
which is sometimes darkened by the addition of aniline-black.
the preceding account will give some idea of the care and
labour expended on these goods in france. in england,
cheaper productions are more in vogue, and almost every
process is accomplished by machinery. an illustration of
the fitzhenry or jackson scouring-machine, which is largely
employed both for scouring and setting out, is given in
fig. . this is a simple and efficient machine, and has
been largely used, both here and in america.
fig. .
fig.  shows the improved tool-carriage introduced by
c. holmes of boston, in which the brush and sleekers or stones
are controlled by handles which are stationary instead of
moving rapidly with the slide, as in the older form. spiral
springs are also substituted for the older elliptical ones.
fig. .
fig. .
the fitzhenry machine has also been constructed so as to
work in any direction over a fixed table, being driven by a
small direct-acting steam-cylinder supplied by jointed pipes.
but probably the most perfect scouring and setting machine
which has yet been introduced is the lockwood automatic
scourer, which may also be regarded as a development of
the fitzhenry machine. this has been some years in use in
america with great success, and has received considerable
improvements, but has only very recently been introduced
into england by messrs. schrader and mitchell of glasgow,
who have kindly furnished the annexed illustration (fig. ).
in this machine the table is fixed, and the tool-carriage can
be moved over it in every direction. the large projecting
carriage, or cross-head, which supports it, travels on a
horizontal rail, which may be observed below and behind the
table. motion is given to it by a screw which is driven in
either direction by the pulleys at each side of the cross-head.
in a similar way the tool-carriage is traversed forwards or
backwards by a second screw at right angles to the first, and
by a most ingenious interlocking arrangement both screws
are controlled by a single handle. the tool-carriage or
"trundle frame" can also be turned like a turntable, so as
to deliver its stroke in any direction, the tool-holder being
driven by a horizontal crank in the centre of the frame, and
immediately above the tools. though the machine is complicated,
and necessarily expensive, it has not been found
either in america or scotland difficult to work or liable to
get out of order, while both the quantity and quality of its
work are all that can be desired. fig.  is gläser's scouring
machine. fig.  illustrates the latest english scouring
machine, messrs. haley and co.'s climax scourer, which is
also ingenious and effective. in it the table instead of the
tool-holder is movable by screws driven by belts thrown into
gear by a handle, and it is provided with two tables of which
one is in work while the hides are being changed and spread
on the other. the oscillating tool-holder, instead of being
actuated by the rise and fall of the connecting-rod, is moved
by an adjustable eccentric.
fig. .
fig. .
in the case of strap-butts, the currying is, of course, far
less elaborate. they are well scoured out, heavily stuffed,
and stretched in screw-frames, to prevent their giving afterwards
when in use.
in germany, switzerland, and austria, a method of stuffing
strap-butts is frequently employed, which, so far as i am
aware, is not in use in england. it is called einbrennen or
"burning in," and consists in applying very hot tallow to
the dry leather. the butts are washed free from liquor in a
tumbler, boarded to soften them thoroughly, scoured, set out
with a sleeker, nailed on laths, and air-dried. they are then
very completely dried in a room heated to °-° f.
(°-° c.), as if any moisture remains in the hide, the
fibre will be destroyed by the heat of the melted tallow.
the tallowing generally takes place in the same room, as a
high temperature is required to allow it to soak in, and the
leather would greedily reabsorb moisture if exposed to damp
air. the tallow is heated, generally by steam in a jacketed
pan, to °-° f. (°-° c.). there are two ways of
applying it. the melted tallow may be applied on a table
to the flesh side of the butt with a ladle, and rubbed on
with a brush or rag. in this case, as soon as the tallow
has sufficiently soaked in, the butts are placed in water to
prevent its striking through to the grain. the second way
is to have the pan of sufficient size and suitable shape, and
for two men to draw the butt through the melted tallow with
tongs, and more or less rapidly according to the quantity
it is desired that the leather should absorb; and in some
cases the process is repeated once or more. in this case, it is
useless to wet in water, and the butts are allowed to cool
gradually in pile.
the leather is now impregnated with grease, but it is far
from being properly stuffed. instead of the grease being
spread over the finest fibres in a minute state of division, it
simply fills the spaces between the larger fibres. to remedy
this, the butts are well softened in water (which, if they have
been drawn through the tallow and allowed to cool, must be
tepid), and are then worked in a damp condition in a drum
tumbler, by which they brighten in colour and become
uniformly stuffed. they are then allowed to lie in a pile a
day or two, are stoned and worked out with the sleeker, and
hung up to dry. when in right temper they receive a final
setting out with the sleeker, and when dry are either rolled
or glassed. for further details, nos.  and  of 'der
gerber,' , must be consulted, where the matter has been
exhaustively treated by eitner, in his papers on "extract-gerberei."
fig. .
in england, curried leathers are generally sold by weight,
which leads to the use of glucose and other materials to add
to the weight. in america, all upper leathers are sold by
measure, and this is now ascertained by a very ingenious
machine (fig. ). the skin is laid on a latticed table, and
a frame, from which rows of bullets are suspended, is let
down upon it. the total weight of the frame is indicated
by a spring balance, and as the bullets which are over the
skin are supported by it, the diminution of weight indicates
the measurement. several modified forms of this machine
are now made.
these are terms used to designate those leathers, whether of
the ox, the horse, the calf, or the seal, which are finished
with a waterproof and bright varnished surface, similar to
the lacquered wood-work of the japanese. the name
"enamelled" is generally applied when the leathers are
finished with a roughened or grained surface, and "patent"
or "japanned" are the terms used when the finish is smooth.
though generally black, yet a small quantity of this leather
is made in a variety of colours.
in america, large thin hides are principally used for the
purpose. they are limed and bated in the usual way,
stoned after bating, and tanned with hemlock and oak
barks in a paddle tumbler, which is run for - minutes
in each hour. when one-third tanned, they are levelled on
the flesh, and split with the belt-knife splitter, fig. .
after splitting, the portions are drummed with strong gambier
liquor for / hour, and then tanned out with bark. the
grains are scoured with the fitzhenry or lockwood machine
(figs.  and ). they are then lightly oiled and stretched
on frames which can be enlarged by screws or a sort of
knuckle-joint at the corners. when quite dry, they are
grounded with a mixture of linseed-oil with white lead and
litharge, boiled together and thickened with chalk and
ochre. this is dried in closets heated by steam, into which
the frames are slid face downwards, the heat being gradually
increased from ° to ° f. (° to ° c.). if it be desired
to employ a higher temperature, the leather is first saturated
with a solution of  oz. each of borax and alum in  gal.
water, when temperatures of °-° f. (°-° c.) may
be used. the remaining treatment is much as above
described, but a little turpentine is used to make the paint
work freely. the final varnish is composed of  parts spirit
of turpentine,  linseed oil,  thick copal varnish, and  of
asphaltum or other colouring material. this must be mixed
- weeks before use, and applied with a brush.
the splits are also often enamelled, and as a preparation
receive a dressing of linseed-oil boiled to a jelly and thinned
with turpentine or naphtha. this is applied with a stiff
brush after the splits are stretched on the frames and are still
damp, so that it does not penetrate the leather, but forms a
sort of artificial grain.
leather destined to be finished in this way requires to be
curried without the use of much dubbing, and to be well
softened. the english practice is to nail the skins thus
prepared, and quite dry, on large smooth boards, fitted to
slide in and out of stoves maintained at a temperature of
°-° f. (°-° c.), coating them repeatedly with a
sort of paint composed (for black) of linseed-oil, lamp-black,
and prussian blue, well ground together. each coating is
allowed to dry in the stoves, before the next is applied.
the number of coatings varies with the kind of skin under
treatment, and the purpose for which it is intended. the
surface of every coat must be rubbed smooth with pumice;
finally, a finishing coat of oil-varnish is applied, and, like
the preceding coats, is dried in the stove. the exact
degrees of dryness and flexibility, the composition of the
paint, and the thickness and number of the coats, are nice
points, difficult to describe in writing.
this branch of the leather industry, so far as it relates to
calf-skins, is carried on to a larger extent, and has been
brought to greater perfection in germany and france than
in england. in the former countries, the heat of the sun is
employed to dry some of the coatings. the united states
have also brought this style to a high degree of excellence,
especially in ox-hides. there, use is said to be made of the
oils and spirits obtained from petroleum, and without doubt,
french and german emigrant workmen have materially
assisted in attaining this high standard.
leather finished in these styles is used for slippers, parts
of shoes, harness, ladies' waist-belts, hand-bags, &c., and
has now maintained a place among the varieties of leather
for a long period of years.
morocco leather is produced from goat-skins. rough-haired
or "blue-back" seal-skins are also used, and produce an
excellent article; while an inferior description, called
"french morocco," is produced from sheep-skins. the
skins are unhaired by liming in the usual way, and are
then baited with a mixture of dogs' dung and water. the
tanning is done chiefly with sumach, at first in paddle-tumblers,
and then in handlers, lasting about a month in
all. sheep-skins are usually tanned through in about
 hours, by being sewn up into bags, grain-side outwards,
and nearly filled with strong sumach infusion. a little
air is then blown in, to completely distend the skin, and
they are floated in a sumach bath, and kept moving by
means of a paddle. after the first day's immersion, they are
thrown up on a shelf, and allowed to drain; they are then
again filled with sumach liquor; when this has a second
time exuded through the skin, they are sufficiently tanned,
and the sewing being ripped open, they are washed and
scraped clean, and hung up to dry, making what are called
"crust-roans." the dyeing is sometimes done by brushing
on a table, grain-side upwards, but more usually the skins
are folded closely down the back, flesh-side inwards, so as to
protect it as much as possible from the influence of the
colour, and then passed through the dye-bath, which is
now generally of aniline colours. the original oriental
method of manufacture for red morocco was to dye with
cochineal before tanning, and this is still customary in the
east, but is quite obsolete in this country. a grain or
polish is given to the leather, either by boarding, or by
working under small pendulum rollers, called "jiggers,"
which are engraved either with grooves or with an imitation
of grain. a well-cleaned sumach-tanned skin is capable
of being dyed in the finest shades of colour; and this branch
of the manufacture of leather has been brought to great
perfection.
russia leather (ger., juchtenleder).
this is tanned in russia with, the bark of various species
of willow, poplar and larch, either by laying away in pits, or
handling in liquors, much like other light leathers, the lime
being first removed by bating, either in a drench of rye- and
oat-meal and salt, by dogs' dung, or by sour liquors. after
tanning, the hides are again softened and cleansed by a weak
drench of rye- and oat-meal. they are then shaved down,
carefully sleeked and scoured out, and dried. the peculiar
odour is given by saturating them with birch-bark oil, which
is rubbed into the flesh-side with cloths. this oil is produced
by dry distillation of the bark and twigs of the
birch. the red colour is given by dyeing with brazilwood;
and the diamond-shaped marking by rolling with
grooved rollers.
much of the leather now sold as "russia" is produced in
germany, france, and england. it is tanned in the customary
way, occasionally with willow, but more generally
with oak-bark, and probably other materials. economy
would suggest the use of such materials as, from their red
colour, are objectionable for other purposes, and therefore
cheap. the currying is in the usual manner, care being
taken that the oil used does not strike through to the grain,
which would prevent it taking the dye. the colour is given
by grounding with a solution of chloride of tin ( parts tin
perchloride,  parts nitric acid,  parts hydrochloric acid,
allowed to stand some days, and the clear solution poured off,
and mixed with  volumes of water). the dye-liquor may
be composed of  parts rasped brazilwood,  parts tartar,
and  parts water, boiled together, strained, and allowed to
settle clear. the grounding and dyeing are done on a table
with a brush or sponge (see glove-kid dyeing, p. ). the
odour is communicated by rubbing the flesh-side with a
mixture of fish-oil and birch-bark oil, which sometimes contains
no more than  per cent. of the latter.
pl. vii.
e. & f. n. spon, london & new york.
this leather, which is remarkable for its soft felty texture,
which it retains even after wetting, although perfectly
porous and free from greasiness in its finished state,
is prepared by the action of oil on the raw skin. wash-leather
was formerly manufactured from sheep- and calf-skins,
and from those of the chamois, and various deer
(hence the name), from which, after liming, the grain was
removed (frized) with a sharp knife, either with the hair,
or after unhairing. the flesh-splits of sheep-skins are now
generally employed for ordinary wash-leather, and of course
no such process is needed, though buff-leather for belts and
military purposes is still so manufactured. the skins receive
a thorough liming, which, where softness is desired, is so
conducted as very thoroughly to remove the cement-substance
(coriin) from between the fibres; and this removal is
frequently carried still further by a short bran-drench, which
also secures the complete absence of lime. after the usual
beam-work, the skins are pressed or wrung out to remove
surplus water, and while still moist are oiled on a table and
folded in cushions. fish-, seal-, or whale-oil is generally used,
and vegetable oils do not seem to answer even in mixture,
with the exception perhaps of olive-oil. the skins are next
stocked for - hours, shaken out, and hung up for /- hour
to cool and partially dry. they are then again folded in
bundles, and stocked for a short time, taken out, oiled again,
and returned to the stocks; and this process is repeated,
until the skins lose their original smell of limed hide, and
acquire a peculiar mustard-like odour, and the water at first
present has been entirely replaced by oil. the later dryings
are frequently conducted in a heated room, and when the
oiling is complete, the skins are piled on the floor, and the
oxidation of the oil, which has already commenced during
the fullings and dryings above described, is completed by
a sort of fermentation, in which the skins heat very considerably.
during this process, they are carefully watched,
and if the heat rises so high as to endanger the quality
of the leather, the pile must be turned over, so as to cool
the skins, and bring those which were originally outside
to the centre. when the fermentation comes to an end, the
skins are no longer susceptible of heating, and are of
the well-known yellow or chamois colour. where this
colour is objectionable, the oxidation is sometimes completed
by hanging the leather in a heated room instead of by piling.
it is now necessary to remove the surplus oil, and this in
france is done by oiling with any sort of oil, throwing into
hot water, and wringing or squeezing. the oil obtained in
this way forms the moëllon or dégras so much prized for
currying purposes. the unoxidised oil still retained by the
skins is removed by washing with soda or potash lye. in
england and germany, the whole of the uncombined oil is
removed in this way, and is recovered from the lye, in which
it exists in a partially saponified state, by neutralisation
with sulphuric acid. it forms the "sod" oil of commerce.
about half the oil employed is obstinately retained by the
skin, and cannot be removed even by boiling with alkalies,
while no gelatin is obtained by boiling water, to which
the chamoised skin is much more resistant than ordinary
leather. the nature of the tanning process does not seem to
be well understood. it is generally stated that the fibres
of the skin are unaltered, but are merely coated with the
oxidised products of the oil. it is hard, however, on this
hypothesis to understand their extraordinary indifference to
water, even at a boiling temperature, which speedily converts
kid and other tawed leathers into a solution which
gelatinises on cooling; and it seems more probable to the
present writer that some actual chemical combination is
formed. lietzman ('herstellung der leder,' p. ) supposes
that the whole of the gelatigenous tissue has been removed
by liming and bating, and that only the very indifferent
yellow elastic fibres (see p. ) remain. this view, however,
is quite untenable, in consideration of the very small proportion
of these fibres originally present in the skin. müntz,
in his researches (see p. ), showed that the fibres insoluble
in boiling water scarcely exceeded  per cent, of the dried pelt.
dry gelatigenous fibre has a considerable resistance to heat,
and it is possible that the action of the oil may consist in
preventing the absorption of water. this, however, will not
explain its resistance to alkalies. cotton or other vegetable
fibres moistened with oil, readily undergo oxidation, with so
much evolution of heat as sometimes to cause spontaneous
combustion; but the oxidation products are easily and completely
removed by alkaline solutions, leaving the fibre in
its original state, as indeed is noted by lietzman (loc. cit.).
the finishing processes consist in staking during drying
to retain softness, and in whitening and smoothing the flesh
(or sometimes both sides) on the fluffing wheel. skins for
gloves, &c., are bleached like linen, by sprinkling and
exposure to the sun; or more rapidly by treatment with a
weak solution of potash permanganate, and subsequently
with sulphurous, or very dilute sulphuric acid, to remove the
brown manganous oxide formed (barreswil, dingl. polyt.
jour., , ). gaseous sulphurous acid from burning
sulphur may also be used for bleaching. the "dyeing" of
chamois leather is generally done with ochres and similar
colouring matters, and may be removed by washing. treatment
with egg-yolk in water, or with an emulsion of olive-oil
with a little soap, and rubbing, or stretching, will restore
softness to chamois leather which has become stiff by washing.
the process of manufacture of this leather, which has
obtained a firm position as the most suitable material for
certain classes of belting, picker-straps, &c., was discovered
about  years since by theodor klemm, a cabinet-maker
in wurtemburg and founder of the present well-known
firm of leather manufacturers, gebrüder klemm of
pfullingen. klemm, at that time in poor circumstances,
sold his patent in paris to an englishman, preller, who
started a manufacture of it in southwark and adopted a
crown as his trade-mark. since this time the manufacture
has spread, first to switzerland and then through germany;
but in england, to the writer's knowledge, it is confined to
one or two firms.
the process of manufacture of crown leather is in principle
intermediate between that of calf-kid (see p. ), and the
pure oil-tanning, if we may call it so, of which the chamois
leather (see p. ) is typical. it depends on impregnating
the raw hide with a mixture of fats and albumens, to which
salt or saltpetre is added to prevent putrefaction. the
process as described in the original patent was as follows,—the
hides were unhaired by liming or painting (with
sulphides), and cleansed as usual, no plumping lime being
given. after unhairing they were allowed to dry some little
time in the air till no longer plump, and were then worked
in a tumbler drum, without water, till uniformly soft. they
were then spread on a table and brushed over on the flesh-sides
with a mixture of  parts of ox-brain, / of butter,
 of soft fat, and  of salt or saltpetre, with  of barley-flour
and / of milk, of which the leading  ingredients
were first to be mixed and the flour stirred in, the milk
being last added. the hides were then returned to the
tumbler, which was provided with tubular axes, through
which a portion of exhaust steam was admitted to warm the
drum. after tumbling some hours, the drum was opened,
and the hides were examined. if the tanning was not
complete, the hides were hung in the air for a time to dry,
and the process was repeated till a cut showed that the
mixture had completely penetrated the hide.
from eitner's researches it appears that the essential
tanning ingredients of the mixture above described are the
fat (and butter which acts simply as fat) and the albuminous
matter of the milk (casein), brains (albumen, &c.), and flour
(gluten); the starch serving at most to assist in the emulsification
of the fats. eitner treated crown leather with dilute
potash solution to remove the albumen and fats, and after
washing and drying obtained a material like an insufficiently
stocked chamois leather. on again stuffing with a quantity
of fat equal to that removed, but without the albumen, the
leather became dark and quite greasy, so that by sharp
bending oil could be pressed out. good results may be
obtained in crown leather manufactured with fats and flour
only, without the use of milk or brains, so that it is obvious
that the same purpose is served by either vegetable or animal
albumenoids. the most important point in the purposes for
which crown leather is employed is toughness, and this is
given by the unaltered hide-fibres, which are merely preserved
by the coating of oily matter with which, like those
of chamois leather, they are surrounded. the albumen
serves the purpose of filling the spaces between the fibres,
and giving solidity and firmness, so that the belts may keep
their shape, and not stretch inordinately. it also serves to
make the leather waterproof, and fit it for water-bags for
military purposes (as it gives no taste to the water) and for
hose-pipes. the albumen, which much resembles the hide-fibres
in composition, is like them preserved by the fats.
for the modern process of manufacture, good, even and
well-flayed hides are selected, and unhaired either by sweating,
or by a very short liming, which must be assisted by
rockers or some mechanical mode of moving the hides, so as
to get them unhaired in the shortest possible time and with
the least injury to the fibre. sodium sulphide (see p. )
may be employed with great advantage. the fleshing and
scudding are performed as usual, according to the mode of
unhairing adopted. the hides are then very commonly
rounded, and the bellies tanned in the usual manner; but
sometimes the whole hide is made into crown leather.
as crown leather is naturally almost white, it is usual at
this stage to colour the hide with bark or other liquors. as
in this case simply colouring and not tanning of the grain is
required, high-coloured liquors, made by steaming materials
with much colour and little tannin, are preferable. for this
purpose wood extracts, such as chestnut, quebracho, or oak-wood
are said to be very suitable, and beech, pine or alder
bark may also be used. in practice, chestnut and hemlock
extracts, and occasionally cutch are employed; but the last
named is not to be recommended. a chestnut liquor of
/° tw. or ° b. (° bark.), with constant handling or in a
paddle-tumbler, will give a satisfactory colour and grain in
- hours. this rapid colouring is preferable to the slower
process, which occupies  hours in weaker liquors. if
sweated, the hides are now plumped with sulphuric acid, but
only to a very moderate extent. this process is best performed
in a paddle-tumbler; about / oz. of sulphuric acid
are required per hide, and a time of - hours according
to the water employed. the liquor may be several times
used, strengthened with the necessary quantity of acid.
limed hides do not require further swelling. the hides are
washed through clean water, and hung up to dry somewhat.
the hides are next spread on a table, flesh-side uppermost,
and covered with a layer of the tanning paste nearly
/ in. thick. the composition of this paste may be varied
according to the relative prices of different materials, and
the amount of hard fats must be regulated according to
whether or not appliances are provided for heating the
tumbler. a good mixture is  parts common wheat-flour,
 of horse-grease,  of salt, and - of tallow. if too soft,
more tallow may be employed. the salt is first added to
the horse-grease, then the melted tallow, these fats are
added little by little to the flour till a uniform paste is
obtained. another good mixture is  parts wheat-flour,
 of bone-grease,  of tallow, and  of salt. another recipe
gives  lb. fine white flour made to a paste with -
pints water and then worked up to a uniform mass with a
tepid mixture of  lb. beef tallow and  lb. hard horse-fat
(pferdekammfett). these mixtures are all for use in warmed
drums; a specimen of one used in a factory where the
mixture was simply trodden in cold into the leather in open
tubs is as follows:— parts flour, · of horse-fat, · of fish-oil,
 of ox-brains and · of salt. the hides are next folded
in bundles and placed in the drum; or in stocks, which are
occasionally used for the purpose. if a drum be used, it
must be of large diameter, - ft., provided with pegs
inside, and should make about  revolutions per minute, so
as to work the hides with considerable force. much more
care is needed in warming the drum, than is required in
ordinary stuffing, and this is best accomplished by warmed
damp air. this may be arranged by the use of an air-pump,
which draws air through water warmed by exhaust steam,
and forces it through the hollow axles of the drum (or
drums); or a simple aspirator consisting of a cask filled
with water may be connected to one axle, so that as the
water runs out it will draw air through the drum from the
opposite axle, which is connected with a cask half filled with
hot water through which air is allowed to bubble. probably
the same effect could be reached in a still simpler and cheaper
manner by the use of a steam-jet blower, such as körting's.
in any case the drum must be warmed to a temperature of
°-° f. (°-° c.). warm dry air may also be used,
but is not so suitable, as it dries the hides too much. the
hides are tumbled - hours, hung up till half-dry, and the
process is repeated. for very heavy hides,  tumblings may
be required. in the later tumblings, a lower temperature,
° f. (° c.), may be employed, and the time extended to
 hours.
the currying of crown leather is very simple. it is set
out on flesh and grain, and boarded to raise the grain.
mossner, before currying, washes  hours in water and
brushes with tepid soda solution ( in ). the yield of
weight is small, only amounting to about - per cent.
of the raw hide employed, and hence the price per lb. must
be considerably higher than that of tanned leather to yield
a profit. the above information is mostly drawn from
articles by w. eitner ('der gerber,' iv.  et seq.) and franz
kathreiner ('gerber zeitung,' st december, ).
the invention of the earliest form of mineral tanning, that
with alum and salt, dates from remote antiquity; but as it
is in large measure the type of all that has been since done,
it deserves examination in some detail, at least as regards
principles. in practice it is used alone in curing skins with
the hair on, and for making white leather for laces and other
purposes; and, in combination with oil and albumen, which,
as we have seen, are the tanning agents in the case of
"crown leather," it forms the process for producing calf
and glove kids, as will be described under those headings
(pp. , ).
careful researches by reimer (ding. polyt. jour., ,
p.  et seq.) show (what has long been known in practice)
that alum alone is not capable of making a pliable leather.
the salt, nevertheless, does not enter into combination with
the alum, or even with the hide. its function is partially
physical, increasing the diffusion of the solution, and partially
chemical, as in the presence of acids (and salts of acid
reaction) it precipitates the coriin, and prevents it from
gluing the fibres into a horny mass as it dries. prof. knapp
has shown that this is the first essential in producing leather,
and that raw hide may be converted into a pliable material
with all the properties of white leather by simply withdrawing
the water with alcohol, in which coriin is not soluble,
and by which it is therefore precipitated. this leather, containing
when dried no added constituent, is of course at once
reconverted into raw hide by soaking in water. both the
salt and a portion of the alumina is removed from tawed
leather by soaking in water, and it then dries hard and
horny, and by boiling in water will yield a considerable percentage
of gelatin. the alum is not absorbed as a whole.
it is a double salt (alumina and potash sulphate or alumina
and ammonia sulphate), and only the alumina sulphate is
absorbed, potash (or ammonia) sulphate accumulating in the
liquor. the alumina salt retained by the hide, especially in
presence of much salt, contains slightly more than its normal
proportion of alumina to acid, or in chemical language is to
some extent basic. this is caused partly by the lime remaining
in the skin from the unhairing process, which neutralises
a portion of sulphuric acid, but in part is the result of the
affinity of the hide-fibres for alumina, a certain small proportion
of free sulphuric acid being left in the liquor. the
accumulation of this and of potash sulphate is the reason
why such liquors cannot be used perpetually by mere
strengthening with alum, but must be frequently renewed.
the attraction of hide-fibre for alumina sulphate is so strong,
that in presence of a sufficient excess of hide it may be completely
removed even from dilute solutions. alumina acetate
or sulphate may be substituted for alum with equally good
results in practice, the only advantage of the latter being
its easier preparation. ferric and chromic salts and iron
or chrome alum, may be substituted for common alum, and
are absorbed in a similar manner, and in presence of common
salt give equally pliable leathers, of a buff and pale greenish
tint respectively. without salt, the leathers are hard and
brittle. in all these cases, the tanning agent may be to a
large extent removed by simple washing with water. the
tannage may be rendered more durable by passing the leather
before drying through a weak bath of sodic carbonate or even
lime-water, which precipitates the alumina, iron, or chrome
in a basic form on the hide-fibres. soap baths may also be
used, by which aluminic, ferric, or chromic stearates and
oleates are formed, possessing considerable toughness and resistance
to water. so far as the writer is aware, no mineral
tannage has yet been produced which will not yield gelatin
when treated, first with dilute acid and then with boiling
water; but this is rather a gain than otherwise, as leather
scraps might be utilised for glue. there seems no reason
why good and durable leather, for boot-uppers and for many
mechanical purposes, should not be fabricated with salts of
iron and chromium in conjunction with salt. if eggs and
flour were also used, products similar to calf-kid would be
obtained. iron-leathers may of course be blacked with infusions
of galls or many tanning materials, or with logwood.
ferrous salts have no tanning properties.
if, instead of using neutral iron salts, basic ferric salts
(which may be obtained by dissolving ferric oxide in solution
of neutral ferric salts, or by oxidising ferrous sulphate with
manganese black oxide, or nitric acid) be employed, much
larger quantities are absorbed by the hide, and if this be
fixed with soap baths and finished with a moderate quantity
of oil, a gain of weight—approaching  per cent. of the
finished leather, or about the same as that given by bark,
may be obtained. the leather, however, has by no means
the same resistance to wet and decay as bark-tanned leather,
and invariably has a tendency to crack when sharply bent.
the process has been most carefully worked out by professor
knapp, and was patented and worked commercially for a
short time in brunswick, but apparently without financial
success. professor knapp's method is as follows:—the iron
solution is prepared by adding nitric acid to a boiling solution
of ferrous sulphate (green vitriol) till the iron is completely
oxidised to the ferric condition. to this, ferrous
sulphate is again added so long as it continues to cause
effervescence. the resulting solution is a clear orange, and
of more or less syrupy consistence, and may be evaporated
without decomposition or crystallisation to a transparent
varnish. the hides are unhaired and prepared for tanning
in the usual way, and are then handled in solutions of the
iron salt, which are at first weak, and are gradually
strengthened. skins are tanned in - days, and the heaviest
hides in a week. after tanning, the hides are stuffed in a
drum ventilated through the axes, very similar to that
described under "crown leather," p. , with an insoluble
iron-soap made by precipitating soap solution with the iron-liquor;
or the iron-soaps may be formed in the hide by the
alternate use of iron and soap solutions, as already described.
the leather is finally saturated with a solution of stearin
and paraffin, to render it waterproof.
a process which has been worked on a larger scale, is that
of dr. heinzerling, introduced about , with the usual
promise of "complete revolution" in the leather trade; but
which, in spite of the most determined and persevering
efforts of the eglinton chemical company, who own the
english patent, has failed to take any very prominent
position in commerce. the tanning materials employed are
alum and salt, with a varying proportion of potash, soda, or
magnesia bichromate. these salts have a very marked
hardening effect on animal tissues, and, when mixed with
gelatin and exposed to light or acted on by acids, become
reduced, and at the same time render the gelatin insoluble
even in hot water, a property which is made useful in many
photographic processes. this is probably due to the formation
of salts of chromium, which, as has been stated (p. )
have a similar tanning effect, but perhaps more powerful,
than those of alumina. however this may be, the effect of
potash bichromate when exposed to light with gelatin, differs
from that of the addition of chrome salts ready formed, the
gelatin in the first case becoming incapable of even swelling
in hot water, while in the second, though rendered insoluble,
it becomes soft and swollen. the use of potash bichromate
in tanning had been previously patented by cavalin, who
used it in conjunction with alum and salt, and with the
addition of a portion of green vitriol, to give the leather a
colour more similar to that of bark-tanned.
dr. heinzerling uses metallic zinc in the salt and alum
solution to assist in the precipitation of amorphous alumina
on the hide-fibres. the same material was used in a similar
way by jennings (no. , ), but with the object of
whitening the goods. yellow or red prussiates of potash
(potassic ferrocyanide or ferricyanide), are also sometimes
mixed with the solution, in order to enable the leather to be
blacked with iron-liquor, with which they produce prussian
blue. to fix the tannage on the fibre, and prevent its
washing out, the use of barium chloride, lead acetate, and
of soap solution is claimed; the latter having been also
patented for similar purposes by knapp, and subsequently
by jennings and others.
in order to render the leather waterproof, it is finally
saturated with solutions of paraffin, stearin, and other fats
and hydrocarbons (resin is employed, though not named
in the patent), in petroleum spirit and similar solvents.
such is the original patent, which, it will be seen, is
rather a combination of older processes than an original
discovery. whether it is still worked on the same lines
the writer is unable to say, but he is aware that considerable
improvements have been made in the finish and appearance
of the goods. the leather in its present form possesses considerable
resistance to water, is free from the brittleness so
common in mineral tannages, and like other alumed leathers,
considerably exceeds bark-tanned leather in toughness and
elasticity. these make it valuable for many purposes, and
among others, for machine-belting, although it has the disadvantage
of elongating considerably while in use.
calf-kid is used for light upper-leather, and belongs to a
different class from any yet described, being "tawed" instead
of tanned. in this respect, and in most details of its manufacture,
it resembles glove-kid.
the process is as follows. selected calf-skins, dried or
salted, are the raw material, and after a suitable softening in
fresh water, are limed for - weeks, or till the hair goes
easily. they are then unhaired and fleshed in the usual
manner, pured with a bate of dogs' dung, scudded, and again
cleansed with a bran drench. in germany, the bran drench
is used alone, and is composed of  lb. bran to  medium
skins. before use, the bran should, especially in summer, be
well washed, to free it from adhering meal. the temperature
of the drench should not exceed ° f. (° c.), and the
skins should remain in for - hours. lactic acid is produced
by fermentation; this removes lime, and is itself neutralised
by the products of putrid fermentation which succeeds it.
the tanning is accomplished in a drum with a mixture
of alum and salt; and after drying, the skins are again
moistened, and worked in the drum with a mixture of oil,
flour, and egg-yolk. in the german method, these two
operations are combined. eitner, who has written a series
of articles on the process, gives  lb. flour,  lb. alum,
 lb. salt,  eggs, or about / gal. of egg-yolk, / pint
(/ litre) of olive-oil, and - gal. water, as a suitable
mixture. the skins are worked in a drum-tumbler (preferably
a square one, see plate ) for  minutes, then allowed
to rest  minutes, and this process is twice repeated. the
temperature must not exceed ° f. (° c.), and it is said
to be important that the drum should be ventilated by holes
at the axis.
the skins are allowed to drain, are then rapidly dried
at a temperature of °-° f. (°-° c.), and, after
"samming," or damping with cold water, are staked by
drawing them to and fro over a blunt knife fixed on the top
of a post (see plate ). they are then wetted down and
shaved, either with the moon-knife or ordinary curriers'
shaving-knife, and sometimes receive a second dressing of
oil, flour, and egg, to soften them still further.
dyeing black is accomplished either by brushing on a
table, or by "ridging" or folding, grain-side outwards, and
drawing quickly through baths of the mordant and colour.
to prepare them for the colour, stale urine is generally
employed. a deeper colour, and one less liable to strike
through the skin, is obtained by adding / lb. potash bichromate
to  gal. of urine, or the following mixture may be
substituted with advantage, viz. / lb. marseilles soap dissolved
in boiling water,  or  egg-yolks added, and the
whole made up to  gal. with water and / lb. potash bichromate.
the colour used is infusion of logwood or its extract,
or two-thirds logwood, which is best extracted by stale urine
or old soak-liquor, with addition of a small quantity of soda
( lb. to  lb. dye-wood). it is fixed and darkened by a
wash of iron-liquor ( of iron protosulphate in  of cold
water). after being again dried, the skins are grounded
with the moon-knife, and rubbed over on the grain with a
composition containing oil, wax, &c., and are finally ironed
with a flat-iron, to give them a fine and smooth surface.
eitner gives a recipe for the gloss:— lb. gum arabic, / lb.
yellow wax, / lb. beef-tallow, / lb. marseilles soap,  lb.
strong logwood infusion, and  gal. water. the water is
brought to a boil in an earthen pot, and then the soap, wax,
gum, and tallow are added successively, each being stirred
till dissolved before adding the next, and lastly the logwood.
after boiling for an hour, it is allowed to completely cool,
being incessantly stirred during the whole process.
this branch of leather manufacture is mainly carried on
in germany, austria, and france. in germany and austria,
lamb-skins are principally employed; in france, kid-skins.
for fine gloves, the skins of very young animals only can be
used. the ordinary style of manufacture is as follows:—the
soaking of the dried skins is effected in large wooden
tubs (kufen, bottichen), and occupies on the average - days,
according to the character of the soak-water, the size of the
skins, and the time they have been stored. the skins, when
thoroughly and uniformly softened, are unhaired, either by
painting the flesh-side with a thin paste of lime, or in lime-pits.
in unhairing by painting (schwöden), the skins, after
coating the flesh-side with lime, are folded together, so that
the lime comes as little as possible into contact with the
wool, and these bundles or "cushions" are placed in a tub,
in which they are most frequently covered with water. after
unhairing on the beam with a blunt knife, the skins must be
limed for some days, in order that the leather may stretch
well, a quality which the germans denominate zug. by this
method of unhairing, the wool is preserved uninjured, but it is
not suitable for the finer sorts of leather. the unhairing in
lime-pits is done either with gas-lime (grünkalk), or, as is now
almost exclusively the practice, with the so-called "poison-limes"
(giftäscher). these are prepared by mixing red
arsenic (arsenic sulphide) with lime, while it is being slaked,
and is at its hottest. the calcic sulphydrate (and perhaps
sulpharsenite) thus formed hastens the unhairing, and gives
the grain a higher gloss. well-conducted establishments
now avoid as much as possible the use of old limes, which
produce a loose, porous leather, with a rough, dull grain.
the liming lasts on the average  days, and is of the
greatest importance. it is essential that the interfibrillary
substance shall be dissolved, that the leather may have the
quality known as stand, that is to say, may be strongly
stretched in either length or breadth without springing back.
it also depends upon the liming (and this is of special
importance in the case of lamb-skins), whether the tissue of
the fat-glands is well loosened, so that the fat, either as such,
or as lime- or ammonia-soap, may be readily and completely
worked out. skins in which this is neglected can never be
properly dyed.
when the hair (or wool) is well loosened, the skins are
rinsed in water, and then unhaired on the beam with a blunt
knife. the water employed in washing should not be much
colder than the limes, or it will prevent the hair from coming
away readily. the wool or hair is washed and dried for
sale. the skins are thrown into water, to which a little
lime-liquor has been added, to prevent precipitation of the
lime in the skins by the free carbonic acid of the water,
which would have the effect of making them rough-grained.
next comes the first fleshing (vergleichen) or "levelling."
by this, the loose cellular tissue on the flesh-side is removed,
together with the head, ears, and shanks, and the flanks are
trimmed. the skins are then again thrown into water,
softened with lime-liquor as above described, and then into
a bate of dogs' dung. this is prepared by stirring up white
and putrid dogs' dung with boiling water, and straining it
through a sieve or wicker basket. the bate must be used
tepid, and not too strong. the skins "fall" (lose their
plumpness) in it rapidly, and become extremely soft and fine
to the touch; and the fat-glands, remaining hairs, and other
dirt, can now be very readily scudded out. so far no completely
satisfactory substitute has been found for this somewhat
disgusting mixture, but it has been noted that guano
will produce similar effects. with regard to the mode of
action of the dung bate, much has been speculated without
proof, and exact analytical evidence is wanting; but, no
doubt, a weak putrefactive action goes on, as may be deduced
from the presence of bacteria; further, the ammonia and weak
organic acids present in the putrefying dung are capable of
acting on fat and lime; and finally, a direct mechanical effect
seems to be produced, difficult to describe, but favourable to
the succeeding manipulation. too strong bates, or too long
continuance in them, produces evident putrefactive effects on
the skins. (see also p. .)
when the skins come out of the bate, they are stretched
and worked (abgezogen) on the flesh with a sharp knife, and
any remaining subcutaneous tissue is removed. this constitutes
the second fleshing. they are then rinsed in warm
water, and beaten with clubs (stoss-keule), see plates  and ,
in a tub, or worked in a tumbler-drum (walkfass), in either
case with a very little water only; and finally brought into
a tank of water, not too cold, and kept in constant motion
with a paddle-wheel.
the skins are next cleansed on the grain-side by working
on the beam with plates of vulcanite with wooden handles,
so as to remove fat, lime- and ammonia-soaps, and other lime
compounds, together with all remaining hair or wool. the
skins are now a second time washed in the "paddle-tumbler,"
first in cold, and then in tepid water; and after allowing
the water to drain from them, they are transferred to the
bran drench.
this is prepared by soaking wheaten bran in cold water,
diluting with warm water, and straining the extract through
a fine hair-sieve. sufficient of the liquid must be employed
to well cover the skins, and the temperature may range
from ° f. (° c.) to ° f. (° c.). these conditions are
favourable to bacterial activity, which comes into play, and,
on the one hand, evolves formic, acetic, lactic, and butyric
acids, which dissolve any remaining traces of lime, and on
the other, loosens and differentiates the hide tissue, so as to
fit it to absorb the tawing solution (gare). much care is
required in the management of the bran drench, especially
in summer, since the lactic readily passes into the butyric
fermentation (see also p. ). the tawing mixture is composed
(like that employed in the fabrication of calf-kid, q. v.)
of alum, salt, flour, and egg-yolks, in a quite thin paste. the
skins are either trodden in it with the feet, or put into a
tumbler-drum with it (fig. ). kathreiner pointed out,
some years since (in vol. i. of 'der gerber'), that a mixture
of olive-oil and glycerine might be partially substituted for the
egg-yolks, in both the tanning and dyeing of glove-kid leather.
the tawed skins are now dried by hanging on poles, grain
inwards. rapid drying in well-ventilated, but only moderately-heated,
rooms is essential to the manufacture of a
satisfactory product.
fig. .
fig. .
the dry leather is rapidly passed through tepid water,
and after being hung for a very short time, to allow the
water to drain off, is trodden tightly into
chests, and allowed to remain in them
for about  hours, so that the moisture
may be uniformly distributed. it
is then trodden on hurdles (horden),
composed of square bars of wood, joined
corner to corner, so as to make a floor of
sharply angular ridges, fig. . the
next operation is stretching over a circular knife, called the
stollmond (stollen, eng. "staking"), shown in fig. ; then
the leather is dried nearly completely, and staked again.
dyeing.
the dyeing of glove-kids is done in  ways:—a. the
skins are plunged into the dye-bath (tunkfarben). in this
way, all light colours are ordinarily produced, such as gris-perle
(pearl-grey), paillé (straw-yellow), chamois (reddish yellow),
silver-grey, aquamarine, &c. b. the skins are spread on an
inclined or rounded table of stone or metal, and brushed
over, on the grain side, first with a mordant (beize), then
with the dye-liquor, and lastly, with a solution of a mineral
salt (plate ). the mordant serves to fix the colour on the
surface of the skin, to prevent its striking through, to produce
certain modifications of colour, and to enable any parts
of the skin which yet contain fat to take the colour evenly
with the rest. to satisfy these conditions, the composition
of the mordants is very varied. potash bichromate, ammonia,
potash, soda, and stale urine are among the most frequently
employed, seldom separately, but usually in a mixture containing
 or more.
dye-stuffs of vegetable origin have always held the first
place. those most in use are logwood (blauholz), brazilwood
(rothholz), the two fustics—cuba gelbholz (morus tinctoria)
and ungarisches gelbholz (rhus cotinus), several species
of willow-bark and of berries, indigo-carmine, and indigo
dissolved in sulphuric acid.
aniline colours used alone remained in fashion for a short
time only, but are now usefully employed as top-colours
(ueberfarben), viz. brushed in very dilute solution over vegetable
colours. in this way, particularly tasteful shades of
green, violet, and marine-blue may be produced.
after the mordant has been applied once or twice, and
the colour - times, a wash (ueberstrich) containing some
metallic salt is generally applied, with the object either of
bringing out the special tone required, or of making the
colour more lively and permanent. the so-called "vitriols"
are mostly employed: "white vitriol" (zinc sulphate),«  »
"blue vitriol" (copper sulphate), "green vitriol" (iron
sulphate), and occasionally other salts.
before dyeing, the greater part of the flour, salt, and alum
must be removed from the skins by washing with tepid
water; and they therefore require a second feeding (nahrung)
of egg-yolk and salt. in the case of the skins which
are dyed by plunging into the dye-vat (tunkfarben), this
is done after the dyeing is completed; in that of brush-dyeing,
before the dyeing process.
after the dyeing, the skins, if dipped, are wrung out; if
brush-dyed, sleeked out with a brass plate, to get rid of
superfluous water. they are then dried in an airy room.
before staking (stretching), the skins are laid or hung in a
damp cellar, or in moist saw-dust. they are staked twice:
once damp, and once nearly dry.
skins which are much damaged on the grain, or otherwise
faulty, are smoothed with lump pumice on the flesh-side,
either by hand or machine. they are then dyed on this
side, mostly by dipping, but occasionally with the brush, in
which case, the method described is slightly modified.
indebtedness is acknowledged to f. kathreiner, of worms,
and david richardson, of newcastle, for much information
on the production of light leathers. the plates  to  represent
the works of messrs. tréfousse et cie., at chaumont
(haute-marne).
as few architects have specially studied the construction
of tanneries, and in most cases much of the arrangement
depends on the knowledge of the tanner himself, a short
chapter on the subject will not be out of place.
in the selection of a site, a clay or loamy soil is to be preferred
to a gravelly or sandy one, as lessening the liability
to leakage, and waste of liquor. perhaps, however, the first
consideration of all is the water supply, since for manufacturing
purposes town water is generally very expensive.
with regard to quality and impurities of water, information
may be found on p. ; but, as a general rule, the softer and
purer the supply the better. it is also of great advantage
when the source is at such a level as to flow into the tan-yard,
or at least into the beam-house, without pumping.
filtration too, when needed, is much facilitated by a sufficient
head of water.
of scarcely less importance than the water supply is the
drainage of the yard. it not unfrequently happens that
tanneries are prohibited from discharging their refuse
liquors, limes, and soaks into rivers and watercourses, and it
is sometimes a matter of extreme difficulty to find any other
way of getting rid of them. in default of an outlet, recourse
must be had to precipitation and filtration, but this is a
costly expedient, and in fixing a site for a new yard it is
far better to provide against such a possible contingency.
should, however, such means become necessary, it may be
borne in mind that limes and liquors in great measure
mutually precipitate each other, and that if all the various
refuse is run into one tank, mixed, and settled, much is
accomplished in the direction of purification. the further
treatment of the effluent water must be determined by its
nature and composition.
the site chosen, the next question is the arrangement of
the buildings. it is very doubtful, where ground is not
inordinately expensive, whether it is wise to erect drying-sheds
over the pits. in case of fire, very serious damage is
done to liquor and leather by the heat and burning timber.
if the turret form of drier be decided on, strong foundations
are required, and the ground-floor or basement is occupied
with heating apparatus; and, on the other hand, the tan-house
may be easily and cheaply covered with slated roofs,
with sections of glass, to the north, if possible, like a weaving-shed,
through which sufficient light for convenient work and
cleanliness is admitted. the direct rays of the sun should
be avoided, but in the writer's opinion the balance of advantage
is largely in favour of a liberal supply of light. iron
roofs are unsuitable, since the moisture condenses on, and
rusts them; and particles of oxide fall into the liquors, and
cause iron-stains.
good ventilation along the ridge of the roof should be provided,
wherever there is any steam or hot liquor used; or the
condensed moisture soon leads to decay.
as regards the general plan of the buildings, much depends
on local circumstances; but as far as possible, they must be
so arranged that the hides and leather work straight forward
from one department to another with as little wheeling or
carrying as possible; that the buildings where power is used
be near to the engine, so as to avoid long transmissions,
which are very wasteful of power; and that the different
buildings be so isolated as to diminish the risk of the whole
being destroyed in case of fire.
as regards the first of these conditions, if the various soaks,
limes, bates, and handlers are well arranged, it is hardly
necessary to do more than draw the goods from one pit into
the next throughout the whole of the process. to, and from
the layers, the goods must generally be carried or wheeled.
in the sheds, if it be a sole-leather tannery, the butts should
first come into turrets or open sheds for the rough drying;
then into a room sheltered from draughts to temper for
striking. the striking machines or beams should be in an
adjoining room, or immediately below; then a small shed-space
for drying before rolling; next the roller room; and
then the warm stove for drying off. if two of these can be
provided to be used alternately, it will allow the goods to be
aired off without taking down, and they may then be immediately
handed or lowered into the warehouse, without
fear of over-drying, which is sometimes difficult to avoid
where leather must be taken direct out of the hot drying-room.
to fulfil the second condition named, the engine should be
at the centre of the main range of buildings, with perhaps the
grinding machinery on one side, and the leather-finishing on
the other; but this would be rather contrary to the third
requirement. a very good plan would be to have the
engine-house in the centre as suggested, but separated from
the buildings on each side by brick gables; and with the
boiler-house behind it, and under a separate roof, say of
corrugated iron. figs. , , from eitner's book on american
tanning, show the arrangement of a sole-leather tannery in
the united states. if it be impossible to have the engine near
its work, it is in most cases better to employ a separate high-pressure
engine, which may be within a glass partition, and
will work all day with scarcely any attention. the loss of
power in carrying steam for moderate distances through sufficiently
large and well-clothed pipes is much smaller than that
of long lines of shafting. the writer has known cases where
fully half the indicated power of the engine was consumed in
friction of the engine, shafting, and belts. high-pressure
engines are as a rule to be preferred to condensing for
tannery use, since the waste steam can generally be employed
for heating, and both the first cost and that of maintenance
are smaller. where much fuel is used, it is quite worth
while to have the cylinders indicated occasionally, both
running light, and driving the
machinery; much information is
gained in this way as to the power
spent on the various machines, and
very frequently large economy is
effected by proper adjustment of
the valves. to work economically,
an engine should be of ample
power for all it has to do;
and adjusted to its work, not by
lowering the pressure of steam, or
by checking it at the throttle-valve,
but by setting the slide-valves
to cut off as early in the
stroke as may be. as to how
early this is possible, an indicator-diagram
will at once give information.
in arranging shafting, moderate
speeds, say - rev. per
min., should be chosen for main
lines, and when higher speeds are
necessary, they should be got up
by light and well-balanced counter-shafts,
with wrought-iron pulleys.
in calculating speeds, it must be
remembered that they vary inversely
as the size of the pulleys.
thus a  ft. pulley running at 
rev., will drive a  ft. one at 
rev., and a  in. one at . of
course the higher its speed, the
more power any shaft will transmit,
but increased friction and wear and
tear soon limit this advantage. the
velocity of a belt in feet per min.
is obtained by multiplying the number of revolutions per
minute by the girth of the pulley in feet or by its diameter
multiplied by /, or more accurately, ·.
fig. .
fig. .
pulleys should always be of ample breadth for the power
they have to transmit; and it is more economical both in
power and cost, to use broad single belting than the same
strength in double. if the pulley will not take a belt broad
enough for the work it has to do, a second belt may be made to
run on the top of the first, and will do its share of the work.
belts should be washed occasionally with soap and tepid water,
and oiled with cod-oil; but if of sufficient breadth, should not
require the use of rosin, or adhesive materials, to make them
grip the pulley. makers of machines often err in constructing
their driving pulleys too small both in breadth and diameter.
the horse-power which a belt is capable of transmitting
obviously varies extremely with circumstances, but may be
approximately calculated by the formula
a · v
where a is
the area of contact of the belt with the smallest pulley, and
v its velocity in feet per minute. another rule is, that at a
velocity of  ft. per min. each inch of breadth of belt
should transmit / horse-power on metal pulleys, or  on
wooden ones, on which the adhesion is greater. adhesion
may also be increased by covering the pulleys with leather
or india-rubber. both rules assume that the belt is of ample
strength. one horse-power would be transmitted by a belt
running  ft. per min. with a pull of  lb. a good
single belt should not break with a much less strain than
 lb. per inch of breadth, and should stand about / as
much as a working strain.
countershafting and high-speed machinery, such as disintegrators,
striking machines of the priestman type, &c.,
should run without material jar or vibration. if this occurs,
it is generally a sign that the running part is not equally
balanced. in this case, the shaft must be taken out of its
bearings, and supported on two exactly horizontal straight-edges,
when it will roll till the heaviest part is downwards;
and weight must be taken off or added till it will lie in any
position. in this way, the writer had recently to add fully
 lb. of iron to the drum of a striking machine before equilibrium
was secured, and a most troublesome vibration
prevented. of course all machinery should be supported
as solidly as possible; and if circumstances permit, most
machines are better on a ground-floor. in placing bark
mills, however, it is frequently convenient to fix them in the
top of a building, so that the ground material may be sent
down shoots by its own weight to the required places. an
alternative plan is to set the mill on the ground-floor, and
to raise the ground material with a bucket-elevator. this
may be done successfully by letting the material fall directly
from the mill into the buckets; but otherwise it must be
thrown in with a shovel, as buckets will not pick up ground
bark, even from a hopper; and in any case such elevators
are often troublesome. in a grinding plant designed by the
writer, the unground material is filled on the basement floor
into an iron barrow, which may be wheeled into an iron bow
working between upright guide-rails. on pulling a brake-line,
the barrow is raised to the top of the building, and its
contents are tipped into a large hopper, after which the
barrow rights itself, and descends for another load. in the
bottom of the hopper is a sliding shover, which forces
the material on to vibrating screens, by which it is guided
either into a disintegrator, or crusher rolls, at pleasure.
both these discharge through iron spouts into large hoppers
on the outside of a brick gable, from which, powdery materials
like myrabolanes and valonia, can be run direct into barrows
or trucks. it is very desirable that such hoppers should be
separated from the main building by a fireproof partition.
the writer is glad to say, he does not know of a case of fire
from disintegrators grinding tanning materials, but he is
informed that a carter's disintegrator employed in grinding
bones in a manure works has repeatedly set fire to the flannel
bag into which the dust was allowed to escape. if this were
to occur with a dry and dusty tanning material, it is not
unlikely that it might result in an explosion such as sometimes
happens in flour-mills from a similar cause. on the
whole, however, mills of the coffee-mill type are probably
more dangerous than disintegrators; since if they become
partially choked, the heat caused by friction is very great.
for lubricating purposes, mineral oils of high density are
not more dangerous than animal or vegetable, but rather the
reverse; as, though they are possibly more inflammable,
their mixture with cotton-waste and other porous vegetable
materials is not spontaneously combustible, while vegetable
and animal oils occasionally are. heavy mineral oils
should always be used as cylinder oils in high-pressure
engines, in preference to other oils or tallow, since they are
not decomposed by steam, and do no harm if blown into the
feed-water, but serve to loosen and prevent scale and deposit.
ordinary oils and tallow, on the other hand, when submitted
to the action of high-pressure steam, are separated into
glycerin and fatty acids (see p. ), and the latter corrode
the valve faces and seatings, and in combination with
temporary hardness in the boilers form a very dangerous
porous deposit, which often leads to overheating of the tubes.
next to the machinery, the pits demand special consideration.
the chapter on the subject in mr. schultz's book on
'leather manufacture,' is well worth attentive study as
giving american practice on the subject.
the old-fashioned method of sinking pits is to make them
of wood, and carefully puddle them round with clay, which
should be well worked up before use. such pits, if made of
good pine and kept in constant use, are very durable, some
of the original pits at lowlights tannery, constructed in
, being still in use. loam mixed with water to the
consistence of thin mortar may also be employed, the pits
being filled up with water, to keep them steady, at the same
rate as the loam is run in. probably the best materials for
pit-sides are the large yorkshire flagstones. where these
are not attainable, very durable pits may be made of brick,
either built with lias lime, and pointed with portland
cement, or built entirely with the latter. common lime
cannot be used, as it spoils both liquors and leather; and
even cements with too large a percentage of lime are unsatisfactory.
brick and common mortar are, however,
suitable for lime-pits.
the writer has constructed wooden pits in two ways. in
the one case, after making the excavation, beams were laid
in a well-puddled bed of clay; on these a floor of strong
tongued and grooved deals was laid, and on this the pits
were constructed of similar wood to the floor, and puddled
round with clay. in the second case the pits were built
like large boxes above ground, and when finished, lowered
on to a bed of clay prepared for them, and then puddled
both around and between. it may have been from defective
workmanship in the first case, but those made on the last-named
plan, which is that adopted from very early times,
have certainly proved the tightest and most satisfactory.
mr. schultz describes a plan as the buffalo method, in which
a floor is laid as just described, and grooves cut with a plane
for the reception of the sides, which are formed of perpendicular
planks, each end and side being finally tightened up
by the insertion of a "wedge plank."
if bricks be used, great care must be taken that the cement
is not merely laid so as to fill the joints towards the two
surfaces of the wall, as is the habit of modern bricklayers,
but actually floated into all the joints so as to make the wall
a solid mass; or leaks can hardly be avoided. cement pits
are very good, and, though not particularly cheap in material,
which must be of the best, are readily made by intelligent
labourers under good supervision. the first step is to lay a
level floor of good concrete, in which glazed pipes for emptying
the pits may be embedded; care being also taken that
all joints in these are thoroughly tight, since future repairs
are impossible. the next step is to make frames, the exact
length and breadth of the pits required, and perhaps  in.
deep. these are arranged on the floor where the pits are to
be, and the intervening spaces are filled with concrete of
perhaps  of cement to  or  of crushed stone or brick. rough
stones and bricks may also be bedded in the concrete as the
work goes on, to help to fill up. after the first layer has
set, the frames may be raised and a second added, and so on.
the work is generally finished by floating over it, while
still damp, a little pure cement, to give a smooth surface.
before using, the cement should be tried on a small scale, to
be sure that it does not discolour leather or liquors, and the
pits should always be seasoned with old or cheap liquor
before actual use.
fig. .
if possible, both latches and handler-pits should be provided
with plugs and underground pipes, communicating with
a liquor-well some feet below their levels. glazed fire-clay
is very suitable both for pipes and plug-holes, which should be
in the pit corners. some means should also be provided for
the ready clearing of the pipes when choked with tanning
materials. a good plan is to let each line of pipes end in a
liquor-well large enough for a man to go down. as it is almost
impossible to make plugs fit without
occasional leakage, it is not well
to run pits with very different
strengths of liquors to one well,
but the layers, handlers, and
different sets of leaches should each
have their own, so as to avoid mixture.
a good means of clearing
pipes consists in a series of iron
rods - ft. long, connected by
hooks fitting into double eyes, as
shown in fig. . it is obvious
that in a narrow pipe or drain,
these cannot become disconnected.
it is, as schultz points out, of
questionable advantage to lay wooden troughs for supplying
liquor to each pit under the alleys, since it is almost impossible
to preserve them from decay; but the same objection
would not apply to glazed pipes, well clayed or cemented.
a very good and cheap plan in practice, is to let the liquor-pump,
or a raised liquor-cistern, discharge into a large and
quite horizontal trough raised  or  feet above the level of
the yard, and provided with plug-holes at intervals, under
which short troughs may be set to run the liquor into the
various pits.
pl. viii.
e. & f. n. spon, london & new york.
in tan-yard construction, iron should, as far as possible, be
avoided wherever it can come into contact with liquor, as it
discolours the leather. in default of underground pipes,
india-rubber suction hose may be employed. direct-acting
steam pumps without fly-wheels are not suitable for tanneries,
as they "hammer" when the pit is nearly sucked up.
steam-jet elevators and the pulsometer are very useful for
some purposes, but slightly warm, and dilute the liquors
with condensed steam.
fig. .
much that has been said about pits applies also to leaches.
they may be constructed either of wood, or brick and cement,
and where heat is employed the latter is the better. they
are also to be provided with plugs and pipes leading to a
liquor-well. about  in. from the bottom of the pit is a
false bottom b made of boards, perforated with holes or set a
little distance apart; and in the corner is an "eye" c (ger.
pfaff) consisting of  boards set at right angles, so as to preserve
a vertical channel communicating with the space under
the false bottom. this serves, in pits provided with pipes,
for the insertion of the plug; and where this is absent, for
that of a suction hose to pump off the liquor. in the
american press-leck system, the eye of one pit communicates
by a horizontal spout with the top of the next (see d,
fig. ). the allen and warren sprinkler leck (fig. )
has very much superseded this arrangement in america,
though it is doubtful if it spends the bark so completely.
the round tubs, however, have several advantages and
may well be used for many purposes in english yards.
their construction is described in some detail in mr. schultz's
book above cited. some details will also be found on p. 
of the 'manufacture of leather' by davis. the rule for
finding the capacity of a round tub with perpendicular sides
in cubic feet is to square the diameter and multiply by
·, and by the depth in feet; or roughly, to square half
the diameter and multiply by the depth and by /.
fig. .
leaches and liquors are generally heated by blowing in
steam direct. in this case, the condensed water mixes with
the liquor, and in heating a liquor to boiling point it may be
taken that about  per cent. of water will be thus added.
where strong liquors are to be heated, it is therefore obviously
much better to pass the steam into a closed copper
coil in the liquor. such a coil, with steam at  lb. pressure,
will heat about / gal. per hour per square foot of surface
from ° f. to boiling, and evaporate about half that quantity
of liquor already at boiling temperature. (see box, 'treatise
on heat,' p. .) heating coils must of course be provided
with steam traps to carry off condensed water; and in boiling
by open steam it is very desirable to let the steam pass through
such a trap before use, to stop water condensed in the pipes,
which usually contains iron, and discolours the liquors.
the primitive way of drying leather was to hang it on
poles in the open air, but this in our uncertain climate has
become quite obsolete. the oldest plan now actually in use
is to hang on poles in a shed generally raised some height
above the ground, so as to catch the wind, and provided on
all sides with louvre boards arranged so as to open and shut
as required. these sheds, to give good results (especially on
mixed tannages, which need much more care in drying
than bark), demand very watchful management. in windy
weather, and with wet leather at all times, the louvres
must be kept nearly or quite closed, and on the sunny
side of the shed the same precaution is generally necessary.
again, in very damp weather the leather does not dry at all,
and in frosty seasons it is apt to freeze, by which sole
leather is made soft and spongy, and dressing leather,
though whitened, is said to be less capable of carrying
grease. to prevent freezing, and to enable leather to be
dried in damp or cold weather, it became customary to
provide sheds with ranges of steam-pipes on the floor; this,
though decidedly a valuable addition, has not proved by any
means an entirely satisfactory solution of the problem of
leather drying. no sufficient means are provided for controlling
the ventilation, and the upward currents of hot air
dry the leather irregularly, and produce bad colour. a much
more satisfactory shed is the american turret drier.
this consists of a lofty building,  to  stories high,
without louvres, but with latticed floors. j. s. schultz recommends
 stories, of  ft. clear between beams, as a convenient
height, and the building should be divided by partitions
from top to bottom into  or more series of chambers
one above another, each of which is capable of having the
heat and ventilation separately regulated. the americans
usually fill one of these series at once, and dry off the whole
in about  days, so that as many will be required for a
tannery as will hold a  days' production. for ventilation,
each of these sets of chambers is provided with a lantern
ventilator at the top for the exit, and shutters or dampers on
the bottom floor for the admission of air. the bottom floor
is also provided with steam-pipes, of which those for each
set of compartments are controlled by a separate cock.
when warmth is applied at the bottom, the tall building
acts like a chimney, and a continuous current of air passes
from the ventilators at the base up to those at the top. the
usual american practice is, after filling one of these ranges
of compartments, to apply no steam-heat for the first
 or  days, and, if the weather be dry or windy to keep
the ventilators also closed. after the third or fourth day, a
moderate degree of heat is given, and this is increased so
that at the end of about  days the stock is fully dry.
this is in accordance with a common american practice,
in which the leather is fully dried before rolling, in order
to fix the soluble colour, and prevent it striking out to the
surface in the finishing. the wet leather is raised by an
elevator, consisting of an endless chain provided with hooks,
to which the leather is attached at the bottom, and from
which it is taken at the top. various ways are adopted to
lower the leather from these tall turrets to the room where
it is stored prior to damping down for rolling. in some cases,
the lattice floors are made movable, and the whole contents of
the room, including the sticks from which the leather is
hung, are allowed to fall into the lowest room. this method
is of very questionable advantage, if we take into account
the labour of separating the sticks and carrying them back
to their places. another plan is to have shoots from each
loft, down which the sides are slid to the rolling-room.
the floors should have what light is necessary supplied
through glass windows, so arranged as not to admit direct
sunlight.
to adapt the turret drier for english requirements, some
slight modification is needed, since we do not dry our
leather right off, and then damp back, but, when it is
suitably dry, lay it in a pile to "sammy" for striking; then,
perhaps, after striking, hang up again for a short time to
temper for rolling, possibly again between rollings, and
finally to dry off at a temperature of, say, -° f.
(-° c.). perhaps on this account, the writer has
seen no complete turret-driers in use in england, though
a portion of one of the large sheds at dartford belonging to
messrs. hepburn was converted by them some years since
into a very good turret, which gave excellent results both
for sole leather and kip butts in stuff. this turret is represented
in section in fig. , and is about  ft. ×  ft. in
area, and  ft. high from the ground-line to the top of the
roof, which is ventilated by a dormer, a, with fixed louvres
at the top, while air is admitted at the bottom through
ventilators with sliding flaps, b b. it is heated by  rows
of -in. steam-pipe, c c, each  ft. long, making a total
of  ft. run, or about  ft. superficial (a -in. pipe
being about / in. diameter outside). i am informed by
mr. j. g. hepburn that he considers -in. pipes inferior
for the purpose to smaller ones, giving too much heat in
one place, and without sufficiently distributing it, and
were he constructing a new turret he would replace
them by / in. wrought-iron, using about  of / in. to
replace  of  in., small pipes being much more effective (as
will be seen by table, p. ) than larger ones, in proportion
to their surface. he considers, however, that the best way
of heating drying-sheds, though more expensive in first cost,
is by means of hot water, which is much more constant in
temperature than steam. mr. hepburn, to whom i am much
indebted for the above information, informs me that the
turret still acts very well, drying kip butts on the upper
floor a good colour in all weathers in about a week. he finds,
however, that the steam-pipes as described are hardly sufficient
in very cold weather, and intends to increase them, or
replace with - ft. of hot water pipe heated by a
saddle boiler. at lowlights tannery, a shed arranged on
the turret principle (though much less completely carried
out from want of height in the buildings) has been for
many years in operation, principally for drying off sole-leather,
with the most satisfactory results.
fig. .
it is noted by box ('practical treatise on heat,' p. ) that
an exit for the moist air should not be placed at the top of a
drying-chamber, but at the bottom, since in the first case,
the hot dry air tends to rise at once to the opening, and pass
away unsaturated with moisture, while that cooled by
evaporating water from the goods, being heavier, tends to
form downward currents and remain in the chamber. to
this it may be objected that aqueous vapour is much lighter
than air; this is true, other things being equal, but in
practice the evaporation of a given quantity of water cools
the air and makes it heavier in a materially greater degree
than the admixture of aqueous vapour lightens it. this
source of waste of heat exists in the turret drier, but is there,
from its great height, reduced to a minimum. in lower sheds
it becomes very material, and the air currents formed are
productive of much harm by causing irregular drying. this
difficulty has been met by mr. edward wilson, of exeter, to
whom the leather trade owes several very useful inventions,
by an ingenious drying-room constructed on the lines
indicated by box, though i do not know that he was in
any way indebted to that writer for the idea. in this mr.
wilson arranges the steam-pipes, instead of on the floor,
in a vertical compartment partitioned from the chamber,
through which air is admitted and heated. this hot air
fills the top of the chamber and from its lightness floats in
a horizontal layer, only descending and escaping by apertures
in the floor as it becomes cooled by evaporating the
moisture of the hides. mr. wilson states that the method
answers well in practice, and it is certainly the most
scientific in conception, but it might be feared that, as applied
to a single floor, the upper parts of the butts, suspended
near the ceiling, would dry more rapidly than those near
the floor. if applied to a double-floored building, this disadvantage
would, from the stronger draught, and consequent
larger supply of air, be less likely to show itself, and the
upper floor with its uniform warm air would be well
adapted for drying off finished sole-leather, while the
cooler and milder drying of the ground floor would be fitted
both in character and situation for that wet out of the yard.
special precaution would be needed to prevent the heated
air escaping by doors opening into the upper floor. there
is little doubt that as regards heat this is the most economical
system which has yet been invented.
a method has been introduced in the united states of
drying wet and finished leather all together, in drying-rooms
heated to a considerable temperature, and closely shut up.
this is found to answer fairly on leather from sour liquors,
but that from strong and sweet liquors is darkened, as
might be expected. the drying is accomplished in much
shorter time than by the turret drier. the mixture of wet
and dry leather, and the lack of ventilation produce an
atmosphere nearly saturated with moisture, and hence the
drying is not nearly so harsh as might be supposed from the
considerable temperatures made use of. there does not,
however, seem anything in the principle to recommend its
general adoption.
another invention, of which we have as yet heard little
definite in england, consists in drying at a low temperature
by air artificially deprived of its moisture. this may be
accomplished in several ways. experiments have been
made in drying in a closed chamber provided with trays
of calcium chloride to absorb the moisture evaporated. air
when artificially cooled by compression and subsequent
expansion, as in the case of ice-making machines, parts with
a large portion of its moisture, which is condensed in the
form of ice in the tubes of the machine. such air, if subsequently
warmed, would dry powerfully and rapidly.
before leaving the subject of drying-sheds, a few words on
the mechanics of drying in general may not be out of place.
air-drying is dependent on the condition that the air must
be capable of taking up more moisture than it already
contains. it is a matter of common experience that there
are warm days when the air is so saturated with moisture in
the form of invisible vapour, that scarcely any drying takes
place; and similarly, cool dry days, when leather dries
rapidly. the relative amount of moisture in the air is
easily ascertained by the simple instrument known as the
wet and dry bulb hygrometer; an instrument which ought
to be in every drying-shed, especially where steam heat is
used. it consists of two similar thermometers, side by side,
of which one has the bulb covered with muslin and kept wet
by a piece of lamp-cotton attached to it, and dipping in a
cup or bottle of water. this water evaporates more or less
rapidly, according to the dryness of the air; and as heat is
consumed by it in passing into the gaseous condition, the
wet thermometer falls more or less below the dry in proportion
to the rapidity of the evaporation. on a summer's day,
the difference may amount to °-° f. (°-° c.), and this
is about the extreme dryness permissible in a drying-room
for finished leather. wet leather should of course be dried
much more slowly. the influence of heat on drying is two-fold.
it increases the capacity of the air for moisture, and it
replaces the heat consumed by evaporation. the following
tables give the capacity of air for moisture at different
temperatures, and the percentage of saturation as shown by
the wet and dry thermometer. at greenwich, the mean
humidity for the year is  per cent.; or for the day-time
only  per cent., varying from  in summer to  in
winter:—
table i.—capacity of air for moisture.
temp. fahr.
weight in pounds ofa cub. ft. ofdry air.
weight in pounds ofmoisture contained ina cub. ft. ofsaturated air.
table ii.—hygrometer table.
temperatureof air.
degrees between wet and dry thermometers.
per cent. of moisture, saturation being .
as regards the heat consumed in evaporation; it requires
about  times as much heat to convert  lb. of
water into vapour, as it does to raise the temperature of the
same quantity ° f. at least as much heat as this must be
supplied if the air which has been used in drying is to retain
the same temperature it had at the outset, and therefore if a
turret is to keep at a higher temperature than the air, which
is necessary to create a draught, this is the minimum amount
of heat which must be supplied per pound of water to be
evaporated. in practice much more will be needed.
the following table shows the heat given out by different
sizes of pipes at different temperatures, and steam pressures,
in units equal to the heat required to raise  lb. of water
° f., and the cubic feet of air which they will heat.[v]
[v] to illustrate the use of such tables, the following example may be
given. to dry  butts in a turret, each containing  lb. of moisture,
at least  ×  ×  = ,, units of heat will be required to
replace the loss by evaporation alone. as a -in. pipe at ° gives off
 units per foot per hour (see table iii.), about  ft. would give off
,, units per day. if we compare this with mr. hepburn's practical
experience, supposing the  working floors of his turret to hold  butts
each (a low estimate), and to dry in  days; we have  ft. for  butts
or  ft. for  butts a day; showing that more than  times the
minimum is required in practice. of course this allows for weather in
which the air must be heated considerably before it will dry at all, for
heat that escapes uselessly at the top and sides of the building, and for the
fact that the pipes are not heated the whole time, and probably, on the
average, to a much lower temperature.
table iii.—heating effect of pipes freely exposed to air at ° f.
temp. of pipe.
pressureof steamper in.
units of heat per ft.-runof pipe per hour.
cub. ft. of air at ° f.(/° c.) heated ° perft.-run of pipe per hour.
 in.
 in.
 in.
 in.
 in.
 in.
 in.
 in.
lb.
it may be taken that / of the above volumes may be
heated °, from ° f. to ° f., and so on; but if the
average temperature is higher than ° f., the duty will be
less, and to obtain the same effect the pipe must be heated
so much hotter as to keep the same difference as before
between the pipe and air. thus a pipe at ° f. will only
heat as much air at ° f. as one of ° f. will of air at
fig. .
it will be noted that the efficiency of small pipes is much
greater than that of larger ones, and in these days of high-pressure
steam, much may be said in favour of the use of
comparatively small wrought-iron steam-pipes instead of the
larger cast metal ones. the first cost is small, the pipes are
easily obtained ready screwed, and in the lengths required,
and may be put together by any intelligent workman. the
risk of fracture by the concussion of condensed water is very
trifling, as compared to that of metal, and much lighter pipes
are safe for high pressures. steam-pipes must always be laid
with an incline of say  in.
in  ft. from the end where
the steam is admitted, so that
the condensed water may get
away, and at the lowest point
a steam-trap must be provided
for its escape. in the writer's
experience, the best form is
that of holman, made by
tangye of birmingham, of
which the principle will
readily be understood from
fig. . the cup-shaped
vessel a floats on the water
in the outer casing, and so
closes the valve b until a gets
full, when it sinks and allows
the water to escape until it floats up again. it is important
that this trap should be set level, or the valve
will not close properly. each pound of condensed water is
equivalent to about  units of heat given off (see table iii.).
in planning steam-pipes, it is not necessary that they should
be arranged in a single line. even if in gridiron form the
steam will still reach every part, in proportion to the condensation
which takes place. a series of large pipes may be
supplied by small pipes from a common main, and discharge
their condensed water into a common waste-pipe with branch
from each. a /-in. pipe from a high-pressure boiler will
supply a considerable range, say  ft. of -in. pipe, though
a larger size is advisable. at the farther end of a range of
steam-pipes a small tap must be provided to let out the air
which accumulates in them. in employing the exhaust steam
of an engine for heating purposes, the pipes must be of ample
size and freely open at the ends to avoid back-pressure. for
this purpose the gridiron form is a very good one.
the planning of hot-water pipes is much more difficult
than that of steam-pipes, but the general principle is that
the pipes must rise all the way from the boiler to the farther
end, where there must be an expansion-box or supply-cistern
to allow the water to rise and fall and dissolved air to escape.
from this the pipes must fall more or less, throughout the
distance, back to the boiler, entering it at the bottom. if at
any point the pipe has to fall, leaving an upward bend, a tap
must be provided for the escape of air, but such upward
bends are a fertile source of difficulty and failure of action.
with long runs of either steam or water pipes, arrangements
must be made to allow of expansion and contraction,
which will amount to - in. per  ft., according to the
temperature employed. if one end of the system can be left
free, all that is needed is to support the pipes on rollers
(pieces of old pipe may be used); if not, stuffing-boxes
must be provided.
the air heated by boilers, and other sources of waste heat,
may often be utilised for heating purposes, but generally
requires to be driven by a fan, unless the drying-room can
be arranged directly above the source of heat. if air has to
be conveyed, the air-ways must be of ample size, and if the
ascending force of heated air be relied on, passages less than
 ft. sq. are seldom of much use. this ascending force is
generally much overrated where the differences of temperature
are so small as those employed in a drying-room. in a
boiler chimney, where the temperature of the escaping gases
is ° f. (° c.), the specific gravity of the air is about
half that outside, and a chimney of  ft. in height gives a
draught equal to the pressure of a column of about / in. of
water, and the hot gases theoretically have a velocity of about
 ft. per second; whereas the same chimney with a difference
of temperature of ° f. would have a draught equal
to / in. of water only, and a velocity of  ft. per second.
the following table will enable the reader to calculate
approximately loss in friction in air-passages and the pressure
required to pass a given volume of air. the pressure
needed increases in proportion to the length of the pipe and
the square of the velocity of the current of air to be passed.
thus if we double the length of the pipe we must double
the pressure to pass the same quantity; and in order to
double the quantity of air through a given pipe, the pressure
must be quadrupled.
table iv.
head, or difference of pressure at the two ends of a circular pipe
 yd. long in inches of water required to pass  cub. ft. of air per
minute.
velocity in ft. per sec.
diameter of pipe.
head.
in.
to pass  ft. per min. these figures must be divided by . to pass , ft. they must be multiplied by .
to calculate the head required for a long pipe, multiply
the head given by the table by the length in yards. the air
passed by square pipes of the same diameters will be ·
times greater with the same heads.
to be added to the pressure required to overcome friction
is that needed to force the air out at the end of the pipe.
this varies with the shape of the tube, &c., but for our
purpose may be taken as given in the following table:—
table v.
approximate pressure needed to force air out of a pipe with a
velocity of—
ft. per sec.
head in inches,water.
under
under
air-passages should be, as far as practicable, of uniform
area throughout their length, as much velocity is lost in
passing even from a smaller to a larger tube. of course
sharp bends must be avoided.
skins.—the trade in skins possesses no small importance.
many of the statistics relating to skins are collective, and
not specific; these will be grouped under the heads of the
respective countries, after all accessible details have been
given upon each kind of skin.
alligator.—in the southern united states, notably florida,
the supply of alligator-skins amounts to many thousands
annually, and the "farming" of the reptiles for their skins
is even spoken of. the principal market for them is europe,
but no statistics of the trade are published. the alligators
often attain a length of - ft. the hides are stripped
off, and the belly and sides, the only portions fit for use,
are packed in barrels in a strong brine, and shipped to the
northern tanner, who keeps them under treatment for -
months, when they are ready to be cut up. so far the leather
has been principally used in the manufacture of boots and
shoes, for which it is especially adapted.
armadillo.—the skins of this animal were exported from
brunei (borneo) to singapore to the value of  dol. (of
s. d.) in .
ass.—hankow exported / piculs (of / lb.) of asses'
skins in , and  piculs in .
buffalo.—manilla (philippines), in , exported  tons
of buffalo-skins, value ,l., and  tons of cuttings,
l. hankow exported  piculs in , and  in
. brunei (borneo) sent  dol. (of s. d.) worth to
singapore in . the approximate london market values
of buffalo-skins are:—batavia, d.-d. a lb.; bengal, d.-d.;
other sorts, /d.-/d.
calf.—hamburg exported to great britain of calf and
other skins in , , cwt.; in , ,; in ,
,; and in , , cwt. the hawaiian islands
sent  pieces to germany in . christiania shipped
, kroner (of s. /d.) worth to great britain in ,
and  kr. in . the exports from archangel (including
seal) in  were  pieces to holland, and , to germany:
total value, l. honolulu, in , exported 
pieces, being  to germany,  to china, and  to the
united states. memel, in , sent landwise over the
russian frontier for german markets, , pieces, value
l. the approximate london market value of calf-skins
is d.-d. a lb.
deer.—san josé (costa rica) exported , lb. in .
kiungchow (china) exported , pieces, value l., in
. ciudad bolivar (venezuela), in , sent ,
pieces (,/ lb.) to new york, and , pieces to
germany. guatemala, in , exported  pieces to germany,
 to new york, and  to belize. panama shipped
l. worth of deer and other skins to the united states in
. costa rica exported , lb. in the year ended
april , . puerto cabello (venezuela), in , shipped
 kilo. (of · lb.) to great britain, , to germany,
 to the united states, and  to holland. the commercial
society of mozambique sold  deer,  buck, 
blesbok, and  other antelope skins at rotterdam in
june . the approximate london market values of deer-skins
are: blesbok, cape, -d. a lb.; deer, east indian,
-s. a doz.
dog.—dog-skin makes a nice, thin, tough leather, but
most of the gloves sold as dog-skin are made of lamb-skin.
dugong and manatee.—the skins of these animals, more
important perhaps as oil-yielders, are smooth, bluish-black
in colour, and nearly  in. thick. they are well adapted
for machine-belting. about  are shipped annually from
queensland.
fish.—although the skins of fish are chiefly gelatinous,
and easily soluble in water, some are of a firm, strong texture,
and of a useful character. up to within a few years, however,
their employment for practical purposes has been rather
limited, and it is only comparatively recently that attention
has been more generally directed to their utilisation on an
extended scale. at a maritime exhibition held at the westminster
aquarium in , a norway exhibitor showed a
variety of tanned fish-skins, among which were:—tanned
whale-skins; upper leather, made from the white whale, the
source of the so-called porpoise hide used for laces; skins
of flatfish, prepared for gloves; skins of soles, tanned and
dressed for purses; skins of thornbacks, prepared as a substitute
for sandpaper; and skins of eels, dressed and dyed,
suitable for braces, &c. shoes have been made at gloucester,
mass., from the skins of the cusk or torsk (brosmus vulgaris),
the use of which has been patented, and an industry is said
to be carried on at colborn, canada, with the skins of species
of siluroids for glove making. in egypt, fish-skins from the
red sea are used for soles of shoes. the skin of the losh
or burbot (lota maculata) is used by the people in many parts
of russia and siberia to trim their dresses. it is also utilised
by some of the tartar tribes as material for their summer
dresses, and the bags in which they pack their animal skins.
the spiny and tuberculous skins of many sharks and allied
fishes are largely employed, under various trade names, for
polishing woods, and for covering boxes, cases, &c. from
a certain portion of the skin of the angel shark (squalina
angelus) the turks make the most beautiful sea-green watch
cases. turners, ebonists, and carpenters in europe use the
rough skin of the blue dog-fish (squalus glaucus), like emery
paper, for smoothing their work and preparing it for polishing.
this shark-skin is also made into shagreen. that most used
at present appears to be the skin of the ray (hypolophus
sephen), which is very common on the malabar coast. the
house of giraudon, paris, makes excellent use of them for
morocco and tabletterie. at the recent paris exhibition this
establishment exhibited numerous illustrations of the ornamental
application of the prepared skin in large office-table
inkstands, candlesticks, boxes and caskets, paper-knives, reticules,
card-cases, photograph frames, bracelets, scent bottles,
&c. the fish called chat (squalus catulus) at marseilles is
smaller than the angel fish, and furnishes a product known
as peau de rousette. this skin is reddish, and without spots,
and of a uniform grain, flat, and only used to make cases and
other articles known as shagreen. peau de chien de mer is
another name given to some species of squalus. that found
on the french coasts is known under the names of chien marin,
rousette tigrée, &c. turners, cabinet makers, and carpenters
use the skin for scraping and smoothing their work, and it
is also used for like purposes by metal workers. this skin,
when worked up with the tubercles with which it is studded,
takes the name of galuchat, and is usually dyed green, to
cover cases, sheaths, and boxes. under the name of chagrin,
these skins used to be much employed in turkey, syria,
tunis, and tripoli—that made in tripoli being considered
the best. it was coloured black, green, white, and red.
france imported , lb. of ray-skins in , chiefly from
portugal.
goat and kid.—our imports of undressed goat-skins in 
were:—from russia ,, l.; sweden , l.;
norway ,, l.; denmark ,, l.; germany
,, l.; holland ,, l.; belgium ,,
l.; france ,, ,l.; italy, , l.; austrian
territories ,, l.; turkey ,, l.; egypt
,, l.; british possessions in south africa ,,,
,l.; aden ,, l.; british india: bombay
,, ,l.; madras ,, ,l.; bengal ,,,
,l.; china ,, l.; australasia ,, l.;
united states of america , l.; chile ,, l.;
brazil ,, ,l.; argentine republic ,, l.;
other countries , l.; total ,,, ,l. ciudad
bolivar (venezuela) sent  pieces ( lb.) to new york
in . tripoli exported l. worth in , and l.
in . in , a number of raw goat-skins were sent from
the marche and romagna to the united states, weighing
about / kilo. (of · lb.) each, and to be used chiefly for
ladies' shoes and pocket-books. shanghai, in , exported
, pieces. tangier, in , sent  cwt., l., to
great britain;  cwt., ,l., to france and algiers;
 cwt., l., to spain; total, , doz., ,l.; and
 cwt., ,l., in . the hawaiian islands, in ,
shipped , pieces to the united states (pacific ports).
in , christiania exported , kroner (of s. /d.)
worth of goat and sheep skins to great britain. the shipments
of goat and kid skins from the french east indies
fell from  in , to  in , and  in ,
with none since. the shipments from the cape to great
britain were , in , , in , and ,
in . cadiz, in , sent  kilo. (of · lb.) of kid
skins, value l., to great britain, and  kilo. l., to
france. puerto cabello (venezuela), in , despatched
, kilo. to germany, , to the united states, ,
to france, and , to holland. honolulu sent ,
pieces to the united states in . samsoun (turkey)
exported , kilo., l., to france in . the cape
exports fell from ,, pieces in , to , in .
memel sent by sea  cwt., l., in . tientsin (china)
exported , piculs (of / lb.) in . mogador
(morocco) forwarded , doz., ,l., to marseilles in
, and  bales, ,l., in ; these skins are used
for the manufacture of morocco leather, for which they are
peculiarly suitable, owing to their fineness of grain, caused,
it is said, by the rich diet, consisting of the fruits of the
argan tree. the approximate london market values of
goat-skins are:—east indian, -d. a lb.; best tanned,
s. d.-s. d.; inferior to good tanned, d.-s. d.; cape,
best, -d.; cape, inferior to good, -d. turkey is one
of the largest rearers of goats, and consequently the manufacture
of morocco leather is extensively carried on in that
country. formerly, nearly all the buck-skins found their
way to london, but they were displaced by indian goat-skins;
and, for a time, the exportation of turkish buck-skins
experienced a check, the result being the establishment of a
large number of manufactories in vienna and the different
austro-hungarian provinces. these establishments have
prospered and been enlarged, and get the major portion of
their goat-skins from the london market. it is, however,
proposed in austria to do without the london market in
future, and to institute at trieste periodical sales of goat-skins,
which will be, especially for vienna, of great advantage
from the point of view of cost of transport. notwithstanding
the exportation of buck-, goat-, and sheep-skins from turkey,
there are still sufficient remaining in the country to form the
basis of a very flourishing and entirely indigenous industry.
the turk is very unskilful in the manufacture of sole leather;
but the article in which he excels is morocco leather for
slippers, tanned exclusively with sumach. the production of
tanned buck-skins reaches yearly a total of nearly a million
skins, and of sheep half a million; the best kinds are those
of philippopolis, samakof, and peristra. the bulgarian skins
are not so well tanned as those mentioned, although the
quality of the raw skins is superior. the best at the present
day are those of sophia.
horse.—shanghai exported / piculs in . rio grande
do sul exported , pieces salted, and  dried, in .
the approximate london market values of horse-hides are:—english,
-d. a lb.; river plate, -s. a hide.
kangaroo.—the skins of this animal are largely exported
from australia and tasmania, forming some of the most
pliable leather known. to prepare them for market, they
should be carefully taken off, pegged out, and dried slowly
in the shade.
lamb.—the exports from asterabad (persia) viâ gez in
 were  bales bokharan, ,l. calamata and messenia
(greece) produced in , , lb., l. dedeagatch
(turkey), in , exported  bales of lamb- and
kid-skins, value l. the exports from ancona (italy),
including kid and rabbit, in , were , kilo. (of
· lb.) to italy, , to austria,  to germany,  to
greece, , to england,  to turkey; total,  tons,
,l. tientsin (china), in , shipped , piculs (of
/ lb.).
llama.—the skin of the llama is growing in importance
in parisian shoemaking. it weighs on an average  lb., and
contains  sq. ft. of leather, costing about l. the source
of supply is the peruvian andes.
ox and cow.—coquimbo (chili) exported  ox-hides in
. santos (brazil) in the year ending sept. , ,
exported , kilo. salted, valued l., and , l.
the shipments from christiania to great britain fell from
, kroner (of s. /d.) worth in , to  kr. in .
san josé (costa rica) despatched , lb. in . the
exports from the cape, including cow, fell from ,
pieces in , to , in . rio grande do sul, in
, shipped , pieces salted, and , dried. of
cow-hides, hankow exported , piculs (of / lb.) in
, and , in . the kiungchow exports (including
buffalo) in  were  piculs, l. from shanghai
(including buffalo) went , piculs in . chinkiang
fell from  piculs in , to  in , and none in
. memel, in , sent away by sea,  cwt., l.;
and over the russian frontier for german markets, 
pieces, l. the approximate london market values of
ox and cow hides are:—buenos ayres and monte video, st
dry, -/d. a lb.; nd dry, -/d.; best light, -/d.;
salted, /-/d.; brazil, dry, -/d.; dry salted, /-d.;
west indies, salted, /-d.; united states, salted, /-/d.;
east india, best, -d.; nd, /-/d.; rd and th,
/-d.; australian, salted, /-d.; cape, wet salted, /-/d.;
continental, salted, /-d.; english, /-d.
seal.—our imports of undressed seal-skins in  were:—from
norway ,, ,l.; denmark , l.;
germany ,, l.; channel islands , l.;
france , l.; british possessions in south africa
, l.; british india: bombay , l.; china
, l.; japan ,, ,l.; australasia ,
l.; british north america ,, ,l.; united
states of america ,, ,l.; central america ,
l.; chile , l.; uruguay ,, l.; whale
fisheries: northern ,, ,l.; other countries ,
l. total, ,, ,l. the exports from christiania
in  were , pieces; to great britain, the value was
, kroner (of /d.) in , and , kr. in .
our total imports from norway rose from , pieces in
, to , in , and receded to , in . from
the cape, they were , in , , in , and
 in . and from newfoundland, , in ,
and , in . the approximate london market
values of seal-skins (not fur seals) are s. d.-s. d. each
for newfoundland, and -s. for greenland.
sheep.—our imports of undressed sheep-skins in 
were:—from russia , l.; sweden ,, l.;
norway ,, l.; denmark ,, l.; germany
,, ,l.; holland ,, l.; belgium ,,
,l.; channel islands , l.; france ,,
,l.; spain ,, ,l.; italy ,, l.;
austrian territories ,, l.; turkey ,, ,l.;
egypt , l.; british possessions in south africa
,,, ,l.; aden ,, l.; british india
,, ,l.; australasia ,,, ,l.; united
states of america ,, l.; bermudas , l.;
peru , l.; chile , l.; brazil ,, l.;
uruguay ,, ,l.; argentine republic ,,
,l.; falkland islands ,, l.; other countries
, l. total, ,,, ,,l.
bosnia serai, in , exported about  tons. shanghai,
in , , pieces (including lamb). coquimbo (chili),
in ,  tons (including goat). bagdag, in , ,
pieces, l., to india and europe (including lamb).
falkland islands, l. worth in . cape, ,,
pieces in . hankow,  pieces, l., in .
tientsin, , piculs (of / lb.) in ,  in .
mollendo (peru)  quintals (of  cwt,) in . mogador, in
,  bales, l., to great britain; , l., to france;
, l., to spain. our imports from the french east indies
have fallen from  pieces in , to  in ,  in
, and none since; from italy, from , in , to
, in ; from european turkey, from , in
, to , in ; from asiatic turkey, they have
risen from , in , to , in ; from brazil,
, in ,  in ,  in , and none in the
intermediate years; from the argentine republic, ,,
in , , in , ,, in ; from the cape,
,, in , ,, in ; from india, ,,
in , ,, in ; from victoria, ,, in ,
,, in ; from new south wales, , in ,
, in ; new zealand, , in , , in
. the approximate london market values of sheep-skins
are:—cape, -s. a doz.; fine wool, -s.; superior,
-s.; mogador, -s.; buenos ayres, -d. a lb.;
australian, -d.; tanned east indian, best, -s.; ordinary
to good, s.-s. d.
walrus.—our imports of walrus skins from christiania in
 were valued at  kroner (of /d).
unenumerated.—our imports of unenumerated skins and
hides in  were as follows:—
dressed skins, not leather.—from russia , l.;
germany , l.; holland , l.; belgium ,,
l.; france ,, l.; british india , l.;
australasia , l.; british north america , l.;
united states of america , l.; other countries , l.
total ,, l.
undressed skins:—from denmark ,, l.; germany
,, l.; holland , l.; belgium ,,
l.; france , l.; british possessions in south
africa , l.; british india ,, l.; china ,
l.; australasia ,, l.; british north america
, l.; united states of america , l.; brazil
,, l.; other countries , l. total ,,
,l.
wet hides.—from sweden  cwt., l.; norway
 cwt., l.; denmark  cwt., ,l.; germany
, cwt., ,l.; holland , cwt., ,l.; belgium
, cwt., ,l.; channel islands  cwt., l.;
france , cwt., ,l.; portugal , cwt., ,l.;
gibraltar  cwt., l.; italy , cwt., ,l.;
austrian territories  cwt., l.; british possessions in
south africa , cwt., ,l.; japan  cwt., l.;
australasia , cwt., ,l.; united states of america
, cwt., ,l.; bermudas  cwt., l.; british
west india islands  cwt., l.; brazil , cwt.,
,l.; uruguay , cwt., ,l.; argentine republic
, cwt., ,l.; falkland islands  cwt., l.;
whale fisheries: northern  cwt., l.; other countries
 cwt., l. total , cwt., ,,l.
dry raw hides and pieces.—from russia , cwt.,
,l.; sweden  cwt., l.; denmark  cwt.,
,l.; germany , cwt., ,l.; holland , cwt.,
,l.; belgium  cwt., ,l.; france  cwt.,
,l.; gibraltar  cwt., l.; italy  cwt., l.;
austrian territories  cwt., l.; turkey  cwt.,
l.; egypt  cwt., l.; west coast of africa, not
particularly designated  cwt., l.; british possessions
in south africa , cwt., ,l.; east coast of africa
(native states)  cwt., l.; madagascar  cwt.,
l.; mauritius  cwt., l.; aden  cwt.,
,l.; british india: bombay , cwt., ,l.;
madras  cwt., ,l.; bengal and burmah ,
cwt., ,,l.; straits settlements , cwt., ,l.;
ceylon  cwt., l.; java  cwt., ,l.; cochin
china, camboja, and tonquin  cwt., l.; china
, cwt., ,l.; australasia  cwt., ,l.; united
states of america , cwt., ,l.; british west india
islands  cwt., l.; united states of colombia 
cwt., l.; peru  cwt., l.; chile  cwt.,
l.; brazil  cwt., ,l.; uruguay  cwt.,
l.; argentine republic  cwt., ,l.; other
countries  cwt., l. total , cwt., ,,l..
undressed leather.—from germany , lb., l.;
holland , lb., l.; belgium , lb., l.;
france , lb., l.; spain , lb., l.; aden
, lb., l.; british india: bombay ,, lb.,
,l.; madras ,, lb., ,,l.; bengal and
burmah ,, lb., ,l.; straits settlements ,,
lb., ,l.; china , lb., l.; australasia: west
australia , lb., l.; south australia , lb.,
,l.; victoria ,, lb., ,l.; new south wales
,, lb., ,l.; queensland , lb., l.; tasmania
, lb., l.; new zealand ,, lb., ,l.;
british north america , lb., l.; united states of
america ,, lb., ,l.; other countries ,
lb., ,l. total ,, lb., ,,l.
dressed leather.—from russia  lb., l.; germany
,, lb., ,l.; holland ,, lb., ,l.;
belgium ,lb., ,l.; france ,, lb., ,l.;
turkey  lb., l.; british possessions in south africa
 lb., l.; british india , lb., ,l.; australasia
 lb., l.; british north america , lb., ,l.;
united states of america ,, lb., ,l.; other
countries  lb., l. total ,, lb., ,,l.
varnished, japanned, or enamelled leather.—from russia
, lb., l.; germany , lb., l.; holland
, lb., ,l.; belgium  lb., l.; france , lb.,
,l.; turkey  lb., l.; british north america  lb.,
l.; united states of america , lb., ,l. total,
, lb., ,l.
boots and shoes.—from germany  dzn. pairs,
,l.; holland , dzn. pairs, ,l.; belgium
, dzn. pairs, ,l.; channel islands  dzn. pairs,
l.; france , dzn. pairs, ,l.; turkey 
dzn. pairs, l.; australasia: new south wales  dzn.
pairs, l.; british north america  dzn. pairs, l.;
united states of america  dzn. pairs, l.; other
countries  dzn. pairs, l. total, , dzn. pairs,
,l.
gloves.—from sweden  dzn. pairs, l.; norway
 dzn. pairs, l.; denmark , dzn. pairs, ,l.;
germany  dzn. pairs, l.; holland , dzn. pairs,
,l.; belgium , dzn. pairs, ,l.; channel
islands  dzn. pairs, l.; france ,, dzn. pairs,
,,l.; italy  dzn. pairs, l.; australasia: victoria
 dzn. pairs, l. total, ,, dzn. pairs, ,,l.
unenumerated leather manufactures.—from sweden l.;
norway l.; denmark l.; germany ,l.; holland
,l.; belgium ,l.; france ,l.; british possessions
in south africa l.; british north america l.;
united states of america ,l.; other countries l.
total, ,l.
our imports of hides from the undermentioned countries
have fluctuated as shown:—
abyssinia.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in ,
 in , and  in .
aden.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in ,  in
algiers.—raw, ,, kilo. (of · lb.) in .
argentine republic.—undressed, , cwt. in ,
, in , , in .
austro-hungary.—vienna, , metrical centners in ,
, in ; fiume, raw,  kilo. in .
bahamas.—l. worth in .
barbados.—l. worth in , l. in .
belgium.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in ,
, in . dressed, , lb. in , , in .
brazil.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in .
pernambuco in - exported, dried, , kilo. to great
britain, , france, , portugal, total value, l.;
salted, , kilo. great britain, , united states,
, france, , spain, , portugal, total value
,l.; in ,  tons, l. maceio exported in ,
 pieces (average  lb. each) to great britain,  new
york and lisbon; in , ,; in , ,. bahia
exported ,, kilo. in -, and ,, in -,
principally to the united states and germany. santos
exported , kilo. in . ceara exported in ,
, kilo. to england, , havre, , hamburg,
 new york.
british india.—undressed, , cwt. in , ,
in ; dressed, ,, lb. in , ,, in .
bulgaria.—rustchuk, in , exported , kilo. (
tons) to austria.
canada.—dressed, , lb. in , , in ,
,, in .
cape.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in ,
, in .
central america.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in
,  in .
chili.—undressed,  cwt. in , , in , 
in ; dressed, , lb. in ,  in , ,
in ,  in ,  in .
china.—undressed,  cwt. in , , in ,
 in . hankow exported in ,  pieces, l.;
kiungchow,  piculs (of / lb.), l.; newchwang, ,
pieces; tientsin,  piculs; canton, in ,  pieces of
skins, / piculs of hides.
costa rica.—san josé exported , lb. in .
denmark.—undressed, , cwt. in ,  in ;
copenhagen exported ,, lb. to great britain in .
ecuador.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in ,  in
,  in . guayaquil exported in ,  quintals
raw, ,l., to the united states, and , halves tanned,
l., to south america; and in ,  quintals raw,
,l., and  tanned, l. manabi, in , exported
 quintals, l.
egypt.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in , 
in . in , the values were l. to austria, l.
france, l. great britain, ,l. greece, l. italy,
,l. turkey.
falklands.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in .
the value of the exports was l. in .
france.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in ;
dressed, ,, lb. in , ,, in . calais in
 sent  kilo. prepared to great britain, and ,
kilo. in .
french east indies.—dressed, , lb. in , ,
in , none since.
gambia.—exported , pieces in .
germany.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in ,
, in ; dressed, ,, lb. in , , in
, ,, in . hamburg sent to great britain,
, cwt. dry and salted in , , in . königsberg
exported  cwt. raw in ,  in .
greece.—dressed: syra in  sent ,l. worth to
turkey, ,l. to the danubian principalities, l. to
austria; in , l. turkey, l. austria, l. russia.
guatemala.—exports in , , dol. worth; in ,
/ quintals to england,  france,  germany, 
new york,  california; , , germany, ,
new york.
hawaiian islands.—exports , , pieces.
holland.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in ;
dressed, , lb. in , , in .
java.—exports -, , pieces and  piculs to
holland,  pieces to the channel for orders,  pieces
to france,  pieces to italy,  pieces and  piculs to
singapore.
madagascar.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in ,
none since.
mauritius.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in .
morocco.—undressed,  in ,  cwt. in ,  in
. tangiers exported in ,  cwt., l., to great
britain;  cwt., l., france;  cwt., l., spain.
mogador, in , sent  bales, l., to great britain;
, l., france; , l., portugal.
natal.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in ,
, in .
new granada.—undressed, , cwt. in ,  in
,  in .
new south wales.—undressed,  cwt. in , ,
in ; dressed, ,, lb. in , ,, in .
new zealand.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in ;
dressed, , lb. in , , in .
persia.—bushire exported in ,  rupees' worth to
england,  r. india; lingah,  r. india,  r.
persian coast; bahrein,  r. koweit, bussora, and bagdad.
peru.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in ,  in
. mollendo exported  quintals in , and  q.
dry in .
philippines.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in .
manilla, in , exported  piculs, ,l., to china and
japan.
portugal.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in .
queensland.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in .
roumania.—galatz exported  bales in .
russia.—undressed,  cwt. in ,  in ;
dressed, , lb. in , , in . riga shipped
, poods (of  lb.) in , , in . poti, in
-, sent away  poods, and  from persia.
saigon.—exports in , , piculs.
san domingo.—exports in ,  pieces to great
britain,  france,  italy,  spain,  united
states,  west indies; in ,  italy,  spain,
 united states,  west indies.
south australia.—dressed, , lb. in , , in
spanish west indies.—puerto rico exported in , 
quintals united states,  spain,  germany.
straits settlements.—undressed, , cwt. in ,
, in ; dressed, , lb. in , ,, in
surinam.—exports in ,  kilo.
sweden and norway.—christiania exported , kroner
worth in ,  kr. in . gothenburg exported
, cwt. in .
tasmania.—dressed, , lb. in , , in .
tripoli.—bengazi, in , sent , pieces, l., to
malta. the value of the exports was l. in , and
l. in .
turkey.—aleppo exported in ,  tons, ,l., to
france; , l., italy; , l., austria; , l.,
turkey; , l., egypt. thessaly exported ,l. worth
in . samos sent ,l. worth tanned to turkey and
egypt in . van exported l. worth in .
kerasund shipped by steamer in ,  bales, l.
trebizond in  sent  bales (of  and  pieces),
l., to turkey; , ,l., france; , l.,
russia; , l., greece. dedeagatch, in , exported
 bales, ,l. alexandretta, in , sent  tons,
,l., to france; , l., austria; , l., russia; ,
l., turkey; , l., egypt. adana, in , sent
 tons, l., to france; , l., turkey; , l.,
greece. jaffa exported , okes (, lb.), l., for
turkey in .
united states.—undressed, , cwt. in , 
in ; , in ; dressed, ,, lb. in ,
,, in . savannah exported  bundles in .
galveston exported in -,  bales and  single,
dry; and  bundles wet-salted. texas state in -
exported ,, lb., ,l.
uruguay.—undressed, , cwt. in , , in ,
, in .
venezuela.—puerto cabello exported in , , kilo.
to great britain,  germany, , united states, 
france,  holland,  spain. ciudad bolivar sent
, pieces, , lb., to new york in .
victoria.—undressed,  in ,  in ,  in
; dressed, ,, lb. in , ,, in . the
values of the exports in  were l. hides, and ,l.
skins and pelts.
tanning materials.—our imports of bark in  were:—from
sweden  cwt., l.; norway  cwt.,
l.; holland , cwt., l.; belgium , cwt.,
,l.; france  cwt., l.; algeria , cwt.,
,l.; british east indies  cwt., l.; australasia
, cwt., ,l.; united states of america , cwt.,
,l.; other countries  cwt., l. total, ,
cwt., ,l.
our imports of cutch and gambier in  were:—from
british india: bombay  tons, l.; bengal and burmah
 tons, ,l.; straits settlements , tons,
,l.; philippine islands  tons, l.; united states
of america  tons, ,l.; other countries  tons,
l. total, , tons, ,l.
our imports of myrobalans in  were:—from germany
 cwt., l.; british india:—bombay , cwt.,
,l.; madras , cwt., ,l.; bengal ,
cwt., l.; straits settlements  cwt., l.; ceylon
 cwt., l.; japan  cwt., l. total, , cwt.,
,l.
our imports of extracts in  were:—from denmark
l.; germany ,l.; holland ,l.; belgium
l.; france ,l.; spain l.; italy l.;
british north america ,l., united states of america
,l.; mexico l.; other countries l. total,
,l.
our imports of galls in  were:—from austrian
territories  cwt., l.; turkey  cwt., ,l.;
egypt  cwt., l.; persia  cwt., l.; british
india  cwt., l.; china , cwt., ,l.; japan
 cwt., l.; other countries  cwt., l. total,
, cwt., ,l.
our imports of valonia in  were:—from holland 
tons, l.; france  tons, l.; austrian territories
 tons, l.; greece  tons, ,l.; turkey
, tons, ,l. total, , tons, ,l.
our imports of sumach in  were:—from france 
tons, l.; spain  tons, l.; italy , tons,
,l.; austrian territories  tons, ,l.; other
countries  tons, l. total, , tons, ,l.
literature.
the chief works relating to the tanning, currying, and
dressing of leather, and the tanning materials employed, are
as follows:—
abridgments of specifications: skin, hides, and leather, -.
london: .
bernardin (r. j.).
classification de  matières tannantes.
gand: .
brüggemann (a.).
weissgerberei.
quedlinburg.
brüggemann (a.).
saffian fabrikation.
quedlinburg.
brüggemann (a.).
glacéleder färberei.
quedlinburg.
councler (dr. c.).
bericht über die verhandlungen der commission zur feststellung einer einheitlichen methode der gerbstoffbestimmung.
cassel: .
das ganze der lederbereitung.
quedlinburg.
davis (c. t.).
manufacture of leather.
philadelphia: .
dussauce (f.).
tanning, currying, and leather-dressing.
philadelphia: .
eitner (w.).
leder-industrie: bericht über die welt-ausstellung in philadelphia, .
vienna: .
