¶ many things which have been found to be true in almost every instance
could have been included in this course. but we prefer to make fewer
statements and have those of[pg ] bedrock certainty. therefore this course,
like all our courses, consists exclusively of those facts which have
been found to be true in every particular of people in normal health.
the five extremes
¶ this book deals with pure or unmixed types only. when you understand
these, the significance of their several combinations as seen in
everyday life will be clear to you.
the human alphabet
¶ just as you can not understand the meaning of a word until you know
the letters that go into the makeup of that word, you cannot analyze
people accurately until you get these five extreme types firmly in your
mind, for they are your alphabet.
founded in five biological systems
¶ each pure type is the result of the over-development of one of the
five biological systems possessed by all human beings—the nutritive,
circulatory, muscular, bony or nervous.
therefore every individual exhibits to some degree the characteristics
of all the five types.[pg ]
the secret of individuality
¶ but his predominant traits and individuality—the things that make him
the kind of man he is—agree infallibly with whichever one of the five
systems predominates in him.
combinations common in america
¶ the average american man or woman is a combination of some two of
these types with a third discernible in the background.
to analyze people
¶ to understand human beings familiarize yourself first with the pure or
unmixed types and then it will be easy and fascinating to spell out
their combinations and what they mean in the people all about you.
postpone combinations
¶ until you have learned these pure types thoroughly it will be to your
advantage to forget that there is such a thing as combinations. after
you have these extreme types well in mind you will be ready to analyze
combinations.
the five types
¶ science has discovered that there are five types of human beings.
discarding for a moment their technical names, they may be called the
fat people, the florid people, the muscular people, the bony people and
the mental people.
each varies from the others in shape, size and structure and[pg ] is
recognizable at a glance by his physique or build. this is because his
type is determined by the preponderance within his body of one of the
five great departments or biological systems—the nutritive, the
circulatory, the muscular, the bony or the nervous.
at birth
¶ every child is born with one of these systems more highly developed,
larger and better equipped than the others.
type never disappears
¶ throughout his life this system will express itself more, be more
intense and constant in its functioning than the others and no manner of
training, education, environment or experience, so long as he remains in
normal health, will alter the predominance of this system nor prevent
its dictating his likes, dislikes and most of his reactions.
effect of eating
¶ if you do not understand why the overaction of one bodily system
should influence a man's nature see if you can't recall more than one
occasion when a square meal made a decided difference in your
disposition within the space of thirty minutes.
if one good meal has the power to alter so completely our personalities
temporarily, is it then any wonder that constant overfeeding causes
everybody to love a fat man? for the fat man is habitually and
chronically in that beatific state which comes from over-eating.
[pg ]
[pg ]
the alimentive type
"the enjoyer"
note: bear in mind at the beginning of this and every other chapter,
that we are describing the extreme or unmixed type. before leaving this
book you will understand combination types and should read people as
readily as you now read your newspaper.
hose individuals in whom the alimentive system
is more highly developed than any other are called alimentives. the
alimentive system consists of the stomach, intestines, alimentary canal
and every part of the assimilative apparatus.
physical rotundity
¶ a general rotundity of outline characterizes this type. he is round in
every direction. fat rolls away from his elbows, wrists, knees and
shoulders. (see chart )
[pg ]
the fat, overweight individual
¶ soft flesh thickly padded over a small-boned body distinguishes the
pure alimentive type. in men of this type the largest part of the body
is around the girth; in women it is around the hips. these always
indicate a large nutritive system in good working order. fat is only
surplus tissue—the amount manufactured by the assimilative system over
and above the needs of the body.
fat is more soft and spongy than bone or muscle and lends to its wearer
a softer structure and appearance.
small hands and feet
¶ because his bones are small the pure alimentive has small feet and
small hands. how many times you have noted with surprise that the two
hundred pound woman had tiny feet! the inconvenience of "getting around"
which you have noticed in her is due to the fact that while she has more
weight to carry she has smaller than average feet with which to do it.
the pure alimentive head
¶ a head comparatively small for the body is[pg ] another characteristic of
the extreme alimentive. the neck and lower part of the head are covered
with rolls of fat. this gives the head the effect of spreading outward
from the crown as it goes down to the neck, thus giving the neck a
short, disproportionately large appearance.
the round-faced person
¶ a "full-moon" face with double or triple chins gives this man his
"baby face." (see chart ) look carefully at any extremely fat person
and you will see that his features are inclined to the same immaturity
of form that characterizes his body.
very few fat men have long noses. nearly all fat men and women have not
only shorter, rounder noses but shorter upper lips, fuller mouths,
rounder eyes and more youthful expressions than other people—in short,
the features of childhood.
the entire physical makeup of this type is modeled upon the
circle—round hands with dimples where the knuckles are supposed to be;
round fingers, round feet, round waist, round limbs, sloping shoulders,
curving thighs, bulging calves, wrists and ankles.
[pg ]
wherever you see curves predominating in the[pg ] physical outlines of any
person, that person is largely of the alimentive type and will always
exhibit alimentive traits.
the man of few movements
¶ the alimentive is a man of unhurried, undulating movements. the
difficulty in moving large bodies quickly necessitates a slowing down of
all his activities. these people are easeful in their actions, make as
few moves as possible and thereby lend an air of restfulness wherever
they go.
because it is difficult to turn their heads, extremely fat people seldom
are aware of what goes on behind them.
the fat man's walk
¶ very fat people waddle when they walk, though few of them realize it.
they can not watch themselves go by and no one else has the heart to
impart bad news to this pleasant person.
spilling over chairs
¶ the fat man spills over chairs and out of his clothes. big arm chairs,
roomy divans and capacious automobiles are veritable dykes to these men.
note the bee-line the fat person makes for the big leather chair when he
enters a room![pg ]
clothes for comfort
¶ the best that money can buy are the kinds of clothes purchased by the
alimentive whenever he can afford them. and it often happens that he can
afford them, especially if the cerebral system comes second in his
makeup. if he is in middle circumstances his clothes will be chosen
chiefly for comfort. even the rich alimentive "gets into something
loose" as soon as he is alone. baggy trousers, creased sleeves, soft
collars and soft cuffs are seen most frequently on fat men.
comfort is one of the very first aims of this type. to attain it he
often wears old shoes or gloves long past their time to save breaking in
a new pair.
susceptible to cold
¶ cold weather affects this type. if you will look about you the first
cold day of autumn you will note that most of the overcoats are on the
plump men.
how the fat man talks
¶ never to take anything too seriously is an unconscious policy of fat
people. they show it plainly in their actions and speech. the very fat
man is[pg ] seldom a brilliant conversationalist. he is often a "jollier"
and tells stories well, especially anecdotes and personal experiences.
doesn't tell his troubles
¶ he seldom relates his troubles and often appears not to have any. he
avoids references to isms and ologies and gives a wide berth to all who
deal in them. radical groups seldom number any extremely fat men among
their members, and when they do it is usually for some other purpose
than those mentioned in the by-laws.
the very fat man dislikes argument, avoids disagreeing with you and
sticks to the outer edges of serious questions in his social
conversation.
the fat man "lives to eat"
¶ rich food in large quantities is enjoyed by the average fat man three
times a day and three hundred and sixty-five days a year. between meals
he usually manages to stow away a generous supply of candy, ice cream,
popcorn and fruit. we have interviewed countless popcorn and fruit
vendors on this subject and every one of them told us that the fat
people kept them in business.[pg ]
visits the soda fountain often
¶ as for the ice cream business, take a look the next time you pass a
soda fountain and note the large percentage of fat people joyfully
scooping up mountains of sundaes, parfaits and banana splits. you will
find that of those who are sipping things through straws the thin folks
are negotiating lemonades and phosphates, while a creamy frappé is
rapidly disappearing from the fat man's glass.
the deep mystery
¶ "what do you suppose is making me so plump?" naively inquires the fat
man when it finally occurs to him—as it did to his friends long
before—that he is surely and speedily taking on flesh.
if you don't know the answer, look at the table of any fat person in any
restaurant, café or dining room. he is eating with as much enthusiasm as
if he had just been rescued from a forty-day fast, instead of having
only a few hours before looked an equally generous meal in the eye and
put it all under his belt. the next time you are at an american plan
hotel where meals are restricted to certain hours note how the fat
people are always the first ones into the dining room when the doors are
opened![pg ]
fat-making foods
¶ butter, olive oil, cream, pastry and starches are foods that increase
your weight just as fast as you eat them, if your assimilative system is
anything like it should be. though he is the last man in the world who
ought to indulge in them the fat man likes these foods above all others
and when compelled to have a meal without them feels as though he hadn't
eaten at all.
why they don't lose weight
¶ we had a friend who decided to reduce. but in spite of the fact that
she lived on salads almost exclusively for a week she kept right on
gaining. we thought she had been surreptitiously treating herself to
lunches between meals until some one noticed the dressing with which she
drowned her lettuce: pure olive oil—a cupful at a sitting—"because,"
she said "i must have something tasty to camouflage the stuff."
an experiment
¶ once in california, where no city block is complete without its
cafeteria, we took a committee from one of our human analysis classes to
six of[pg ] these big establishments one noontime. to illustrate to them the
authenticity of the facts we have stated above we prophesied what the
fat ones would select for their meals.
without exception their trays came by heaped with pies, cake, cream,
starchy vegetables and meat, just as we predicted.
a short life but a merry one
¶ according to the statistics of the united states life insurance
companies fat people die younger than others. and the insurance
companies ought to know, for upon knowing instead of guessing what it is
that takes us off, depends the whole life insurance business. that they
consider the extremely fat man an unsafe risk after thirty years of age
is a well-known fact.
"i am interrupted every day by salesmen for everything on earth except
one. but the life insurance agents leave me alone!" laughed a very fat
young lawyer friend of ours the other morning—and he went on ordering
ham and eggs, waffles, potatoes and coffee!
that he is eating years off his life doesn't trouble the fat man,
however. he has such a good time doing it![pg ]
"i should worry," says the fat man
¶ it was no accident that "ish ka bibble" was invented by the hebrew.
for this race has proportionately more fat people in it than any other
and fat people just naturally believe worry is useless. but the fat man
gets this philosophy from the same source that gives him most of his
other traits—his predominating system.
digestion and contentment
¶ the eating of delicious food is one of the most intense and poignant
pleasures of life. the digestion of food, when one possesses the
splendid machinery for it which characterizes the alimentive, gives a
deep feeling of serenity and contentment.
since the fat man is always just going to a big meal or in the process
of digesting one he does not give himself a chance to become ill
natured. his own and the world's troubles sit lightly upon him.
the most popular type socially
¶ "the life of the party" is the fat man or that pleasing, adaptable,
feminine creature, the fat woman. no matter what comes or goes they have
a good time and it is such an infectious one that others catch it from
them.[pg ]
did you ever notice how things pick up when the fat ones appear? every
hostess anticipates their arrival with pleasure and welcomes them with
relief. she knows that she can relax now, and sure enough, fatty hasn't
his hat off till the atmosphere shows improvement. by the time chubby
gets into the parlor and passes a few of her sunny remarks the wheels
are oiled for the evening and they don't run down till the last plump
guest has said good night.
¶ so it is no wonder that fat people spend almost every evening at a
party. they get so many more invitations than the rest of us!
likes complacent people
¶ people who take things as they find them are the ones the alimentive
prefers for friends, not only because, like the rest of us, he likes his
own kind of folks, but because the other kind seem incongruous to him.
he takes the attitude that resistance is a waste of energy. he knows
other and easier ways of getting what he desires.
there are types who take a lively interest in those who are different
from them, but not the alimentive. he prefers easy-going, hospitable,
complacent friends whose homes and hearts are always open[pg ] and whose
minds run on the simple, personal things.
¶ the reason for this is obvious. all of us like the people, situations,
experiences and environments which bring out our natural tendencies,
which call into play those reflexes and reactions to which we tend
naturally.
chooses food-loving friends
¶ "let's have something to eat" is a phrase whose hospitality has broken
more ice and warmed more hearts than any other, unless perchance that
rapidly disappearing "let's have something to drink." the fat person
keeps at the head of his list those homey souls who set a good table and
excel in the art of third and fourth helpings.
because he is a very adaptable sort of individual this type can
reconcile himself to the other kind whenever it serves his purpose. but
the tenderest spots in his heart are reserved for those who encourage
him in his favorite indoor sport.
when he doesn't like you
¶ a fat man seldom dislikes anybody very hard or for very long.
really disliking anybody requires the expenditure of a good deal of
energy and hating people is the[pg ] most strenuous work in the world. so
the alimentive refuses to take even his dislikes to heart. he is a
consistent conserver of steam and this fact is one of the secrets of his
success.
he applies this principle to everything in life. so he travels smoothly
through his dealings with others.
holds few grudges
¶ "forget it" is another phrase originated by the fat people. you will
hear them say it more often than any other type. and what is more, they
excel the rest of us in putting it into practice. the result is that
their nerves are usually in better working order. this type runs down
his batteries less frequently than any other.
avoids the "ologists"
¶ when he takes the trouble to think about it there are a few kinds of
people the alimentive does not care for. the man who is bent on
discussing the problems of the universe, the highbrow who wants to
practise his new relativity lecture on him, the theorist who is given to
lengthy expatiations, and all advocates of new isms and ologies are
avoided by the pure alimentive. he calls them faddists, fanatics and
fools.[pg ]
when he sees a highbrow approaching, instead of having it out with him
as some of the other types would, he finds he has important business
somewhere else. thus he preserves his temperature, something that in the
average fat man seldom goes far above normal.
no theorist
¶ theories are the bane of this type. he just naturally doesn't believe
in them. scientific discoveries, unless they have to do with some new
means of adding to his personal comforts, are taboo. the next time this
one about "fat men dying young" is mentioned in his presence listen to
his jolly roar. the speed with which he disposes of it will be beautiful
to see!
"say, i feel like a million dollars!" he will assure you if you read
this chapter to him. "and i'll bet the folks who wrote that book are a
pair of grouches who have forgotten what a square meal tastes like!"
where the t-bones go
¶ when you catch a three-inch steak homeward bound you will usually find
it tucked under the arm of a well-rounded householder. when his salary
positively prohibits the comforts of parlor,[pg ] bedroom and other parts of
the house the fat man will still see to it that the kitchen does not
lack for provender.
describes his food
¶ the fat person likes to regale you with alluring descriptions of what
he had for breakfast, what he has ordered for lunch and what he is
planning for dinner—and the rarebit he has on the program for after the
theater.
eats his way to the grave
¶ most of us are committing suicide by inches in one form or
another—and always in that form which is inherent in our type.
the alimentive eats his way to the grave and has at least this much to
say for it: it is more delightful than the pet weaknesses by which the
other types hasten the final curtain.
diseases he is most susceptible to
¶ diabetes is more common among this type than any other. apoplexy comes
next, especially if the fat man is also a florid man with a fast heart
or an inclination to high blood pressure. a sudden breaking down of any
or several of the vital organs is also[pg ] likely to occur to fat people
earlier than to others. it is the price they pay for their years of
over-eating.
¶ overtaxed heart, kidneys and liver are inevitable results of too much
food.
so the man you call "fat and husky" is fat but not husky, according to
the statistics.
fat men and influenza
¶ during the historic spanish influenza epidemic of  more fat people
succumbed than all other types combined. this fact was a source of
surprise and much discussion on the part of newspapers, but not of the
scientists. the big question in treating this disease and its twin,
pneumonia, is: will the heart hold out? fat seriously handicaps the
heart.
the fat man's ford engine
¶ the human heart weighs less than a pound but it is the one organ in
all our machinery that never takes a rest. it is the engine of the human
car, and what a faithful little motor too—like the ford engine which it
so much resembles. if you live to be forty it chugs away forty years,
and if you stay here ninety it stretches it to ninety, without an
instant of vacation.[pg ]
but it must be treated with consideration and the first consideration is
not to overwork it. a ford engine is large enough for a ford car, for
fords are light weight. as long as you do not weigh too much your engine
will carry you up the hills and down the dales of life with good old
ford efficiency and at a pretty good gait.
making a truck out of your ford
¶ but when you take on fat you are doing to your engine what a ford
driver would be doing to his if he loaded his car with brick or scrap
iron.
a ford owner who intended to transport bricks the rest of his life could
get a big-cylinder engine and substitute it for the original but you
can't do that. this little four-cylinder affair is the only one you will
ever have and no amount of money, position or affection can buy you a
new one if you mistreat it. like the ford engine, it will stand for a
good many pounds of excess baggage and still do good work. but if you
load on too much and keep it there the day will come when its cylinders
begin to skip.
¶ you may take it to the service station and pay the doctors to grind
the valves, fix your carbureter and put in some new spark plugs. these
may work[pg ] pretty well as long as you are traveling the paved highway of
perfect health; you may keep up with the procession without noticing
anything particularly wrong.
but come to the hill of pneumonia or diabetes and you are very likely
not to make the grade.
don't "kill your engine"
¶ the records in america show that thousands of men and women literally
"kill their engines" every year when they might have lived many years
longer.
how each finds happiness
¶ we live for happiness and each type finds its greatest happiness in
following those innate urges determined by the most highly-developed
system in its makeup.
the alimentive's disposition, nature, character and personality are
built by and around his alimentary system. he is happiest when
gratifying it and whenever he thwarts it he is miserable, just as the
rest of us are when we thwart our predominant system.
the world needs him
¶ this type has so many traits needed by the world, however, and has
such extreme capacity for[pg ] enjoying life that the race, not to mention
himself, would profit greatly by his denying himself excessive amounts
of food.
enjoyment the keynote of this type
¶ the good things of life—rich, abundant food and everything that
serves the personal appetites—are the cravings of this type.
he purchases and uses more of the limousines, yachts and chefs than any
other three types combined, and gets more for his money out of them than
others do. the keynote of his nature is personal enjoyment. his senses
of touch and taste are also especially acute.
the fat man loves comfort
¶ you can tell a great deal about a man's type by noting for what
classes of things he spends most of his extra money.
the alimentive may have no fire insurance, no liberty bonds, no real
estate but he will have all the modern comforts he can possibly afford.
most of the world's millionaires are fat and human analysis explains
why. we make few efforts in life save to satisfy our most urgent
demands, desires, and ambitions. each human type differs in its
crav[pg ]ings from each of the others and takes the respective means
necessary to gratify these cravings.
the alimentive craves those luxuries, comforts and conveniences which
only money can procure for him.
the fat millionaire
¶ when the alimentive is a man of brains he uses his brains to get
money. no fat person enjoys work but the greater his brain capacity the
more will he forego leisure to make money.
when the fat man is in average circumstances
¶ any man's money-making ambitions depend largely on whether money is
essential to the satisfaction of his predominating instincts.
if he is fat and of average brain capacity he will overcome his physical
inertia to the point of securing for himself and his family most of the
comforts of modern life.
the average-brained fat man composes a large percentage of our
population and the above accounts for his deserved reputation as a
generous husband and father.
the fat man a good provider
¶ the fat man will give his last cent to his wife[pg ] and children for the
things they desire but he is not inclined as much as some other types to
hearken to the woes of the world at large. the fat man is essentially a
family man, a home man, a respectable, cottage-owning, tax-paying,
peaceable citizen.
not a reformer
¶ he inclines to the belief that other families, other communities,
other classes and other countries should work out their own salvation
and he leaves them to do it. in all charitable, philanthropic and
community "drives" he gives freely but is not lavish nor sentimental
about it. it is often a "business proposition" with him.
when the fat man is poor
¶ love of ease is the fat man's worst enemy. his inherent contentment,
accentuated by the inconvenience of moving about easily or quickly,
constantly tempts him to let things slide. when he lacks the brain
capacity for figuring out ways and means for getting things easily he is
never a great success at anything.
when the extremely fat man's mentality is below the average he often
refuses to work—in which case he becomes a familiar figure around
public[pg ] rest rooms, parks and the cheaper hotel lobbies. such a man
finally graduates into the class of professional chair-warmers.
fat people love leisure
¶ a chance to do as we please, especially to do as little hard work as
possible, is a secret desire of almost everybody. but the fat man takes
the prize for wanting it most.
not a strenuous worker
¶ he is not constructed to work hard like some of the other types, as we
shall see in subsequent chapters. his overweight is not only a handicap
in that it slows down his movements, but it tends to slow down all his
vital processes as well and to overload his heart. this gives him a
chronic feeling of heaviness and inertia.
everybody likes him
¶ but nature must have intended fat people to manage the rest of us
instead of taking a hand at the "heavy work." she made them averse to
toil and then made them so likable that they can usually get the rest of
us to do their hardest work for them.[pg ]
the world managed by fat people
¶ when he is brainy the fat man never stays in the lower ranks of
subordinates. he may get a late start in an establishment but he will
soon make those over him like him so well they will promote him to a
chief-clerkship, a foremanship or a managership. once there he will make
those under him so fond of him that they will work long and hard for
him.
fat men to the top
¶ in this way the fat man of real brains goes straight to the top while
others look on and bewail the fact that they do most of the actual work.
they fail to recognize that the world always pays the big salaries not
for hand work but for head work, and not so much for working yourself as
for your ability to get others to work.
the popular politician
¶ this capacity for managing, controlling and winning others is what
enables this type to succeed so well in politics. the fat man knows how
to get votes. he mixes with everybody, jokes with everybody, remembers
to ask how the children are—and pretty soon he's the head of his ward.
almost every big political boss is fat.[pg ]
makes others work
¶ one man is but one man and at best can do little more than a good
man-size day of work. but a man who can induce a dozen other
man-machines to speed up and turn out a full day's work apiece doesn't
need to work his own hands. he serves his employer more valuably as an
overseer, foreman or supervisor.
the fat salesman
¶ "a fat drummer" is such a common phrase that we would think our ears
deceived us did anyone speak of a thin one. approach five people and say
"a traveling salesman," each will tell you that the picture this
conjures in his imagination is of a fat, round, roly-poly, good natured,
pretty clever man whom everybody likes.
for the fat men are "born salesmen" and they make up a large percentage
of that profession. salesmanship requires mentality plus a pleasing
personality. the fat man qualifies easily in the matter of personality.
then he makes little or much money from salesmanship, according to his
mental capacity.
the drummers' funny stories
¶ you will note that the conversation of fat people[pg ] is well sprinkled
with funny stories. they enjoy a good joke better than any other type,
for a reason which will become more and more apparent to you.
¶ that salesmen are popularly supposed to regale each customer with
yarns till he gasps for breath and to get his signature on the dotted
line while he is in that weakened condition, is more or less of a myth.
it originated from the fact that most salesmen are fat and that fat
people tell stories well.
jokes at fat men's expense
¶ "look at fatty," "get a truck," and other jibes greet the fat man on
every hand. he knows he can not proceed a block without being the butt
of several jokes, but he listens to them all with an amiability
surprising to other types. and this good nature is so apparent that even
those who make sport of him are thinking to themselves: "i believe i'd
like that man."
the fat man's habits
¶ "never hurry and never worry" are the unconscious standards underlying
many of the reactions of this type. if you will compile a list of the
habits of any fat person you will find that they are mostly the
outgrowths of one or both of these motives.[pg ]
won't speed up
¶ you would have a hard time getting an alimentive to follow out any
protracted line of action calling for strenuosity, speed or high
tension. he will get as much done as the strenuous man when their
mentalities are equal—and often more. the fat person keeps going in a
straight line, with uniform and uninterrupted effort, and does not have
the blow-outs common to more fidgety people. but hard, fast labor is not
in his line.
loves comedy
¶ all forms of mental depression are foreign to fat people as long as
they are in normal health. we have known a fat husband and wife to be
ejected for rent and spend the evening at the movies laughing like
four-year-olds at charlie chaplin or a mack sennett comedy. you have
sometimes seen fat people whose financial condition was pretty serious
and wondered how they could be so cheerful.
inclined to indolence
¶ fat people's habits, being built around their points of strength and
weakness, are necessarily of two kinds—the desirable and the
undesirable.[pg ]
the worst habits of this type are those inevitable to the ease-loving
and the immature-minded.
indolence is one of his most undesirable traits and costs the alimentive
dear.
in this country where energy, push and lightning-like efficiency are at
a premium only the fat man of brains can hope to keep up.
the inertia caused by his digestive processes is so great that it is
almost insurmountable. the heavy, lazy feeling you have after a large
meal is with the fat man interminably because his organism is constantly
in the process of digesting large amounts of food.
likes warm rooms
¶ love of comfort—especially such things as warm rooms and soft
beds—is so deeply imbedded in the fiber of this type that he has ever
to face a fight with himself which the rest of us do not encounter. this
sometimes leads the excessively corpulent person to relax into laziness
and slovenliness. an obese individual sometimes surprises us, however,
by his ambition and immaculateness.
but such a man or woman almost always combines decided mental tendencies
with his alimentiveness.[pg ]
enjoys doing favors
¶ the habits which endear the fat person to everyone and make us forget
his faults are his never-failing hospitality, kindness when you are in
trouble, his calming air of contentment, his tact, good nature and the
real pleasure he seems to experience when doing you a favor.
his worst faults wreak upon him far greater penalties than fall upon
those who associate with him, something that can not be said of the
faults of some other types.
likes melody
¶ simple, natural music is a favorite with fat people. love songs,
rollicking tunes and those full of melody are most popular with them. an
easy-to-learn, easy-to-sing song is the one a fat man chooses when he
names the next selection.
they like ragtime, jazz and music with a swing to it. music the world
over is most popular with fat races. the world's greatest singers and
most of its famous musicians have been fat or at least decidedly plump.
goes to the cabaret
¶ the fat person will wiggle his toes, tap his[pg ] fingers, swing his fork
and nod his head by the hour with a rumbling jazz orchestra.
when the alimentive is combined with some other type he will also enjoy
other kinds of music but the pure alimentive cares most for primal tunes
and melodies.
likes a girly-show
¶ a pretty-girl show makes a hit with fat women as well as with fat men.
drop into the "passing show" and note how many fat people are in the
audience. drop into a theater the next night where a tragedy is being
enacted and see how few fat ones are there.
the one made sport of
¶ fat people enjoy helping out the players, if the opportunity offers.
all show people know this.
when one of those tricks is to be played from the foot-lights upon a
member of the audience the girl who does it is always careful to select
that circular gentleman down front. let her try to mix up confetti or a
toy balloon with a tall skinny man and the police would get a hurry
call!
when we describe the bony type you will note how very different he is
from our friend the fat man.[pg ]
a movie fan
¶ "the fat man's theater" would be a fitting name for the movie houses
of the country. not that the fat man is the only type patronizing the
cinema. the movies cover in one evening so many different kinds of human
interests—news, cartoons, features and comedy—that every type finds
upon the screen something to interest him.
but if you will do what we have done—stand at the doorway of the
leading movie theaters of your city any evening and keep a record of the
types that enter you will find the plump are as numerous as all the
others combined.
easy entertainment
¶ the reason for this is plain to all who are acquainted with human
analysis: the fat man wants everything the easiest possible way and the
movie fulfils this requirement more fully than any other theatrical
entertainment. he can drop in when he feels like it and there is no
waiting for the show to start, for one thing.
this is a decided advantage to him, for fat people do not like to depend
upon themselves for entertainment.[pg ]
the babies of the race
¶ the first stage in biological evolution was the stage in which the
alimentary apparatus was developed. to assimilate nutriment was the
first function of all life and is so still, since it is the principal
requirement for self-preservation.
being the first and most elemental of our five physiological systems the
alimentive—when it overtops the others—produces a more elemental,
infantile nature. the pure alimentive has rightly been called "the baby
of the race." this accounts for many of the characteristics of the
extremely fat person, including the fact that it is difficult for him to
amuse himself.
he of all types likes most to be amused and very simple toys and
activities are sufficient to do it.
loves the circus
¶ a serious drama or "problem play" usually bores him but he seldom
misses a circus.
the fat person expresses his immaturity also in that he likes to be
petted, made over and looked after.
¶ like the infant he demands food first. almost the only time a fat man
loses his temper is when he has been deprived of his food. the next
demand on[pg ] his list is sleep, another characteristic of the immature.
give a fat man "three squares" a day and plenty of sleep in a
comfortable bed, and he will walk off with the prize for good humor
three hundred and sixty-five days in the year. next to sleep he demands
warm clothing in winter and steam heat when the wintry winds blow.
fat people at the beach
¶ if it were not for the exertion required in getting to and from the
beaches, dressing and undressing, and the momentary coldness of the
water, many more alimentives would go to the beaches in summer than do.
not strenuous
¶ anything, to be popular with the alimentive, must be easy to get, easy
to do, easy to get away from, easy to drop if he feels like it. anything
requiring the expenditure of great energy, even though it promises
pleasure when achieved, is usually passed over by the fat people.
the art of getting out of it
¶ "let george do it" is another bit of slang invented by this type. he
seldom does anything he[pg ] really hates to do. he is so likable he either
induces you to let him out of it or gets somebody to do it for him. he
just naturally avoids everything that is intense, difficult or
strenuous.
the peaceable type
¶ if an unpleasant situation of a personal or social nature arises—a
quarrel, a misunderstanding or any kind of disagreement—the fat man
will try to get himself out of it without a discussion.
except when they have square faces (in which case they are not pure
alimentives), extremely fat people do not mix up in neighborhood,
family, church, club or political quarrels. it is too much trouble, for
one thing, and for another it is opposed to his peaceable, untensed
nature.
avoids expensive quarrels
¶ the fat man has his eye on personal advantages and promotions and he
knows that quarrels are expensive, not alone in the chances they lose
him, but in nerve force and peace of mind.
the fat man knows instinctively that peace times are the most profitable
times and though he is not for "peace at any price" so far as the
country is concerned, he certainly is much inclined that way[pg ] where he
is personally concerned. you will be amused to notice how this
peace-loving quality increases as one's weight increases. the more fat
any individual is the more is he inclined to get what he wants without
hostility.
the real thing
¶ the favorite "good time" of the alimentive is one where there are
plenty of refreshments. a dinner invitation always makes a hit with him,
but beware that you do not lure a fat person into your home and give him
a tea-with-lemon wisp where he expected a full meal!
always ready for food
¶ substantial viands can be served to him any hour of the day or night
with the certainty of pleasing him. he loves a banquet, provided he is
not expected to make a speech. the fat man has a harder time than any
other listening to long speeches.
the fashion of trying to mix the two most opposite extremes—food and
ideas—and expecting them to go down, was due to our misunderstanding of
the real nature of human beings. it is rapidly going out, as must every
fashion which fails to take the human instincts into account.[pg ]
avoids sports
¶ no prizes lure a fat man into strenuous physical exercise or violent
sports. although we have witnessed numerous state, national and
international tennis, polo, rowing, sprinting, hurdling and swimming
contests, we have seen not one player who was fat enough to be included
in the pure alimentive type.
the grand-stands, bleachers and touring cars at these contests contained
a generous number of fat people, but their conversation indicated that
they were present more from personal interest in some contestant than in
the game itself.
the nearest a fat man usually comes to taking strenuous exercise is to
drive in an open car. the more easeful that car the better he likes it.
he avoids long walks as he would the plague, and catches a street car
for a two-block trip.
the personal element
¶ due to his immaturity, the fat person gives little thought to anything
save those things which affect him personally.
the calm exterior, unruffled countenance and air of deliberation he
sometimes wears, and which have[pg ] occasionally passed for "judicial"
qualities, are largely the results of the fact that the alimentive
refuses to get stirred up over anything that does not concern him
personally.
this personal element will be found to dominate the activities,
conversation and interests of the alimentive. for him to like a thing or
buy a thing it must come pretty near being something he can eat, wear,
live in or otherwise personally enjoy. he confines himself to the
concrete and tangible. but most of all he confines himself to things out
of which he gets something for himself.
reading
¶ the fat man is no reader but when he does read it is nearly always
something funny, simple or sentimental. in newspapers he reads the
"funnies." magazine stories, if short and full of sentiment, attract
him. he seldom reads an editorial and is not a book worm. the newspaper
furnishes practically all of the fat man's reading. he seldom owns a
library unless he is very rich, and then it is usually for "show."
avoids book stores
¶ in making the investigations for this course, we interviewed many
clerks in the bookstores of leading[pg ] cities throughout the united
states. without exception they stated that few extremely fat people
patronized them. "i have been in this store seventeen years and i have
never sold a book to a two hundred and fifty pounder," one dealer told
us. all this is due to the fact with which we started this chapter—that
the fat man is built around his stomach—and stomachs do not read!
naturally realistic
¶ the fat man has the child's natural innocence and ignorance of subtle
and elusive things. he has the same interest in things and people as
does the child; the child's indifference to books, lectures, schools and
everything abstract.
physical assets
¶ "i believe i could digest nails!" exclaimed a fat friend of ours
recently. this perfect nutritive system constitutes the greatest
physical superiority of the alimentive. so highly developed is his whole
stomach department that everything "agrees" with him. and everything
tends to make him fat.
as irvin cobb recently said: "it isn't true that one can't have his cake
and eat it, too, for the fat man eats his and keeps it—all."[pg ]
physical liabilities
¶ a tendency to over-eat results naturally from the highly developed
eating and digesting system of this type but this in turn overtaxes all
the vital organs, as stated before. also, the fat man's aversion to
exercise reduces his physical efficiency.
the pure alimentive and the alimentively-inclined should learn their
normal weight and then keep within it if they desire long lives.
social assets
¶ sweetness of disposition is one of the most valuable of all human
characteristics. fat people possess it more often and more unchangingly
than any other type. other social assets of this type are amenableness,
affability, hospitality and approachableness.
social liabilities
¶ gaining his ends by flattery, cajolery, and various more or less
innocent little deceptions are the only social handicaps of this type.
emotional assets
¶ his unfailing optimism is the most marked emotional quality of this
type. nothing can be so dark that the fat person doesn't find a silver
edge[pg ] somewhere. so in disaster we always send for our fat friends. in
the presence of an amply-proportioned individual everything looks
brighter. hope springs eternal in human breasts but the springs are
stronger in the plump folks than in the rest of us.
money spending is also a marked feature of the fat man. his emotions are
out-going, never "in-growing." a stingy fat man is unknown.
emotional liabilities
¶ a tendency to become spoiled, to pout, and to take out his resentments
in babyish ways are the emotional weaknesses of this type. these, as you
will note, are the natural reactions of childhood, from which he never
fully emerges.
business assets
¶ the ability to make people like him is the greatest business and
professional asset of this type, and one every other type might well
emulate. one average-minded fat man near the door of a business
establishment will make more customers in a month by his geniality,
joviality and sociableness than a dozen brilliant thinkers will in a
year. every business that deals directly with the public should have at
least one fat person in it.[pg ]
business liabilities
¶ a habit of evading responsibility and of "getting out from under"
constitutes the inclination most harmful to the business or professional
ambitions of this type. again it is the child in him trying to escape
the task set for it and at the same time to avoid punishment.
domestic strength
¶ love of home is a distinguishing domestic trait of all fat people. the
fat man's provision for his family is usually as complete as his
circumstances will permit and he often stretches it a point.
as parents fat men and women are almost too easy-going for their own
future happiness, for they "spoil" their children. but they are more
loved by their children than any other type. being so nearly children
themselves they make equals of their children, enter into their games
and live their lives with them.
domestic weakness
¶ dependence on others, the tendency of allowing one's self to be
supported by brothers or sisters or wife, is the chief domestic weakness
of fat people. they should begin early in life to depend upon
them[pg ]selves and make it a practice to carry their share of family
responsibilities.
should aim at
¶ developing more of his mental powers with a view to using his head to
lessen the manual work he so dislikes, and cultivating an interest in
the more mature side of the world in which he lives should be two of the
aims of all extremely fat people.
should avoid
¶ "letting down," soft snaps and temptations to evade responsibility
should be avoided by the fat. elbert hubbard said, "blessed is the man
who is not looking for a soft snap, for he is the only one who shall
find it." this explains why the fat man, unless brainy, seldom lands
one.
strongest points
¶ optimism, hospitality and harmony are the strongest points in the fat
man's nature. upon them many a man has built a successful life. without
them no individual of any type can hope to be happy.
his popularity and all-around compatibility give the fat man advantages
over other types which fairly compensate for the weak cogs in his
machinery.[pg ]
weakest points
¶ self-indulgence of all kinds, over-eating, over-sleeping,
under-exercising and the evasion of responsibilities are the weakest
points of this type. despite his many strong points his life is often
wrecked on these rocks. he so constantly tends to taking the easy way
out. day by day he gives up chances for ultimate success for the baubles
of immediate ease.
he is the most likable of all the types but his indolence sometimes
strains even the love of his family to the breaking point.
how to deal with this type socially
¶ feed him, give him comfortable chairs—the largest you have—and don't
drag him into long discussions of any kind. this is the recipe for
winning the fat man when you meet him socially.
and whatever you do, don't tell him your troubles! the fat man hates
trouble, smothers his own, and you only make him ill at ease when you
regale him with yours.
don't walk him any more than is absolutely necessary. let him go home
early if he starts. he enjoys his sleep and doesn't like to have it
interfered with.
¶ make your conversation deal with concrete per[pg ]sonal things and events.
stay away from highbrow subjects. the best places to eat and the best
shows of the week are safe subjects to introduce when with very fat
people.
how to deal with this type in business
¶ don't give him hard manual tasks. if you want this kind of work done
get some one other than an extremely fat man to do it. if you hire a fat
man blame yourself for the result.
give your fat employee a chance to deal with people in a not-too-serious
way, but hold him strictly to the keeping of his records, reports and
working hours. if this fat person is a dealer, a merchant or a tradesman
keep him to his word. start out by letting him know you expect the
delivery of just what he promises. don't let him "jolly" you into
relinquishing what is rightfully yours. and keep in mind always that the
fat person is usually good at heart.
[pg ]
remember, the chief distinguishing marks of the alimentive in the order
of their importance are rounded outlines, immature features and dimpled
hands. a person who has these is largely of the alimentive type, no
matter what other types may be included in his makeup.
[pg ]
[pg ]
the thoracic type
"the thriller"
ndividuals in whom the circulatory system
(heart, arteries and blood vessels) and the respiratory system (lungs,
nose and chest) are more highly developed than any other systems, have
been named the thoracics.
¶ this name comes from the fact that the heart and lungs (which
constitute the most important organs of these two closely-allied
systems) are housed in the thorax—that little room made by your ribs
for the protection of these vital organs.
physical resilience
¶ a general elasticity of structure, a suggestion of sinews and physical
resilience characterizes this type.
the florid-faced, high-chested individual
¶ what is known as a "red face," when accompanied by a high chest,
always signifies large thoracic tendencies. the high color which in an
adult[pg ] comes and goes is a sure indication of a well developed
circulatory system, since high color is caused by the rapid pumping of
blood to the tiny blood vessels of the face.
people with little blood, weak hearts or deficient circulation are not
florid and must be much overheated or excited to show vivid color in
their cheeks.
betray their feelings
¶ on the other hand, the slightest displeasure, enjoyment, surprise or
exertion brings the blood rushing to the face and neck of him who has a
large, well-developed blood-system. how many times you have heard such a
one say: "i am so embarrassed! i flush at every little thing! how i envy
the rest of you who come in from a long walk looking so cool!"
the man of great chest expansion
¶ the largest part of this man's body is around the chest. (see chart )
his chest is high for the reason that he has larger lungs than the
average.
advantages of a high chest
¶ the man of unusual chest-expansion has one great physical asset. the
person who breathes[pg ] deeply has a decided advantage over the man who
breathes deficiently. the lungs form the bellows or air-supply for the
body's engine, the heart, and with a deficient supply of air the heart
does deficient work. efficient breathing is easy only to the man of
large lungs, and only the high chested have large lungs.
long-waisted people
¶ a long waist is another thoracic sign, for it is a natural result of
the extra house-room required by the large lungs and heart. it is easily
detected in both men and women. (see chart )
if you are a close observer you have noticed that some people appear to
have a waist line much lower than others; that the belt line dividing
the upper part of the body from the lower is proportionately much nearer
the floor in some than in others of the same height.
passing of the "wasp waist"
¶ the "straight-up-and-down" lines of today's woman and the slimpsy
shoulder-to-heel garments she wears have obliterated her waistline, but
you will recall how differently the old "wasp waist" fashions of a score
of years ago betrayed the secrets of the short and long waist.[pg ]
the eighteen-inch belt, of which we were so falsely proud in , told
unmistakable facts about milady's thoracic development.
belts vs. suspenders
¶ as the tell-tale belt disappeared from woman's wardrobe it appeared in
man's, and now betrays the location of his waist with an exactness of
which the old-fashioned suspenders were never guilty.
to test yourself
¶ if you are a man and have difficulty in getting ready-made coats long
enough for you this is certain proof that you have decided thoracic
tendencies. if you are a woman who has to forego many a pretty gown
because it is not long enough in the waist, the same is true of you.
in women this long waist and high chest give the appearance of small
hips and of shoulders a little broader than the average; in men it gives
that straight, soldier-like bearing which makes this type of man admired
and gazed after as he strides down the street.
the pure thoracic head
¶ a high head is a significant characteristic of the[pg ] typical thoracic.
(see chart ) the anglo-saxons tend to have this head and, more than any
other races, exhibit thoracic qualities as racial characteristics.
this is considered the handsomest head known. certainly it lends the
appearance of nobility and intelligence. it is not wide, looked at from
the front or back, but inclines to be slightly narrower for its height
than the alimentive head.
the kite-shaped face
¶ a face widest through the cheek bones and tapering slightly up the
sides of the forehead and downward to the jaw bones is the face of the
pure thoracic. (see chart ) this must not be mistaken for the pointed
chin nor the pointed head, but is merely a sloping of the face upward
and downward from the cheek bones as a result of the unusual width of
the nose section. (see chart )
his well-developed nose
¶ the nose section is also high and wide because the typical thoracic
has a nose that is well developed. this is shown not only by its length
but by its high bridge.[pg ]
the cause for the width and length of this section[pg ] is obvious. the
nose constitutes the entrance and exit departments of the breathing
system. large lung capacity necessitates a large chamber for the intake
and expulsion of air.
signs of good lungs
¶ whenever you see a man whose face is wide through the cheek
bones—with a long, high-bridged open-nostrilled nose—you see a man of
good lung capacity and of quick physical energy. when you see any one
with pinched nostrils, a face that is narrow through the cheek bones and
a low or "sway-back" nose, you see a man whose lung capacity is
deficient. such a person invariably expends his physical energy more
slowly.
freckles, being due to the same causes as red hair and high color, are
further indications of thoracic tendencies, though you may belong to
this type with or without them.
the typical thoracic hand
¶ the pointed hand is the hand of the pure thoracic. (see chart ) note
the extreme length of the second finger and the pointed effect of this
hand when all the fingers are laid together. any person with a pointed
hand such as this has good[pg ] thoracic development whether it occupies
first place in his makeup or not.
the fingers of the thoracic are also inclined to be more thin-skinned
than those of other types.
one may be predominantly thoracic without these elements but they are
indications of the extreme thoracic type. naturally the hand of the
extreme thoracic is more pink than the average.
the beautiful foot
¶ the thoracic tends to have more narrow, high-arched feet than other
types. as a result this type makes the majority of the beautifully shod.
the man of energetic movements
¶ a hair-trigger nimbleness goes with this type. he is always "poised
ready to strike."
all thoracics use their hands, arms, wrists, limbs and feet alertly and
energetically. they open doors, handle implements and all kinds of hand
instruments with little blundering. also their movements are more
graceful than those of other types.
the thoracic walk
¶ "the springy step" must have been invented to describe the walk of the
thoracic. no matter[pg ] how hurried, his walk has more grace than the walk
of other types. he does not stumble; and it is seldom that a thoracic
steps on the train of his partner's gown.
the graceful sitter
¶ the way you sit tells a great deal about your nature. one of the first
secrets it betrays is whether you are by nature graceful or ungainly.
the person who sits gracefully, who seems to drape himself becomingly
upon a chair and to arise from it with ease is usually a thoracic.
their excess of energy sometimes gives them the appearance of
"fidgeting," but it is an easy, graceful fidget and not as disturbing as
that of other types.
keen eye and ear senses
¶ quick eyes and keen ears are characteristic of the thoracics. the
millions of stimuli—the sounds, sights and smells impinging every
waking moment upon the human consciousness—affect him more quickly and
more intensely than any other type. the acuteness of all our senses
depends, to a far greater extent than we have hitherto supposed, upon
proper heart and lung action.[pg ]
take long, deep breaths for five minutes in the open air while walking
rapidly enough to make your heart pound, and see how much keener your
senses are at the end of that time.
the thoracic is chronically in this condition because his heart and
lungs are going at top speed habitually and naturally all his life.
susceptible to heat
¶ because bodily temperature varies according to the amount of blood and
the rapidity of its circulation, this type is always warmer than others.
he is extremely susceptible to heat, suffers keenly in warm rooms or
warm weather and wears fewer wraps in winter. the majority of bathers at
the beaches in summer are largely of this type.
the high-strung
¶ nerves as taut as a violin string—due to his acute physical senses
and his thin, sensitive skin—plus his instantaneous quickness make the
thoracic what is known as "high-strung."
the most temperamental
¶ because he is keyed to high c by nature, the thoracic has more of that
quality called temperament than any other type.[pg ]
the wag who said that "temperament was mostly temper" might have
reversed it and still have been right. for temper is largely a matter of
temperament. since the thoracics have more "temperament" it follows
naturally that they have more temper, or rather that they show it
oftener, just as they show their delightful qualities oftener.
a continuous performance
¶ this type, consciously and unconsciously, is a "continuous
performance." he is showing you something of himself every moment and if
you are interested in human nature, as your reading of this book
suggests, you are going to find him a fascinating subject. he is
expressing his feelings with more or less abandon all the time and he is
likely to express as many as a dozen different ones in as many moments.
the quick temper
¶ "flying off the handle," and "going up in the air" are phrases
originally inspired by our dear, delightful friends, the thoracics.
other types do these more or less temperamental things but they do not
do them as frequently nor on as short notice as this type.[pg ]
the human firefly
¶ a fiery nature is part and parcel of the thoracic's makeup. but did
you ever see a fiery-natured man who didn't have lots of warm friends!
it is the grouch—in whom the fire starts slowly and smoulders
indefinitely—that nobody likes. but the man who flares up, flames for a
moment and is calm the next never lacks for companions or devotees.
the red-haired
¶ one may belong to the thoracic type whether his hair is blonde or
brunette or any of the shades between, but it is an interesting fact
that most of the red-haired are largely of this type. "he didn't have
red hair for nothing" is a famous phrase that has been applied to the
red-haired, quick-tempered thoracic for generations.
you will be interested to note that this high color and high chest are
distinctly noticeable in most of the red-haired people you know—certain
proof that they approximate this type.
as you walk down the street tomorrow look at the people ahead of you and
when you find a "red-head" notice how much more red his neck is than[pg ]
the necks of the people walking beside him. this flushed skin almost
always accompanies red hair, showing that most red-haired people belong
to this type.
the "flash in the pan"
¶ the red-haired man's temper usually expends itself instantly. his
red-hot fieriness is over in a moment. but for every enemy he has two
friends—friends who like his flame, even though in constant danger from
it themselves.
whereas the alimentive avoids you if he disagrees with you, the thoracic
likes to tell you in a few hot words just what he thinks of you. but the
chances are that he will be so completely over it by lunch time that he
will invite you out with him.
desire for approbation
¶ to be admired and a wee bit envied are desires dear to the heart of
this type. everybody, to a greater or lesser degree, desires these
things, but to no other type do they mean so much as to this one. we
know this because no other type, in any such numbers, takes the trouble
or makes the sacrifices necessary to bring them about.[pg ]
acts indicate desires
¶ the ego of every individual craves approval but the majority of the
other types craves something else more—the particular something in each
case depending upon the type to which the individual belongs.
you can always tell what any individual wants most by what he does. the
man who thinks he wants a thing or wishes he wanted it talks about
getting it, envies those who have it and plans to start doing
something about it. but the man who really wants a thing goes after it,
sacrifices his leisure, his pleasures and sometimes love itself—and
gets it.
shines in public life
¶ the lime-light appeals more to this type than to others because it
goes further toward gratifying his desire for approbation. so while
other men and women are dreaming of fame the thoracic practises, ploughs
and pleads his way to it.
the personal adulation of friends and of the multitude is the breath of
life to him. extremes of this type consider no self-denial too great a
price to pay for it.[pg ]
many on the stage
¶ the stage in all its forms is as natural a field to the thoracic as
salesmanship is to the alimentive. the pleas of fond papas and fearsome
mamas are usually ineffective with this type of boy or girl when he sets
his heart on a career before the foot-lights or in the movies.
whether they achieve it or not will depend on other, and chiefly mental,
traits in each individual's makeup, but the yearning for it in some form
is always there. so the managers' waiting rooms are always crowded with
people of this type. it is this intensity of desire which has goaded and
inspired most stage artists on to success in their chosen fields.
"put yourself in his place"
¶ to be able to put one's self in the role of another, to feel as he
feels; to be so keenly sensitive to his situation and psychology that
one almost becomes that person for the time being, is the heart and soul
of acting.
the thoracic has this sensitiveness naturally. after long study and
acquaintance you may be able to put yourself in the place of a few
friends. the thoracic does this instantly and automatically.[pg ]
tendency, not toil, makes fame
¶ those who have succeeded to fame in any given line are wont to
proclaim, "hard work is the secret of success," and to take great credit
unto themselves for the labor they have expended on their own.
it is true of course that all success entails hard work. but the man or
woman sufficiently gifted to rise to the heights gets from that gift
such a strong inward urge towards its expression that what he does in
that direction is not work to him. the long hours, concentration and
study devoted to it are more pleasurable than painful to him. he chooses
such activities voluntarily.
nature the real artist
¶ nothing can rightly be called work which one does out of sheer
preference. work never made an actress and work never made a singer
where innate talent for these arts was lacking. nature, the true maker
of every famous name, bestows ninety per cent and man, if he hustles,
can provide the other very necessary ten. but his sense of humor if not
his sense of justice should be sufficient to prevent his trying to rob
the almighty of his due.[pg ]
success for all
¶ every individual who is not feeble-minded can be a success at
something in this big world. every normal-minded individual is able to
create, invent, improve, organize, build or market some of the myriads
of things the world is crying for. but he will succeed at only those
things in which his physiological and psychological mechanisms perform
their functions easily and naturally.
why we work
¶ man is, by inclination, very little of a worker. he is, first, a
wanter—a bundle of instincts; second, a feeler—a bundle of emotions;
last and least, he is a thinker. what real work he does is done not
because he likes it but because it serves one of these first two bundles
of instincts.
when the desire for leisure is stronger than the other urges, leisure
wins. but in all ambitious men and women the desire for other things
outweighs the leisure-urge.
ambition and type
¶ now what is it that causes some to have ambition and others to lack
it?
your ambitions take the form determined by your[pg ] predominating
physiological system. for instance, in every great singer the thoracic
has been present either as the first or second element.
the effect of the physical upon our talents is no more marked anywhere
than here. for it is his unusual lung power, his high chest, the
sounding boards in his nose section and his superior vocal cords that
make the real foundation of every singer's fame. these physiological
conditions are found in extreme degree only in persons of thoracic
tendencies.
it was the great lung-power of caruso that made him a great singer. it
was his remarkable heart-power that brought him through an illness in
february, , when every newspaper in the world carried on its front
page the positive statement that he could not live another day. that he
lived for six months afterward was due chiefly to his remarkable heart.
the nature resulting from a large heart and large lungs is one
distinctly different from all others—in short, the thoracic nature.
the best dressed
¶ the best dressed man and the best dressed woman in your town belong
predominantly to this[pg ] type. this is no accident. the thoracics, being
possessed of acute eye senses, are more sensitive to color and line than
any other type. these are the foundations of "style" and artistic
grooming.
clothes can unmake the man
¶ being desirous of the approval of others and realizing that though
clothes do not make the man they can unmake him, this type looks to his
laurels on this point.
because clothes determine the first impressions we make upon strangers
and because that impression is difficult to change, clothes are of vast
importance in this maze of human relationships.
the thoracic is more sensitive to the attitude of others because their
attitude is more vital to his self-expression. he senses from childhood
the bearing that clothes have for or against him in the opinion of
others and how they can aid him to express his personality.
the glass of fashion
¶ the thoracic therefore often becomes "the glass of fashion and the
mold of form." his consciousness of himself is so keen that, even when
alone, he prefers those things in dress which are at once fine, fancy
and fashionable.[pg ]
some types are indifferent to clothes, some ignorant of clothes and some
defiant in their clothes but the thoracic always has a keen sense of
fitness in the matter of apparel.
distinction in dress
¶ the distinctive dresser is one who essays the extremely fashionable,
the "last moment" touch. he is always a step or two ahead of the times.
his ties, handbags, handkerchiefs and stick pins are "up to the minute."
such a man or woman invariably has a large thoracic development and is
well repaid by the public for his pains.
dress the universal language
¶ the public looks more eagerly than we suppose to changes in styles and
fads. it gives, in spite of itself, instantaneous admiration of a sort
to those who follow the dictates of fashion. this being one of the
quickest roads to adulation, it is often utilized by this type.
the newest in hairdressing
¶ the latest thing in coiffures is always known by the thoracic woman.
and because she is, more often than any other type, a beautiful woman
she[pg ] can wear her hair in almost any style and find it becoming.
so when puffs were the thing this type of woman not only wore puffs but
the most extreme and numerous puffs. when the "sticking-to-the-face"
style was in vogue she bought much bandoline and essayed the sleekest
and shiniest head of all. when the ear-bun raged she changed those same
paper-like curls over night into veritable young sofa cushions.
always on "dress parade"
¶ with intent to keep the spotlight on himself the thoracic is always on
dress parade. he is vividly aware of himself; he knows what kind of
picture he is making. he is seldom "self-conscious," in the sense of
being timid. when he does happen to be timid he suffers, by reason of
his greater desire for approval, more acutely than any other type.
affectability his keynote
¶ instantaneous reaction to stimuli—with all the reflex actions
resulting therefrom—constitutes the keynote of this type. this makes an
individual who is physiologically and psychologically affectable.[pg ]
because life is full of all kinds of stimuli, acting during every waking
moment upon every sense in the organism, any person who is high strung
finds himself in the midst of what might be called "nerve-bedlam."
gets the most out of everything
¶ because of this same highly sensitized makeup the thoracic gets more
sensations out of every incident than the rest of us do. he experiences
more joy in the space of a lifetime but also more disappointment.
the human violin
¶ for the same reason that the violin vibrates to a greater number of
sounds than the organ, the thoracic is a more vibrant individual than
others. he is impelled to an expressiveness of voice, manner and action
that often looks like pretence to less impulsive people. in other types
it would be, but to the thoracic it is so natural and normal that he is
often much surprised to hear that he has the reputation of being
"affected."
a reputation for flightiness
¶ this lightning-like liveliness of face, body and[pg ] voice, his quick
replies and instantaneous reactions to everything also cause him to be
called "flighty."
the quick thinker
¶ we are prone to judge every one by ourselves. people whose mental or
physical senses are less "keyed-up," less sensitive, call the thoracic
"rattle-brained."
usually such a man's brain is not rattled at all; it is working, as all
brains do in response to the messages reaching it, via the telegraph
wires of the five senses.
in the thoracic these wires happen to be more taut than in the other
types. he gets sensations from sights, sounds, tastes, touches and
smells much more quickly than the rest of us do. these messages are sent
to the brain more rapidly and, since sensation is responsible for much
of our thinking, this man's brain thinks a little more speedily than
that of other types.
it does not necessarily think any better. often it does need slowing
down. but compared to the thought-power of some of the other types the
thoracic's speed makes up for much of his carelessness. he makes more
mistakes in judgment[pg ] than other types but can "right-about-face" so
quickly he usually remedies them while other types are still trying to
decide when to start.
to hold himself back is the hardest lesson for this type to learn.
his changeability
¶ this tendency to let himself go brings the thoracic a great deal of
unhappiness and failure. he plunges so quickly that he often fails to
take into consideration the various elements of the situation.
his physical senses tell him a thing should be done and rush him
headlong into actions that he knows are ill-advised the moment he has
time to think them over. in turning around and righting his mistakes he
often hears himself called "changeable" and "vacillating."
his "batting average"
¶ in this, as in other things, we have a tendency toward smugness,
shortsightedness and egotism. the man who makes but one mistake a year
because he makes but two decisions is wrong fifty per cent of the time.
yet he self-satisfiedly considers himself superior to the thoracic
because he[pg ] has caught the latter in six "poor deals within six months."
at the rate the average thoracic acts this would be about one mistake in
a thousand—a much "better batting average" than the other man's.
but because the confidence of others in our stability is of prime
importance to us all, this type or any one inclined to definite thoracic
tendencies should take pains to prevent this impression from settling
into the minds of his friends.
should get onto the highway
¶ the greatest reason for striving toward stability in action and more
slowness in decision, however, is for his own future's sake. the man who
is constantly making decisions and being compelled to alter them gets
nowhere. he may have the best engine and the finest car in the world but
if he runs first down this by-path, and then that, he will make little
progress on the main highway.
should have an aim
¶ an aim, a definite goal is essential to the progress of any
individual. it should be made with care and in keeping with one's
personality, talents, training, education, environment and experience,[pg ]
and having been made should be adhered to with the determination which
does not permit little things to interfere with it.
eliminating non-essentials
¶ the big problem of individual success is the problem of eliminating
non-essentials—of "hewing to the line, letting the chips fall where
they may." most of the things that steal your time, strength, money and
energy are nothing but chips. if you pay too much attention to them you
will never hew out anything worth while.
no vain regrets
¶ if you are a thoracic don't regret the fact that you are not a
one-decision-a-year man, but try to make fewer and better decisions.
your quickness, if called into counsel, will enable you to see from what
instincts your mistakes habitually arise and the direction in which most
of them have pointed. and you will see this with so much greater
dispatch than the average person that you will lose little time.
you should begin today to analyze your most common errors in judgment
that you may guard against their recurrence.[pg ]
always slightly thrilled
¶ even when apparently composed the thoracic is always a wee bit
thrilled. everything he sees, hears, touches, tastes or smells gives him
such keen sensations that he lives momentarily in some kind of
adventure.
he languishes in an unchanging environment and finds monotony almost
unbearable.
lights and shadows
¶ "never two minutes the same" fitly describes this type. he passes
rapidly from one vivid sensation to another and expresses each one so
completely that he is soon ready for the next. he has fewer complexes
than any other type because he does not inhibit as much.
the uncorked bottle
¶ the "lid" is always off of the thoracic. this being the case he
suffers little from "mental congestion" though he sometimes pays a high
price for his self-expression.
everybody is interesting
¶ most of us are much more interesting than the world suspects. but the
world is not made up of[pg ] mind readers. we keep our most interesting
thoughts and the most interesting side of ourselves hidden away. even
your dearest friends are seldom given a peep into the actual you. and
this despite the fact that we all recognize this as a deficiency in
others.
we bottle up ourselves and defy the world's cork-screws—all save the
thoracic. he allows his associates to see much of what is passing in his
mind all the time. because we are all interested in the real individual
and not in masks this type usually is much sought after.
not secretive
¶ the thoracic does not by preference cover up; he does not by
preference secrete; he does not, except when necessary, keep his plans
and ways dark. he is likely to tell not only his family but his newest
acquaintances just what he is planning to do and how he expects to do
it.
the naturally secretive person who vaguely refers to "a certain party"
when he has occasion to speak of another is the exact opposite of this
type.
his "human interest"
¶ we are all interested in the little comings and[pg ] goings of our
friends. upon this fact every magazine and newspaper builds its "human
interest" stories. we may be indifferent to what the president of the
united states is doing about international relations but what he had for
breakfast is mighty interesting. few people read inaugural addresses,
significant though they often are to the world and to the reader
himself. but if the president would write ten volumes on "just how i
spend my sundays," it would be a "best seller."
naturally confidential
¶ personal experiences, personal secrets and personal preferences are
subjects we are all interested in. these are the very things with which
the thoracic regales his friends and about which he is more frank and
outspoken than any other type. he makes many friends by his obvious
openness and his capacity for seeing the interesting details which
others overlook.
charming conversationalist
¶ colorful, vivid words and phrases come easily to the tongue of this
type for he sees the unusual, the fascinating, in everything. since any
one can make a thing interesting to others if he is really[pg ] interested
in it himself, the thoracic makes others see and feel what he describes.
he is therefore known as the most charming conversationalist.
beautiful voice
¶ the most beautiful voices belong to people who are largely of this
type. this is due, as we have said before, to physiological causes. the
high chest, sensitive vocal cords, capacious sounding boards in the nose
and roof of the mouth all tend to give the voice of the thoracic many
nuances and accents never found in other types.
his pleasing voice plus the vividness of his expressions and his lack of
reticence in giving the intimate and interesting details are other
traits which help to make the thoracic a lively companion.
the lure of spontaneity
¶ the most beloved people in the world are the spontaneous. we lead such
drab lives ourselves and keep back so much, we like to see a little
niagara of human emotion occasionally. the thoracic feels everything
keenly. life's experiences make vivid records on the sensitive plate of
his mind. he puts them on the victrola that is himself and proceeds to
run them off for your entertainment.[pg ]
sometimes a "bubbler"
¶ "a constant stream of talk" must have been first said in describing
this type. for while others are carefully guarding their real feelings
and thoughts the thoracic goes merrily on relieving himself of his.
more sedate and somber types call the thoracics "bubblers" or "spouters"
just for this reason.
the incessant talker
¶ "that person's talk gets on my nerves," is a remark often made by one
of the staid, stiff types concerning the seldom silent, extremely florid
individual. so natural is this to the thoracic that he is entirely
unconscious of the wearing effect he has on other people.
a sense of humor
¶ seeing the funny side of everything is a capacity which comes more
naturally to this type than to others. this is due to the psychological
fact that nothing is truly humorous save what is slightly "out of
plumb."
real humor lies in detecting and describing that intangible quirk. no
type has the sensitiveness essential to this in any such degree as the
thoracic.[pg ] individuals of other types sometimes possess a keen sense of
humor. this trait is not confined to the thoracic. but it is a
significant fact that almost every humorist of note has had this type as
the first or second element in his makeup.
the human fireworks
¶ "he is a skyrocket," or "she is a firefly," are phrases often used to
describe that vivacious individual whose adeptness at repartee puts the
rest of the crowd in the background. these people are always largely or
purely thoracic. they never belong predominately to the fourth type.
the next time you find such a person note how his eyes flash, how his
color comes and goes and the many indescribable gradations of voice
which make him the center of things.
"he is always shooting sparks," said a man recently in describing a
florid, high-chested friend.
never dull company
¶ his "line" may not interest you but the thoracic himself is usually
interesting. he is an actual curiosity to the quiet, inexpressive people
who never can fathom how he manages to talk so frankly and so fast.[pg ]
such a person is seldom dull. he is everything from a condiment to a
cocktail and has the same effect on the average group of more or less
drab personalities.
lives in the heights and depths
¶ "glad one moment and sad the next" is the way the ticker would read if
it could make a record of the inner feelings of the average thoracic.
these feelings often come and go without his having the least notion of
what causes them. ordinarily these unaccountable moods are due to
sensations reaching his subconscious mind, of which no cognizance is
taken by his conscious processes.
called "intuitive"
¶ this ability to "get" things, to respond quickly with his physical
reactions while devoting his mental ones to something else, has obtained
for this type the reputation of possessing more "intuition" than others.
source of "hunches"
¶ that there is no such thing as intuition in the old sense of getting a
"hunch" from the outside is now agreed by psychologists. the thing we
have[pg ] called intuition, they maintain, is not due to irregular or
supernatural causes but to our own normal natural mental processes.
the impression that he gets this knowledge or suspicion from the outside
is due, the scientists say, to the fact that his thinking has proceeded
at such lightning-like speed that he was unable to watch the wheels go
round. the only thing of which he is conscious is the final result or
sum at the bottom of the column called his "hunch." he is not aware of
the addition and subtraction which his mind went through to get it for
him.
easily excited
¶ "off like a shot" is a term often applied to the thoracic. he is the
most easily excited of all types but also the most easily calmed. he
recovers from every mood more quickly and more completely than other
types. under the influence of emotion he often does things for which he
is sorry immediately afterward.
on the spur of the moment
¶ this type usually does a thing quickly or not at all. he is a gun that
is always cocked. so he hits a great many things in the course of a[pg ]
lifetime and leads the most exciting existence of any type. being able
to get thrills out of the most commonplace event because of seeing
elements in it which others overlook, he finds in everyday life more
novelty than others ever see.
the adventurers
¶ romance and adventure always interest this type. he lives for thrills
and novel reactions and usually spares no pains or money to get them. a
very slangy but very expressive term used frequently by these people is,
"i got a real kick out of that."
this craving for adventure, suspense and zest often lures this type into
speculation, gambling and various games of chance. the danger in flying,
deep-sea diving, auto-racing and similar fields has a strong appeal for
this type—so strong that practically every man or woman who follows
these professions is of this type.
tires of sameness
¶ the thoracic soon tires of the same suit, the same gown, the same
house, the same town and even the same girl. he wrings the utmost out of
each experience so quickly and so completely that he is forever on the
lookout for new worlds to conquer.[pg ] past experiences are to him as so
many lemons out of which he has taken all the juice. he anticipates
those of the future as so many more to be utilized in the same way.
likes responsive people
¶ we all like answers. we want to be assured that what we have said or
done has registered. the thoracic is always saying or doing something
and can't understand why other people are so unresponsive. he is as
responsive as a radio wire. everything hits the mark with him and he
lets you know it. so, naturally, he enjoys the same from others and
considers those less expressive than himself stiff, formal or dull.
the kind of person the thoracic likes best is one sufficiently like
himself to nod and smile and show that he fully understands but who will
not interrupt his stream of talk.
people he dislikes
¶ the stolid, indifferent or cold are people the thoracic comes very
near disliking. their evident self-complacency and immobility are things
he does not understand at all and with which he has little patience.[pg ]
such people seem to him to be cold, unfeeling, almost dead. so he steers
clear of them. it was surely a thoracic who first called these people
"sticks." but the reason for their acting like sticks will be apparent
in another chapter.
his pet aversions
¶ whereas the alimentive avoids people he does not care for, the
thoracic is inclined to betray his aversions. he occasionally delights
to put people he dislikes at a disadvantage by his wit or satire. the
stony individual who walks through life like an ionian pillar is a
complete mystery to the thoracic; and the pillar returns the compliment.
we do not like anything we do not understand and we seldom understand
anything that differs decidedly from ourselves.
thus we distrust and dislike foreigners, and to a greater or lesser
extent other families, people from other sections of the country, etc.
the easterner and westerner have a natural distrust of each other; and
the civil war is not the only reason for the incompatibility of
southerners and northerners.
so it is with individuals. those who differ too widely in type never
understand each other. they[pg ] have too little of the chief thing that
builds friendships—emotions in common.
the forgiving man
¶ if you have once been a real friend of a thoracic and a quarrel comes
between you, he may be ever so bitter and biting in the moment of his
anger but in most cases he will forgive you eventually.
really forgets disagreements
¶ it is not as easy for other types to forgive; they often refrain from
attempting a reconciliation. but the thoracic's forgiveness is not only
spontaneous but genuine.
the alimentive bears no grudges because it is too much trouble. the
thoracic finds it hard to maintain a grudge because he gets over it just
as he gets over everything else. his anger oozes away or he wakes up
some fine morning and finds, like the boy recovering from the
chickenpox, that he "simply hasn't it any more."
diseases he is most susceptible to
¶ acute diseases are the ones chiefly affecting this type. everything in
his organism tends to suddenness and not to sameness.[pg ]
just as he is inclined to get into and out of psychological experiences
quickly, so he is inclined to sudden illnesses and to sudden
recuperations. a thoracic seldom has any kind of chronic ailment. if he
acquires a superabundance of avoirdupois he is in danger of apoplexy.
the combination of extreme thoracic and extreme alimentive tendencies is
the cause of this disease.
likes fancy foods
¶ variety and novelty in food are much enjoyed by this type. the
alimentive likes lots of rich food but he is not so desirous of
varieties or freak dishes. but the thoracic specializes in them.
you can not mention any kind of strange new dish whose investigation
won't appeal to some one in the crowd, and that person is always
somewhat thoracic. it gives him another promise of "newness."
foreign dishes of all kinds depend for their introduction into this
country almost entirely upon these florid patrons. according to the
statements of restauranteurs this type says, "i will try anything once."
many-course dinners, if the food is good, are especially popular with
them.[pg ]
"the trimmings" at dinner
¶ out-of-the-ordinary surroundings in which to dine are always welcome
to this type. the hangings, pictures, and furniture mean much to him.
most people like music at meals but to the thoracic it is almost
indispensable. he is so alive in every nerve, so keyed-up and has such
intense capacity for enjoyment of many things simultaneously that he
demands more than other types. an attentive waiter who ministers to
every movement and anticipates every wish is also a favorite with the
thoracic when out for dinner.
sensitive to his surroundings
¶ colorful surroundings are more necessary to the thoracic than to other
types. the ever-changing fashions in house decorations are welcome
innovations to him. he soon grows tired of a thing regardless of how
much he liked it to begin with.
take notice amongst your friends and you will see that the girl who
changes the furniture all around every few weeks is invariably of this
type. "it makes me feel that i have changed my location and takes the
place of a trip," explained one girl not long ago.[pg ]
wants "something different"
¶ the exact color of hangings, wall-paper, interior decorations and
accessories are matters of vital import to this type. whereas the
alimentives demand comfort, the thoracics ask for "something different,"
something that catches and holds the eye—that makes an instantaneous
impression upon the onlooker and gives him one more thing by which to
remember the personality of the one who lives there.
this type considers his room and home as a part of himself and takes the
pains with them which he bestows upon his clothes.
when he is rich
¶ wealth to the thoracic means unlimited opportunity for achieving the
unusual in everything. his tastes are more extravagant than those of
other types. uncommon works of art are usually found in the homes of
this type. the most extraordinary things from the most extraordinary
places are especial preferences with him.
he carries out his desire for attention here as in everything else and
what he buys will serve that end directly or indirectly.[pg ]
fashion and "flare"
¶ "flare" aptly describes the quality which the pure thoracic desires in
all that touches him and his personality. it must have verve and "go"
and distinctiveness. it must be "the latest" and "the thing."
he is the last type of all to submit to wearing last year's suit,
singing last year's songs, or driving in a last year's model.
likes dash
¶ the thoracic wants everything he wears, drives, lives in or owns to
"get across," to make an impression. the fat man loves comfort above all
else, but the florid man loves distinction.
he does not demand such easy-to-wear garments as the fat man. on the
contrary, he will undergo extreme discomfort if it gives him a
distinctive appearance. he wants his house to be elegant, the grounds
"different," the view unusual.
has color sense
¶ whereas the fat man when furnishing a home devotes his attention to
soft beds, steam heat and plenty of cushioned divans, the thoracic
thinks[pg ] of the chandeliers, the unusual chairs, the pretty front
doorstep, the landscape gardening and the color schemes.
when he is in moderate circumstances
¶ when only well to do this type will be found to have carried out
furnishings and decorations with the taste worthy of much larger purses.
when merely well to do he wears the very best clothes he can possibly
afford, and often a good deal better. this type does not purpose to be
outwitted by life. he tries always to put up a good showing.
when he is poor
¶ the thoracic is seldom poor. he has so much personality, ginger and go
of the sort that is required in the world of today that he usually has a
good position. he may not like the position. but in spite of the fact
that he finds it harder to tolerate disagreeable things than any other
type, he will endure it for he knows that the rewards he is after can
not be had by the down-and-outer.
the natural and normal vanity of the thoracic stands him in hand here
more than in almost any other place in life.[pg ]
the world entertained by them
¶ behind every row of foot-lights you will find more people of this type
than any other. the alimentive manages the world but the thoracic
entertains it.
he comprises more of the dancers, actors, operatic stars and general
entertainers than any other two types combined. in everything save
acrobatics and oratory he holds the platform laurels.
as already pointed out, his adaptability, spontaneity and love of
approval are responsible for this.
his fastidious habits
¶ the thoracic is the most fastidious of all the types. his thin skin
and sensitive nerves make him more conscious of roughness and
slovenliness than others. the result is that he is what is called "more
particular" about his person than are other types. the fat man often
wears an old pair of shoes long past their usefulness, but the florid
man thinks more of the impression he creates than of his own personal
comfort, and will wear the shiniest of patent leathers on the hottest
day if they are the best match for his suit.[pg ]
likes all music
¶ every kind of music is enjoyed by the pure thoracic because he
experiences so many moods.
entertainment he prefers
¶ social affairs of an exclusive order where he wears his "best bib and
tucker" and everybody else does the same, are amongst the favorite
diversions of this type. he makes a favorable impression under such
conditions and is well aware of it.
other reasons for this preference are his brilliant conversational
powers, his charm and his enjoyment of other people and their
view-points. the thoracic is also exceedingly fond of dancing.
enjoys vaudeville
¶ the average thoracic enjoys vaudeville, follies, revues, etc., because
they are full of quick changes of program. he enjoys, as does every
type, certain kinds of movies, but he constitutes no such percentage of
the movie-going audience as some other types.
reading
¶ books and stories that are romantic, adventurous, and different are
the favorites of this type. detective stories are often in high favor
with him also.[pg ]
physical assets
¶ the physical advantages of this type are his quick energy—based on
his wonderful breathing system—and the rich, rapid-flowing blood,
produced by his wonderful heart system.
he is noted for his ability to get "his second wind" and has remarkable
capacity for rising to sudden physical emergencies.
physical liabilities
¶ a tendency to over-excitement and the consequent running down of his
batteries is a physical pitfall often fatal to this type.
favorite sports
¶ hurdling, sprinting, tennis and all sports requiring short, intense
spurts of energy are the ones in which this type excels.
social assets
¶ charm and responsiveness are the chief social assets of the thoracic.
inasmuch as these are the most valuable of all social traits, he has a
better natural start in human relationships than any other type.[pg ]
social liabilities
¶ quick temper, his inflammable nature and appearances of vanity are his
greatest social liabilities. they stand between him and success many
times. he must learn to control them if he desires to reap the full
benefit of his remarkable assets.
emotional assets
¶ instantaneous sympathy and the lack of poisonous inhibitions are the
outstanding emotional assets of this type.
emotional liabilities
¶ impatience, mercurial emotions and the expenditure of too much of his
electricity in every little experience are the tendencies most to be
guarded against.
business assets
¶ that he is a "good mixer" and has the magnetism to interest and
attract others are his most valuable business traits.
business liabilities
¶ an appearance of flightiness and his tendency to hop from one subject
to another, stand in the way of the thoracic's promotion many times.[pg ]
domestic strength
¶ the ability to entertain and please his own family and to give of
himself to them as freely as he gives himself to the world at large, is
one of the most lovable thoracic traits.
domestic weakness
¶ the temperament and temper of this type constitute a real domestic
problem for those who live with them. but they are so forgiving
themselves that it is almost impossible to hold anything against them.
should aim at
¶ the thoracic should aim at making fewer decisions, at finishing what
he starts, and of wasting less energy in unnecessary words and motions.
should avoid
¶ all situations, conditions and people who "slip the belt off the
will," who tend to cut life up into bits by dissipation or
pleasure-seeking, should be avoided by this type because they aggravate
his own weaknesses in that direction.
strong points
¶ personal ambition, adaptability and quick[pg ] physical energy are the
strongest points of the thoracic.
weakest points
¶ too great excitability, irresponsibility and supersensitiveness, are
the weakest points of this type.
how to deal with this type socially
¶ give him esthetic surroundings, encourage him to talk, and respond to
what he says. these are the certain methods for winning him in social
intercourse.
how to deal with this type in business
¶ get his name on the dotted line now, or don't expect it. if he is an
employee let him come into direct contact with people, give his
personality a chance to get business for you, don't forget to praise him
when deserved, and don't pin him down to routine. this type succeeds
best in professions where his personal charm can be capitalized, and
does not belong in any strictly commercial business.[pg ]
remember, the chief distinguishing marks of the thoracic in the order
of their importance, are flushed complexion, high chest and long waist.
any person who has these is largely of the thoracic type, no matter what
other types may be included in his makeup.[pg ]
the muscular type
"the worker"
eople in whom the muscular system is
proportionately larger and more highly developed than any of their other
systems are musculars. this system consists of the muscles of the
organism.
the "lean meat" type
¶ the muscle-system of the human body is simply a co-ordinated,
organized arrangement of layers of lean meat, of which every individual
has a complete set.
an individual's muscles may be small, flabby, deficient in strength or
so thin as to be almost imperceptible but they are always
there—elementary in the infant, full grown in the adult and remnants in
the aged. but they are so smoothly fitted together, so closely knitted
and usually so[pg ] well covered that we seldom realize their complexity or
importance.
in the pure muscular type his muscles are firm and large. such muscles
can not be disguised but seem to stand out all over him.
helpless without them
¶ without them we would be helpless masses of fat and bone; we could not
blink an eye nor lift a finger. yet we are so accustomed to them that we
rarely think of them and seldom give them credit for what they do.
without their wonder-work to adjust the eyes we could not see; without
their power the heart would cease to beat. we can not smile, sob, speak
nor sing without using them. we would have no pianists, violinists,
dancers, aviators, inventors or workers of any kind without them.
everything we put together—from hooks and eyes to skyscrapers—is
planned by our brains but depends for its materialization upon the
muscles of the human body.
how to know him
¶ look at any individual and you will note one of these three
conditions: that his bones seem to be[pg ] covered just by skin and sinews
(which means that he belongs to the fourth type) or thickly padded with
fat (in which case he is largely of the first type) or well upholstered
with firm meat.
in the latter case he is largely muscular, no matter what other types
may be present in his makeup.
in a short time you will be able to tell, at a glance, whether the
padding on an individual is mostly fat or mostly muscle, because fat is
always round and soft while muscle is firm and definite.
physical solidity
¶ a general solidity of structure, as distinguished from the softness of
the alimentive and the resilience of the thoracic, characterizes the
muscular. (see chart )
poke your finger into a fat man's hand and though it makes a dent that
dent puffs back quickly. do the same to the muscular and you will find a
firmness and toughness of fiber that resists but stays there longer once
the dent is made.
not so malleable
¶ this little illustration is typical of the differences between these
two natures throughout their entirety. just as the fat man's face gives
to your touch, he will give in to you more easily than any other
type; but he will go back to the same place sooner and more smoothly
when your pressure is removed.[pg ]
[pg ]
the muscular does not mold so easily, is less suggestible, is less
tractable than the alimentive or thoracic but is less likely to revert
afterwards.
built on the square
¶ "on the square" is a figurative expression usually applying to a moral
tendency. in this sense it is as often possessed by one type as another.
but in a purely literal sense the muscular is actually built on the
square. his whole figure is a combination of squares.
the alimentive is built upon the circle, the thoracic on the kite-shape
but the pure muscular always tends toward a squareness of outline.
we repeat, he is no more "square" morally than any other type, so do not
make the mistake of attributing any more of this virtue to him than to
others.
¶ each type has its own weaknesses and points of strength as
differentiated from other types and these are responsible for most of
the moral differences between people.[pg ]
no type superior morally
¶ since moral weakness comes from type weakness and since each type
possesses about as many weaknesses as the others, it follows that no
type is superior "morally" to any other and no type is morally inferior
to any other.
type and temptation
¶ morality is mostly a matter of how much temptation you can withstand.
every individual in a civilized community is surrounded by temptations
of some kind most of the time. he does not want to yield to any of them.
every man and woman does the best of which his particular type is
capable under a given circumstance.
each individual resists many temptations for which we fail to give him
credit. he yields only to those which make such a strong appeal to his
type that he lacks the power of resistance.
in other words, each person yields to the temptations that prey upon his
particular weaknesses, and what his weaknesses are will depend upon his
type. in the grip of these temptations he may commit anything from
discourtesy to crime[pg ]—according to the strength of the temptation plus
his own leaning in that direction.
on the other hand, certain "immoralities" which appeal strongly to some
types have no attraction whatever for others and these latter get credit
for a virtuousness that has cost them nothing.
praise and punishment
¶ on the other hand, each one of the five human types has certain points
of strength and from these gets its natural "moral" qualities. we spend
a great deal of energy giving praise and blame but when we realize—as
we are doing more and more—that the type of an individual is
responsible for most of his acts, we will give less of both to the
individual and more of both to the creator.
type vs. training
¶ the most that training can do is to brace up the weak spots in us; to
cultivate the strong ones; to teach us to avoid inimical environments;
and to constantly remind us of the penalties we pay whenever we digress.
child training
¶ as this great science of human analysis becomes known the world will
understand for the[pg ] first time "how the other half lives," and why it
lives that way.
we will know why one child just naturally tells fibs while his twin
brother, under identical training, just naturally tells the truth. what
is more to the point we will know this in their childhood and be
prepared to give to each the kind of training which will weed out his
worst and bring out his best.
short and stocky
¶ the extreme muscular type (see chart ) is below medium height, though
one of any height may be largely muscular.
the extreme type, of which we are treating in this chapter, is shorter
and heavier than the average. but his heaviness is due to muscle
instead of fat. he has the appearance of standing firmly, solidly upon
the ground, of being stalwart and strong.
the square-shouldered man
¶ the muscular's shoulders stand out more nearly at right angles than
those of any other type and are much broader in proportion to his
height. the alimentive has sloping shoulders and the thoracic inclines
to high shoulders. but the shoul[pg ]ders of the pure muscular are
straighter and have a squareness where the alimentive's have curves.
this accounts for the fact that most of the square shouldered men you
have known were not tall men, but medium or below medium in height. the
wide square shoulders do not accompany any other pure type, though
naturally they may be present in an individual who is a combination.
has proportionately long arms
¶ the arms of pure musculars are longer in proportion to the body than
the arms of other types. the arms of the alimentive are short for his
body but the extreme muscular's arms are always anywhere from slightly
longer to very much longer than his height would lead you to expect.
the pure muscular head
¶ a "square head" is the first thing you think of when you look at a
pure muscular. his head has no such decided digressions from the normal
as the round head of the alimentive or the kite-shaped head of the
thoracic. it is not high for his body like the thoracic's nor small for
his body like the alimentive's, but is of average proportions.[pg ]
[pg ]
his thick neck
¶ a distinctive feature of this type is his thick neck. it is not fat
like that of the alimentive nor medium long like that of the thoracic
but has unusual muscularity and strength.
this is one of the chief indications of the muscular's strength. a
sturdy neck is one of the most significant indications of physical
prowess and longevity, while the frail neck—of which we shall speak in
connection with the fifth type—is always a sign of the physical frailty
which endangers life. the thickness of his neck may sometimes give you
the impression that the muscular head is small but if you will look
again you will see that it is normal for his bodily size.
his square face
¶ looking at him from directly in front you will see that the muscular's
face gives you an impression of squareness. (see chart ) you will also
notice that his side-head, cheeks and jaw run up and down in such a way
as to give him a right-angled face.
his square jaw
¶ a broad jaw is another characteristic of this type. not only is it
square, looked at from the front,[pg ] but you are pretty sure to note that
the jaw bones, as they proceed downward under the ear, tend to make a
right-angled turn at the corners instead of a rounded curve.
these dimensions tend to give the whole lower part of the muscular's
face a box-like appearance. it is considered becoming to men but robs
its female owners of the delicate, pointed chin so much desired by
women.
the typical muscular hand
¶ notice the hands of the people you meet and you will be surprised to
see how different and how interesting they are. their size, shape and
structure as seen from the back of the hand are especially significant
and tell us much more about the individual's nature than the palm does.
perhaps you have thought that a hand was just a hand. but there are
hands and hands. each pure type has its own and no other is ever seen on
the extreme of that type.
the hand of the muscular, like all the rest of his body, is built in a
series of squares. it runs out from the wrist and down in a straighter
line and tends to right angles. (see chart )[pg ]
the square fingers of this type
¶ "spatulate fingers"—meaning fingers that are square or paddle-shaped
at the tips—are sure indications of a decided muscular tendency.
he may have other types in combination but if his fingers are really
square—"sawed off at the ends" in such a way as to give them large
instead of tapering ends—that person has more than average muscularity
and the activities of his life will tend in the directions referred to
in this chapter.
the manual worker
¶ musculars are the hand-workers of the world. they are the artisans,
craftsmen, the constructors and builders.
we all tend to use most those organs or parts of the body which are
largest and most highly developed. the muscular's hand is
proportionately larger than the hand of any other type. it has more
muscle, that one element without which good hand work is impossible.
so it has followed inevitably that the manual work of the world is done
largely by musculars. their hands are also so much more powerful that
they do not tire easily.[pg ]
the hand of the creative artist
¶ "the artist's hand" and "the artistic hand" are phrases long used but
misused. delicate tapering fingers were supposed in ancient times to
denote artistic ability. the frail curving hand was also supposed to be
a sign of artistic talent.
from the stage of old down to the movies of today the typical artist is
pictured with a slight, slender hand.
this tapering-fingered hand denotes a keen sense of artistic values; a
love of the esthetic, refined and beautiful; and real artistic
appreciation, but not the ability to create.
the "hand arts"
¶ before we explain this, kindly understand that we are speaking only of
those arts which require hand work—and not of such arts as singing,
dancing, or musical composition which could more properly be called
artistic activities. we are referring only to those arts which depend
for their creation upon the human hand—such as painting, architecture,
craftsmanship, cartooning, sculpture, violin, piano, etc.
all these are created by square fingered people.[pg ]
we are too much inclined to think of the products of these arts as being
created out of sheer artistic sense, artistic taste or artistic insight.
but a moment's reflection will show that every tangible artistic
creation is the result of unusual hand work combined with gifted head
work. without a sure, strong, well-knit hand the ideas of the greatest
artists could never have materialized. the lack of such a hand explains
why the esthetic, the artistic-minded and the connoisseur do not
create the beautiful things they appreciate.
head and hand partners
¶ the hand must execute what the brain plans and it must be so perfect a
mechanism for this that it responds to the most elusive inspirations of
the artist. it must be a fifty per cent partner, else its owner will
never produce real art.
no type has this strong, sure, co-ordinated hand-machine to any such
degree as the muscular.
the finger ends, which are of the utmost significance in the creation of
artistic things, must be fitted with well developed muscles of extreme
efficiency or the execution will fall short of the ideal pictured in the
artist's mind.[pg ]
the pure muscular type seldom makes an artist, for, after all, inspired
brain work is the other important element in the creation of art, and
this is the forte of the fifth type. a combination of the fifth type
with the muscular makes most hand artists. a combination of the muscular
and thoracic makes most singers. every hand artist will be found to have
spatulate-fingered hands—in short, muscular hands.
the hand of the famous craftsman, pianist, sculptor and painter, instead
of being more frail and delicate, is always larger and heavier than that
of the average person. such a hand is a certain indication of the
muscular element in that individual's makeup.
his powerful movements
¶ forceful, decisive movements also characterize this type. he is
inclined to go at even the most trivial things with as much force as if
the world depended on it.
recently we were exhibiting a small pencil sharpener to a muscular
friend. it was so sharp that it performed its work without pressure. but
she took hold of it as if it were a piece of artillery and pushed the
pencil into it with all the force she had.[pg ]
when we remonstrated smilingly—for her face and hands are
ultra-square—she said, "but i can't do anything lightly. i just
naturally put that much force into everything."
his forceful walk
¶ heavy, powerful, forceful strides distinguish the walk of this type.
if he has but ten steps to go he will start off as if beginning an
around-the-world marathon.
you hear him coming
¶ all musculars notify people, by their walk, of their approach. they
are unconscious of this loud incisive tread, and most of them will be
surprised to read it here. but their friends will recognize it. the
chances are that they have often spoken of it amongst themselves.
the loud voice
¶ the "steam-calliope voice" belongs almost always to a muscular. he
does his talking just as he does everything else—with all his might.
it is very difficult for the muscular to "tone down" this powerful
voice. his long-suffering friends will testify to this characteristic.[pg ]
his stentorian tones
¶ this loud voice is a serious social handicap to him. his only chance
of compensation for it lies in its use before juries, congregations or
large audiences.
it might be noted here that every great orator has been largely of this
type, and also that his fame came not alone from the things he said but
from the stentorian tones in which he said them.
famous male singers
¶ caruso, john mccormack and all other famous male singers had large
thoracic systems, but in every instance it was combined with a large
muscular development.
the solid sitter
¶ when a muscular sits down he does it as he does everything—with
definiteness and force. he does not spill over as does the alimentive
nor drape himself gracefully like the thoracic, but planks himself as
though he meant business.
activity his keynote
¶ because he is especially built for it the muscular is more active than
any other type. without[pg ] muscles no organism could move itself from the
spot in which it was born.
biology teaches us that the stomach was the first thing evolved. the
original one-call organism possessed but one function—digestion. as
life progressed it became necessary to send nutriment to those parts of
the organism not touched by the stomach.
for the purpose of reaching these suburbs there was involved the
circulatory or thoracic system, and this gave rise, as we have seen in
the previous chapter, to the thoracic type.
movement and development
¶ as time went on movement became necessary, full development not being
possible to any static organism. to meet this need muscles were evolved,
and organic life began to move.
it was only a wiggle at first, but that wiggle has grown till today it
includes every kind of labor, globe trotting and immigration.
the muscular is fitted with the best traveling equipment of any type and
invariably lives a life whose main reactions express these things.
the immigrant muscular
¶ no matter what his work or play the muscular[pg ] will make more moves
during the course of a day than other types. he loves action because his
muscles, being over-equipped for it, keep urging him from within to do
things.
as a result this type makes up most of the immigrants of the world.
italians, poles, greeks, russians, germans and jews are largely of this
type and these are the races furnishing the largest number of foreigners
in america.
inertness irks him
¶ shut up a muscular and you destroy him. his big muscle system cries
out for something to do. he becomes restless, nervous and ill when
confined or compelled to be idle.
the alimentive loves an easy time but the muscular dislikes ease except
when exhausted. even then it is almost impossible to stop him.
must be doing something
¶ "i can't bear to be doing nothing!" you often hear people say. such a
person always has plenty of muscle. musculars want to feel that they are
not wasting time. they must be "up and doing," accomplishing something.
if there is nothing near them that needs doing they are sure to go and
find something.[pg ]
the born worker
¶ work is second nature to this type. he really prefers it.
everyone likes some kind of work when in the mood if it serves a purpose
or an ideal. but the muscular likes work for its own sake—or rather for
the activity's sake.
work palls on the alimentive and monotony on the thoracic, but leisure
is what palls on the muscular. he may have worked ten years without a
vacation and he may imagine he wants a long one, but by the morning of
the third day you will notice he has found a piece of work for himself.
it may be nothing more than hanging the screen door, chopping the wood
or dusting the furniture, but it will furnish him with some kind of
activity.
because he enjoys action for its own sake and because work is only
applied action, this type makes the best worker. he can be trusted to
work harder than any other type.
require less watching
¶ it is no accident that the three-hundred-men gangs of foreign workmen
who dig ditches, tunnels and tubes, construct buildings, railroads and[pg ]
cities work with fewer foremen and supervisors than are ordinarily
required to keep much smaller forces of other employees at their posts.
seldom unemployed
¶ for this reason the muscular is seldom out of work. he is in demand at
the best current wages because he can be depended upon to "keep at it."
¶ while writing this book our windows overlook a public park in one of
america's one-million-population cities. hundreds of unemployed men
sleep there day and night. having occasion to pass through this park
daily for several months it has been interesting to note the types
predominating. hardly one per cent belonged to the muscular type.
likes to do things
¶ because he is such a hard worker this type gets a good deal of praise
and glory just as the fat people, who manage to get out of work, receive
a good deal of blame. yet work is almost as pleasant to the muscular as
leisure is to the alimentive.
the muscular's pugnacity
¶ fighters—those who really enjoy a scrap occasionally—are invariably
musculars. their square[pg ] jaws—the sure sign of great muscularity—are
famous the world over and especially so in these days when war is once
more in fashion.
the next time you look at the front faces of pershing, haig, hindenberg
or even that of your traffic policeman, note the extremely muscular face
and jaw. combat or personal fighting is a matter of muscle-action. being
well equipped for it this type actually enjoys it. that is why he is
oftener in trouble than any other type.
it was no accident that the phrase "big stick" was the slogan of an
almost pure muscular.
loves the strenuous life
¶ "the strenuous life" was another of roosevelt's pet phrases and came
from the natural leanings of his type. the true muscular is naturally
strenuous. because we are prone to advise others to do what we enjoy
doing ourselves it was inevitable that so strenuous a man as t. r.
should advocate wholesale, universal and almost compulsory strenuosity.
we tell others to do certain things because "it will do you good" but
the real reason usually is that we like to do it ourselves.[pg ]
the acrobatic type
¶ the next time you go to a vaudeville show get there in time for the
acrobatics and notice how all the participants are musculars. if there
are any other types taking part please observe that they are secondary
to the acrobats—they catch the handkerchiefs or otherwise act as foils
for the real performers.
all the hard work in the act will be done by musculars. you will find no
better examples of the short, stocky, well-knit pure muscular than here.
you do not need to wait for another show to realize how true this is.
recall the form and height of all the acrobats you have ever seen. you
will remember that there was not one who did not fit the description of
the pure muscular given at the beginning of this chapter.
acrobats always muscular
¶ we once had occasion to refer to this fact in a human analysis class.
one member declared that just that week he had seen a very tall,
unmuscular man performing in an acrobatic act at the orpheum.
knowing that this was impossible, we offered a[pg ] large reward to this
member if he were proven right. we sent to the theater and found the
acrobat in question. he had just finished his act and kindly consented
to come over.
he turned out to be a pure muscular as we had stated. the class member's
mistake came from the fact that the acrobat appeared taller than he
really was. high platforms always give this illusion. furthermore his
partner in the act was of diminutive height and the acrobat looked tall
and slender by contrast.
why they don't do it
¶ to be an acrobat is the ambition of almost every boy. there have been
few who did not dream, while doing those stunts in the haymow on
mother's broomstick, of the glory that should be theirs when they grew
up and performed in red tights for the multitudes.
almost every boy has this ambition because he passes through a stage of
decided muscular development in his early years. but only those who were
born with much larger muscles than the average ever carry out their
dreams. the others soon develop girth or the "sitting still" habit to
the[pg ] point where a cushioned seat in the first row of the parquet looks
much better.
durability in clothes
¶ something that will wear well is what this type asks for when he drops
in to buy a suit. musculars are not parsimonious nor stingy. their
buying the most durable in everything is not so much to save money as
for the purpose of having something they do not need to be afraid to
handle.
likes heavy materials
¶ this type likes heavy, stable materials. whereas the alimentive wants
comfortable clothes and the thoracic distinctive ones the muscular wants
wearable, "everyday" clothes.
he wants the materials to be of the best but he cares less for color
than the thoracic. quality rather than style and plainness rather than
prettiness are his standards in dress.
"making over father's pants for johnnie" is a job muscular women have
excelled in and for which they have become famous. for this type of
mother not only sees to it that father's pants are of the kind of stuff
that won't wear out easily but she has the square, creative hand that
enjoys construction.[pg ]
the plain dresser
¶ simple dresses—blue serge, for instance—are the ones the muscular
woman likes. this type cares little about clothes as ornamentation. he
is intent on getting his desires satisfied by doing things, not by
looking them. he also resents the time and trouble that fashionable
dressing demands. no matter how much money this type has he will not be
inclined to extremes in dress. musculars are not really interested in
clothes for clothes' sake. it is not that this type is unambitious. he
is extremely so, but he is so concentrated on "getting things done" that
he is likely to forget how he looks while doing them.
when a person of this type does take great pains with his clothes it is
always for a purpose, and not because he enjoys preening himself. there
is little of the peacock in the muscular.
a simple soul
¶ musculars are the most democratic of all the types. the thoracic is a
natural aristocrat, and enjoys the feeling of a little innocent
superiority. but musculars often refuse to take advantage of superior
positions gained through wealth or station,[pg ] and are inclined to treat
everybody as an equal. it is almost impossible for this type, even
though he may have become or have been born a millionaire, to "lord it
over" servants or subordinates. he is given to backing democratic
movements of all kinds. this explains why musculars constitute the large
majority in every radical group.
humanness his hobby
¶ being "human" is an ideal to which this type adheres with almost
religious zeal. he likes the commonplace things and is never a follower
after "the thing" though he has no prejudices against it, as the fourth
type has.
an everyday individual
¶ the muscular does not care for "show" and, except when essential to
the success of his aims, seldom does anything for "appearances."
he is not an easy-going companion like the alimentive nor a
scintillating one like the thoracic, but an everyday sort of person.
when in trouble
¶ this type is not given to sliding out of difficulties like the
alimentive nor to being tempor[pg ]arily submerged by them like the
thoracic. he "stands up to them" and backs them down. when in trouble he
acts, instead of merely thinking.
the most practical type
¶ "the practicalist" is often used to describe this type. he is inclined
to look at everything from the standpoint of its practicality and is
neither stingy nor extravagant.
he likes what works
¶ "will it work?" is the question this type puts to everything. if it
won't, though it be the most fascinating or the most diverting thing in
the world, he will take little interest in it.
this type depends mostly upon his own hands and head to make his fortune
for him, and is seldom lured into risking money on things he has not
seen.
the natural efficiency expert
¶ the shortest, surest way is the one this type likes. he is not
inclined to fussiness. he insists on things being done in the most
efficient way and he usually does them that way himself. he is not an
easy man to work for, but quick to reward merit.[pg ] the muscular does not
necessarily demand money nor the things that money buys but he tries to
get the workable out of life.
the property owner
¶ this type likes to have a fair bank account and to give his children a
worth while training. he is less inclined to bedeck them with frills but
he will plan years ahead for their education.
these are not rigid parents like the fourth type, lenient like the
alimentives, nor temperamental with their children like the thoracics,
but practical and very efficient in their parenthood. they are very fond
of their children but do not "spoil" them as often as some of the other
types do.
they bring up their children to work and teach them early in life how to
do things. as a result, the children of this type become useful at an
early age and usually know how to earn a living if necessary.
wants the necessities
¶ the necessities of life are things this type demands and gets. whereas
the alimentive demands the comforts and the thoracic the unusual, the
muscular demands the essentials. he is willing to work for them, so he
usually succeeds.[pg ]
he is not given to rating frills and fripperies as necessities but
demands the things everyday men or women need for everyday existence.
naturally he goes after them with the same force he displays in
everything else.
his heart and soul in things
¶ when some one shows great intensity of action directed toward a
definite end we often say "he puts his heart and soul into it." this
phrase is apropos of almost everything the muscular does. he makes no
half-hearted attempts.
an enthusiast
¶ "enthusiasm does all things" said emerson, and therein explained why
this type accomplishes so much. the reason back of the muscular's
enthusiasm is interesting.
all emotions powerfully affect muscles. a sad thought flits through your
mind and instantly the muscles of your face droop and the corners of
your mouth go down. hundreds of similar illustrations with which you are
already familiar serve to prove how close is the connection between
emotions and muscles. the heart itself is nothing more nor less than a
large, tough, leather-like muscle.[pg ]
possessing the best equipment for expressing emotion, the muscular is
constantly and automatically using it.
therefore he becomes an enthusiast over many things during the course of
his lifetime. this enthusiasm literally burns his way to the things he
wants.
the plain talker
¶ when deeply moved this type talks well. if the mental element is also
strong he can become a good public speaker for he will then have all the
qualifications—a powerful voice, human sympathy, democracy and
simplicity.
in private conversation he is inclined to use the verbal hammers too
much and to be too drastic in his statements, accusations, etc. but he
means what he tells you, no more, and usually not much less.
he avoids long words and complicated phrases even when well educated and
speaks with directness and decisiveness.
straightforward
¶ "straight from the shoulder" might be used to describe the method of
the pure muscular in what[pg ] he does and says. he does not deal in
furbelows, dislikes the superfluous and the superficial. he goes through
life over the shortest roads.
likes the common people
¶ plain folks like himself are the kind this type prefers for friends.
he enjoys them immensely, but does not cultivate as large a number of
them as does the thoracic, nor have as many "bowing acquaintances" as
the alimentive.
snubs the snobs
¶ the snob is disliked by every one but is the especial aversion of this
type. being so democratic himself and living his life along such
commonplace lines, he has no patience with people who imagine they are
better than others or who carry the air of superiority.
the only person therefore whom the muscular is inclined to snub is the
snob. he is not overawed by him and enjoys "taking him down a peg,"
whenever he tries his high and mighty airs on him.
defends the "under dog"
¶ standing by the under dog is a kind of religion with this type. he
glories in fighting for the down[pg ]trodden. this explains why he is so
often a radical. much of this vehemence in radicalism is due to the fact
that he feels he is getting even with the snobs of the world—the
plutocrats—when he furthers the causes of the proletariat.
often on the warpath
¶ to "have it out" with you is the first inclination of this type when
he becomes angry.
he is apt to say atrocious things and to exaggerate his grievances.
everything must yield to his "dander" once it is up. being possessed of
a highly developed fighting equipment, he is like a battleship, with
every gun in place, most of the time.
he is frequently in violent quarrels with his friends, and since he does
not recover from his anger quickly like the thoracic, he often loses
them for life.
the most generous friend
¶ when they like you the musculars are the most abandoned in their
generosity of all the types. they "go the limit" for you, as the
westerner says, and they go it with their money, time, love and
enthusiasm.[pg ]
all types do this for short periods occasionally and for a very few
choice friends. but the muscular often does it for people he scarcely
knows if they strike his fancy or appeal to him.
his heart and his home belong to the stranger almost as completely as to
his family, for he does not feel a stranger to any one. he feels from
the first moment, and acts, as though he had known you always.
this accounts for his democracy, for his success as an orator,
and—sometimes for his being "broke."
not a quick forgiver
¶ but disappoint him in anything he considers vital and he does not
overlook it easily. he finds it especially difficult to forgive people
who take advantage of the generosity he so lavishly extends. but he does
not make his hate a life-long one, as the fourth type does.
with all his own giving to others he seldom takes much from others.
the naturally independent
¶ "standing on his own legs" is a well-known trait of the muscular.
dependence is bred of necessity. this type being able to get for himself
most of[pg ] the things he wants, rarely finds it necessary to call upon
others for assistance.
love of self-government, plus fighting pluck, both of which are inherent
in the muscular irish race, are responsible for the long struggle for
their independence.
likes plain foods
¶ "meat and potatoes" are the favorite diet of the average american
muscular. the alimentive wants richness and sweetness in food, the
thoracic wants variety and daintiness but the muscular wants large
quantities of plain food.
the alimentive specializes in desserts, the thoracic in unusual dishes,
but the muscular wants solid fare. he is so fond of meat it is
practically impossible for him to confine himself to a vegetable diet.
when he is in moderate circumstances
¶ the muscular is most often found in moderate circumstances. he is
rarely far below or far above them. most of the plain, simple, everyday
things he desires can be secured by people of average means. he does not
feel the necessity for becoming a millionaire to obtain comforts like
the alimentive, nor for extravagances like the thoracic.[pg ]
when he is rich
¶ philanthropy marks the expenditures of this type whenever he is rich.
he does not spend as much of his money for possessions but enjoys
investing it in what he deems the real—that is, other human beings.
the most plain and durable things in furnishings, architecture and
service characterize the rich of this type in their homes.
the world's work done by musculars
¶ broadly speaking, the fat man manages the world, the florid man
entertains the world, and the muscular man does the work of the world.
he composes most of the day-laborers, the middle men, the manual and
mechanical toilers the world around, as we have stated before.
he could get out of his hard places into better paid ones if he did not
like activity so well, but lacking the love of ease and show he is
willing to work hard for the necessities of life.
simple habits
¶ the muscular's nature does not demand the exciting, the gregarious or
the food-and-drink things that lead toward laxity.[pg ]
he is seldom a dissipator. he likes to go to bed early, work hard and
make practical progress in his life.
he leads the simple and yet the most strenuous existence of any type.
entertainment he enjoys
¶ plays about plain people, their everyday experiences, hopes and fears
are the kind that interest this type most.
the "problem play" of a decade ago was a prime favorite with him. he
likes everything dealing with these everyday commonplace affairs with
which he is most familiar.
he frequently goes to serious lectures—something the pure alimentive
always avoids—and he especially enjoys them if they deal with the
problem of the here and now.
he cares little for comic opera, vaudeville or revues because he feels
they serve no practical purpose and get him nowhere. this type does not
attend the theater merely to be amused. he goes for light on his
everyday experiences and usually considers time wasted that is spent
solely on entertainment.[pg ]
music he likes
¶ band music, stirring tunes and all music with "go" to it appeals to
this type.
reading
¶ true stories, news and the sport page are the favorite newspaper
reading of the muscular. he does not take to sentimental stories so much
as the alimentive, nor to adventure so much as the thoracic but sticks
to practical subjects almost exclusively.
being active most of his waking hours, and strenuously active at that,
the muscular is often too tired at night to read anything.
his favorite sports
¶ the most violent sports are popular with this type. football,
baseball, handball, tennis, rowing and pugilism are his preferences. all
experts in these lines are largely muscular.
physical assets
¶ his wonderful muscular development, upon which depends so much of
life's happiness—since accomplishment is measured so largely
thereby—is the greatest physical asset of this type. with it he[pg ] can
accomplish almost anything of which his mind can conceive.
he is capable of endless effort, does not tire easily, and because of
his directness makes his work count to the utmost of his mental
capacity.
physical liabilities
¶ a tendency to overwork is the chief physical pitfall of this type. the
disease to which he is most susceptible is rheumatism. but owing to his
love of activity he exercises more than any other type and thus
forestalls many diseases.
social assets
¶ his generosity is the strongest social asset of the muscular. he is
usually straightforward and sincere and thereby gains the confidence of
those who meet him.
social liabilities
¶ his loud voice and his plain ways are the disadvantages under which
this type labors in social intercourse. he needs polishing and is not
inclined to take it. his pugnacity is also a severe drawback.
emotional assets
¶ understanding, enthusiasm and warmth of[pg ] heart are the emotional
qualities which help to make him the public leader he so often is. these
have made him the "born orator," the radical and the reformer of all
ages.
emotional liabilities
¶ his tendency to anger and combat are shackles that seriously handicap
him. many times these lose him the big opportunities which his splendid
traits might obtain for him.
business assets
¶ efficiency and willingness to work hard and long are the greatest
business assets of this type.
business liabilities
¶ pugnacity over trifles costs the average muscular many business
chances. he has to fight out every issue and while he is doing it the
other fellow closes the deal.
he is inclined to argue at great length. this helps him as a lawyer or
speaker but it hurts him in business. curbing his combativeness in
business should be one of his chief aims.
domestic strength
¶ practical protection for the future is the greatest[pg ] gift of the
average muscular to his family. he is not as lenient with his children
as is the alimentive nor as effusive as the thoracic, but he usually
lays by something for their future.
domestic weakness
¶ cruel, angry words do the muscular much harm in his family life. they
cause his nearest and dearest to hold against him the resentments that
follow.
should aim at
¶ taking more frequent vacations, relaxing each day, and curbing his
pugnacity should be the special aims of this type.
should avoid
¶ superficial and quarrelsome people, all situations requiring pretence,
and everything that confines and restricts his physical activity should
be avoided by this type.
strongest points
¶ democracy, industry and great physical strength are the strongest
points of this type.
weakest points
¶ inclination to overwork and to fight constitute the muscular's two
weakest links.[pg ]
how to deal with this type socially
¶ don't put on airs nor expect him to when you are meeting this type
socially. be straightforward and genuine with him if you would win him.
how to deal with this type in business
¶ remember, this type is inclined to be efficient and democratic and you
had better be the same if you wish to succeed with him in business.
he is intensely resentful of the man who tries to put anything over on
him; and demands efficiency. so when you promise him a thing see to it
that you deliver the goods and for the price stated. he does not mind
paying a good price if he knows it in the beginning, but beware of
raising it afterwards. the muscular is serious in business, not a
jollier like the alimentive, nor a thriller like the thoracic, and he
wants you to be the same.
[pg ]
remember, the chief distinguishing marks of the muscular, in the order
of their importance, are large, firm muscles, a square jaw and square
hands. any person who has these is largely of the muscular type, no
matter what other types may be included in his makeup.
[pg ]
the osseous type
"the stayer"
en and women in whom the osseous or bony framework of the body is more
highly developed than any other system are called the osseous type.
this system consists of the bones of the body and makes what we call the
skeleton.
just as the previous systems were developed during man's biological
evolution for purposes serving the needs of the organism—first, a
stomach-sack, then a freight system in the form of arteries to carry the
food to remoter parts of the body, and later muscles with which to move
itself about—so this bony scaffolding was developed to hold the body
upright and better enable it to defend and assert itself.[pg ]
man is a creature who, in spite of his height, walks erect. he can so do
only by means of the[pg ] support given him by his bony framework. the
human body is like a tall building—the muscles are like the mortar and
plaster, the bones are like the steel framework around which everything
else is built and without which the structure could not stand upright.
how to know him
¶ prominent ankles, wrists, knuckles and elbows are sure signs that such
an individual has a large osseous or bony element in his makeup.
when you look at any person you quickly discern whether fat, bone or
muscle predominates in his construction. if fat predominates he leans
toward the alimentive, no matter what other types he may have in
combination; if firm, well-defined muscles are conspicuous, he is
largely muscular; but if his bones are proportionately large for his
body he has much of the osseous type in his makeup.
the "raw-boned" man
¶ "raw-boned" exactly describes the appearance of the extreme osseous.
(see chart )
such a man is a contrast to others in any group and a figure with which
all of us are familiar. but that[pg ] his inner nature differs as widely
from others as his external appearance differs from theirs is something
only recently discovered.
as we proceed through this chapter you will be interested to note how
every trait attributed to this type applies with absolute accuracy to
every extremely raw-boned, angular person you have ever known. you will
also notice how these traits have predominated in every person whose
bones were large for his body.
though this type was the last to be classified by science it is the most
extreme of them all.
physical rigidity
¶ an impression of physical rigidity is given by the extreme osseous.
such a man or woman looks stable, unchanging, immovable—as though he
could take a stand and keep to it through thick and thin.
so vividly do very tall, angular, raw-boned people convey this
impression that they are seldom approached by beggars, barked at by
street vendors, or told to "step lively."
his size looks formidable
¶ the power of his physique is evident to all who look at him. the
strength indicated by his large[pg ] joints, angular hands and general bulk
intuitively warns others to let this kind of person alone.
he is therefore unmolested for the most part, whether he walks down the
streets of his home town or wanders the byways of dangerous vicinities.
his ruggedness
¶ this type also looks rugged. he reminds us of "the rugged rockies." he
appears firm, fixed, impassive—as though everything about him was
permanent.
externals are not accidental; they always correspond to the internal
nature in every form of life. and it is not accidental that the osseous
looks all of these things. he is all of them as definitely as they can
be expressed in human nature.
the steady man
¶ of all human types the osseous is the most dependable and reliable.
the phrases, "that man is steady," "never flies off the handle," "always
the same," etc., are invariably used concerning those of more than
average bony structure.
immovability his keynote
¶ the keynote of the bony man's whole nature—mental, physical and
moral—is immovability.[pg ]
once he settles into a place of any kind—a town, a home, or even a
chair—he is disinclined to move. he does not settle as quickly as other
types but when he does it is for a longer stay.
think how different he is from others in this psychological trait and
how it coincides exactly with his physiological structure.
the fat man lets you make temporary dents in his plans just as you make
them in a piece of fat meat. but the bony man is exactly the opposite,
just as bone is difficult to twist, or turn, or alter in any way. it
takes a long time and much effort—but once it is changed it is there
for good.
the "six-footer"
¶ because any individual's height is determined by his skeleton, extreme
tallness is a sign of a larger than average bony structure. the extreme
osseous is therefore tall.
but you must remember that large joints are more significant than
height. even when found in short people they indicate a large osseous
tendency.
large bones for his body
¶ so bear in mind that any person whose bones are large for his body
is somewhat of the osseous[pg ] type, regardless of whether he is short or
tall and regardless of how much fat or muscle he may have. the
large-jointed person when fat is an osseous-alimentive. a large-jointed
man of muscle would be an osseous-muscular.
the "small osseous"
¶ a very short person then may be predominantly osseous if his bones are
proportionately large for his body. such an individual is called a
"small osseous."
a head that is high for his body and inclines to be straight up and down
goes with the extreme osseous type. (see chart ) it does not resemble a
sphere like the alimentive, is not kite-shaped like the thoracic, nor
square like the muscular. it is higher than any of the others, stands on
a longer, more angular neck, and his "adam's apple" is usually in
evidence.
the pioneer type
¶ like each of the other types, the osseous is a result of a certain
environment. rigorous, remote regions require just such people, and
these finally gave rise to this stoical nature. the outposts of
civilization are responsible for his evolution.[pg ]
[pg ]
pioneering, with its hardship, its menacing cold and dearth of comforts,
in far countries at last produced a man who could stand them, who could
"live through" almost anything and still dominate his surroundings.
not a "softie"
¶ the osseous does not give way to his feelings. he keeps his griefs,
sorrows, ambitions and most of his real opinions to himself. he is the
farthest from a "softie" of any type.
if you desire to know at once what kind of person the osseous is, put
the alimentive and thoracic types together and mix them thoroughly. the
osseous is the opposite of that mixture.
each and every trait he possesses is one whose exact opposite you will
find in one or the other of these first two types.
consistency in types
¶ as we go on in this chapter you will see why all kinds of people make
up the world, for nature has outdone herself in the distinctions between
the five human types.
each type is made up of certain groups of traits with which we have come
in contact all our lives[pg ] but which we have never classified; and each
"set" of traits comprising a type has a consistency which nothing less
than mother nature could have produced. you will be interested to see
how accurate are the statements concerning each type and how they are
proven again and again in every type you associate with.
guesswork is no longer necessary in the sizing up of strangers. you can
know them better than their mothers know them if you will get these
nutshells of facts clearly in your mind and then apply them.
his high cheek bones
¶ cheek bones standing higher than the average are always indicative
either of a large thoracic or a large osseous element.
if the distance between the cheeks is so wide as to make this the widest
section of the face, it is probable that the person is more thoracic
than osseous. but if his face is narrow across the cheek bones, and
especially if it runs perpendicularly down to the jaw-corners from that
point instead of tapering, the person is large of the osseous type.
built on the oblong
¶ an oblong is what the osseous brings to mind.[pg ] his body outlines
approximate the oblong—a squareness plus length. he is full of right
angles and sharp corners. (see chart )
his face is built on the oblong (see chart ) and if you will notice the
side-head of the next osseous man you meet you will see that even a side
view presents more nearly the appearance of the oblong than of any other
geometrical figure.
the oblong hand
¶ "the gnarled hand" well describes that of the osseous. the hand
outlines of this type also approximate the oblong. (see chart ) it runs
straight down instead of tapering when the fingers are held close
together.
the hand of the osseous matches his body, head and face. it is bony,
angular, large-jointed and as rigid as it looks. the inflexibility of
his hand is always apparent in his handshake.
knotty fingers
¶ knotty fingers characterize the hands of this type. their irregular
appearance comes from the size of the joints which are large, in keeping
with all the joints running throughout his organism.
everything in one of nature's creatures matches[pg ] the other parts.
agassiz, the great naturalist, when given the scale of a fish could
reconstruct for you the complete organism of the type of fish from which
it came. give a tree-leaf to a botanist and he will reconstruct the
size, shape, structure and color of the tree back of it. he will
describe to you its native environment and its functions; what its bark,
blossoms and branches look like and what to do to make it grow.
no guesswork in nature
¶ nature has no accidents. with her everything is organized, everything
has a purpose, and every part of a thing, inside and out, matches the
whole. so the hand of the osseous and the face of the osseous match the
body and head.
this is also true of every other type. the alimentive has small, fat,
dimpled hands and feet like his body; the thoracic has tapering hands
and feet to match his face and body; the muscular's body, hands and feet
are all square; but the osseous has a bony body, so his hands and feet
are equally bony.
the man of slow movements
¶ "he is too slow for me," you have heard some one say of another.
perhaps you heard it said today.[pg ] review the outward appearance of all
the people you know who have this reputation, from those of your
earliest childhood down to that person of whom it was spoken today—and
you will find that every one of them resembled the bony type we have
just been describing.
look back and call to mind the appearance of all the "rapid" ones and
you will find that in every case they possessed high color, high chests
or high-bridged noses. take another look for the easy-going amenable
ones, and see how plump they all were!
the straight-laced
¶ none of these things "just happened." they are the result of the law
of cause and effect. the connection between external and internal traits
is becoming clearer every day and reveals some very unexpected things.
one that has been discovered very recently is that the straight-faced
are the straight-laced. notice for yourself and you will find that every
person who is really "straight-laced" is a person with a straight
face—that is, a face with straighter up-and-down lines than the
average.
think back over those you have known who come[pg ] under this heading and
you will find no actually round-faced people amongst them.
no matter how sanctimonious, religious or correct a person may act when
his position or the occasion demands it, if he has a round, "moon" face
he is not really straight-laced at heart. any one who knows him well
enough to know his real nature will tell you so.
the naturally conventional
¶ the "born puritan," the ascetic, and the naturally conventional person
is, on the other hand, invariably an individual of more severe facial
outlines.
this person may be in an unconventional position; your straight-faced,
severe-lined person may be a gambler, a boot-legger, or follow any other
line defying the conventions; but he is at heart a conservative after
all. for instance, you will always find, when you know him, that he does
things in a way that is very conventional to him. that is, he has
decided standards, rules, habits and requirements, and he clings rigidly
to them in the transaction of his business, regardless of how lax the
business itself may be.[pg ]
"a certain way of doing things" means as much to him, at heart, as it
means little to the circular-faced people.
systematic and methodical
¶ "a place for everything and everything in its place" is a rule
preached and practised by people of this type.
the osseous person does not mislay his things. he knows so well where
they are that he can "go straight to them in the dark." such a man is
careful of his tools and keeps his work-bench or desk "shipshape." a
woman of this type is an excellent housekeeper. her sewing basket,
dresser drawers and pantry shelves are all systematically arranged in
apple-pie order.
the typical new england housewife, who washes on mondays, irons on
tuesdays and bakes on saturdays for forty years, is a direct descendant
of the puritans, most of whom belong to this bony, pioneering type.
the stiff sitter
¶ extremely osseous people are inclined to be somewhat formal in their
movements. they make fewer motions than any other type. they do not[pg ]
wave their hands or arms about when talking and are almost devoid of
gesticulation of any kind. they sit upright instead of slumping down in
their chairs, except when tall and lanky, and usually prefer
"straight-backs" to rockers.
the osseous walk
¶ the extremely raw-boned person has also a formal gait. his walk, like
all his other movements, is inclined to be deliberate and somewhat
mechanical.
¶ nothing about the five types is more interesting than the walk which
distinguishes each. the alimentive undulates or rolls along; the
thoracic is an impulsive walker, and the muscular is forceful in his
walk. but the osseous walks mechanically, deliberately, and refuses to
hurry or speed up.
the naturally poised
¶ the osseous has more natural poise than any other type.
he is not impressionable, excitable or arousable. things do not "stir
him up" as they do other people. he is more self-contained,
self-controlled and self-sufficient than any other. he is not easily
carried off his feet and seldom yields to impulse. it is difficult to
get him to do anything on the spur[pg ] of the moment. he usually has his
evenings, sundays and vacations all planned in advance and won't change
his schedule.
not given to "nerves"
¶ literally as well as figuratively the osseous is not a man of
"nerves." every fiber of his being is less susceptible to outside
stimuli than that of other types. in this he is the exact opposite of
the thoracic whose nerves, as we have pointed out, are so finely
organized that he is hypersensitive.
resists change
¶ osseous people do not change anything, from their hair dress to their
minds, any oftener than necessary. when they do, it is for what they
consider overpoweringly good reasons.
these people are not flighty. they have their work, their time and their
lives laid out systematically and do not allow trivialities to upset
them. they take a longer time to deliberate on a proposed line of
action, but once they have made a decision, adhere to it with much
greater tenacity than any other type.
the constant
¶ people of this type are not fickle nor flirtatious.[pg ] they love few;
but once having become enamored are not easily turned aside. it is this
type that remains true to one love through many years, sometimes for
life.
the implacable
¶ the osseous are not prone to sudden outbursts of temper. but they have
the unbending kind when it is aroused.
never forgiving and never forgetting is a trait of these people as
contrasted with the thoracic.
the alimentive avoids those he does not like and forgets them because it
is too much bother to hate; the thoracic flames up one moment and
forgives the next; the muscular takes it out in a fight then and there,
or argues with you about it.
but the osseous despises, hates and loathes—and keeps on for years
after every one else has forgotten all about it. the "rock-bound
puritan" type, as stony as the new england land from which it gets its
living, is always bony. the implacable father who turns his child away
from home, with orders "never to darken his door again," always has a
lot of bone in his structure. those who refuse to be softened into
forgiveness by the years are always of this type.[pg ]
not adaptable
¶ it is difficult for the osseous to "fit in." he is not adaptable and
in this is once again the opposite of the thoracic. it is impossible for
him to adjust himself quickly to people or places.
because he is unyielding, unbending and unadjustable he is called "sot
in his ways."
he should not be misjudged for this inadaptability, however, for it is
as natural to him as smoothness is to the alimentive and impulsiveness
to the thoracic. he is made that way and is no more to blame for it than
you are for having brown eyes instead of blue.
the one-track man
¶ "single-track minds" are characteristic of this type. they get an idea
or an attitude and it is there to stay. they think the same things for
many years and follow a few definite lines of action most of their
lives.
but it is to be remembered in this connection that this type often
accomplishes more through his intensive concentration than more
versatile types. while they follow many by-paths in search of their goal
the osseous sticks to the main track.[pg ]
the born specialist
¶ "this one thing i do," is a motto of the osseous. they are the least
versatile of any type and do not like to jump from one kind of work to
another.
they prefer to do one thing at a time, do it well and finish it before
starting anything else. because of this the osseous stars in
specialities.
dislikes many irons in the fire
¶ the man who likes many irons in the fire is never an osseous. to have
more than one problem before him at one time makes him irritable, upset
and exasperated.
the most dependable type
¶ the unchangingness which handicaps the osseous in so many ways is
responsible for one very admirable trait. that trait is dependability.
the osseous is reliable. he can be taken at his word more often than any
other type, for he lives up to it with greater care.
always on time
¶ when an osseous person says, "i will meet you at four o'clock at the
corner of main and[pg ] market," he will arrive at main and market at four
o'clock. he will not come straggling along, nor plead interruptions, nor
give excuses. he will be on the exact spot at the exact hour.
in this he is again a contrast to the first two types. an alimentive man
will roll into the offing at a quarter, or more likely, a half hour past
the time, smilingly apologize and be so naive you forgive and let it go
at that.
the thoracic will arrive anywhere from five after four to six o'clock,
drown you in a thrilling narrative of just how it all happened, and
never give you a chance to voice your anger till he has smoothed it all
out of you.
an exacting man
¶ but the osseous is disdainful of such tactics and you had better
beware of using them on him. he is dependable himself and demands it of
others—a little trait all of us have regarding our own particular
virtues.
likes responsibility
¶ responsibility, if it does not entail too many different kinds of
thought and work, is enjoyed by the osseous.[pg ]
he can be given a task, a job, a position and he will attend to it.
entrust him with a commission of any kind, from getting you a certain
kind of thread to discovering the north pole, and he will come pretty
near carrying it out, if he undertakes it.
finishes what he starts
if an osseous decides to do a piece of work for you you can go ahead and
forget all about it. no need to advise, urge, watch, inspire, coax and
cajole him to keep him at it. he prefers to keep at a thing if he starts
it himself. you may have to hurry him but you will not have to watch him
in order to know he is sticking to his task. this type starts few things
but he brings those few to a pretty successful conclusion.
the martyr of the ages
¶ "died for a cause" has been said of many people, but those people have
in every known instance been possessed of a larger-than-average bony
structure.
¶ the pure alimentive seldom troubles his head about causes. the
thoracic is the type that lives chiefly for the pleasure of the moment
and the adventures of life. the muscular fights hard and works hard for
various movements.[pg ]
but it is the osseous who dies for his beliefs.
it is the osseous or one who is largely of this type who languishes in
prison through long years, refusing to retract.
he is enabled to do this because the ostracism, jibes and criticism with
which other types are finally cowed, have little effect upon him. on the
contrary, opposition of any kind whets his determination and makes him
keep on harder than ever.
takes the opposite side
¶ "if you want him to do a thing, tell him to do the opposite," is a
well-known rule supposed to work with certain kinds of people.
you have wondered why it sometimes worked and sometimes didn't, but it
is no mystery to the student of human analysis.
when it worked, the person you tried it on was an osseous or one largely
osseous in type; and when it didn't he was of some other type.
"contrary?" complained a man of a bony neighbor recently, "contrary is
his middle name."
"i am open to conviction but i would like to see the man who could
convince me!" is always said by a man whose type you will be sure to
recognize.[pg ]
an "againster"
¶ "i don't know what it is but i'm against it," is the inside mental
attitude of the extremely raw-boned, angular man or woman.
they often, unconsciously, refrain from making a decision about a thing
till the other fellow makes his. that settles it; they take the other
side.
think back over your school-days and call to mind the visage and bodily
shape of the boy who was always on the opposite side, who just naturally
disagreed, who "stood out" against the others. he was a bony lad every
time.
remember the "fatty" with a face like a full moon? did he do such
things? he did not. he was amenable, easy-going, good natured, and
didn't care how the discussion came out, so long as it didn't delay the
lunch hour.
remember the boy or girl who had the pick of the school for company
whenever there was a party, who danced well and was so sparkling that
you always felt like a pebble competing against a diamond when they were
around? that boy or girl had a high chest, or high color, or a
high-bridged nose—and usually all three.
but the one you couldn't persuade, who couldn't[pg ] be won over, who
refused to give in, who held up all the unanimous votes till everybody
was disgusted with him, and who rather gloried in the distinction—that
boy had big bones and a square jaw—the proof that he was a combination
of the osseous and muscular types.
the human balance wheel
¶ to keep the rest of the world from running away with itself, to
prevent precipitous changes in laws, customs and traditions, has always
been one of the functions performed for society by the bony people.
these people are seldom over-persuaded, and being able to retain a
perpendicular position while the rest of the world is being swayed this
way and that, they act as society's balance wheel.
the osseous changes after a while, but it is a long while, and by the
time he does, the rest of the world has marched on to something new
which he opposes in its turn.
wears same style ten years
¶ even the clothes worn by this type tell the same story. styles may
come and styles may go, but the osseous goes on forever wearing the
same[pg ] lines and the same general fashions he wore ten years before. if
you will recall the men who continued wearing loose, roomy suits long
after the "skin-tight" fashions came in, or the women who kept to long,
full skirts when short ones were the vogue you will note that every one
of them had large joints or long faces.
bony people find a kind of collar or hat that just suits, and to that
hat and that collar they will stick for twenty years!
disdains the fashions
¶ in every city, neighborhood and country crossroads there is always
somebody who defies the styles of today by wearing the styles of ten
years ago.
every such person is a bony individual—never under any circumstances a
moon-faced, round-bodied one. in every case you will find that his face
is longer, his nose is longer, or his jaw and hands are longer than the
average—all osseous indications.
when he is rich
¶ the bony man's adherence to one style or to one garment is not
primarily because he wishes to save money, though saving money is an
item that[pg ] he never overlooks. it is due rather to his inability to
change anything about himself in accordance with outside influence until
a long time has elapsed.
doesn't spend money lavishly
¶ the osseous is, as stated at the head of this chapter, a "stayer" and
this applies to everything he wears, thinks, says, believes, and to the
way he carries on every activity of his life.
no matter how rich he may be he will not buy one kind of car today and
another tomorrow, nor one house this week and another in six weeks.
he uses his money, as all of us do, to maintain his type-habits and to
give freer rein to them, not to change them to any extent. this type
likes sameness. he likes to "get acquainted" with a thing. he never
takes up fads and is the most conservative of all types. unlike the
thoracic, he avoids extremes in everything and dislikes anything
savoring of the "showy" or conspicuous.
not a social star
¶ because he dislikes display, refuses to yield to the new fangled
fashions of polite society and finds it hard to adapt himself to people,
the man of this type is seldom a social success.[pg ]
he is the least of a "ladies' man" of all the types. the osseous woman
is even less disposed to social life than the osseous man because the
business and professional demands, which compel men of this type to
mingle with their fellows, are less urgent with her.
likes the same food
¶ the same "yesterday, today and forever" is the kind of food preferred
by this type. he seldom orders anything new. the tried and true things
he has eaten for twenty-five years are his favorites and it is almost
impossible to win him away from them. "i have had bread and milk for
supper every sunday night for thirty years," a bony man said to us not
long ago.
means what he says
¶ the osseous does not flatter and seldom praises. even when he would
like to, the words do not come easily. but when he does give you a
compliment you may know he means it. he is incisive and specific—a
little too much so to grace modern social intercourse where so much is
froth.
a man of few words
¶ a man of few words is always and invariably a[pg ] man whose bones are
large for his body. the fat man uses up a great many pleasant, suave,
merry, harmless words; the thoracic inundates you with conversation; the
muscular argues, declares and states; but the osseous alone is sparing
of his words.
the hoarder
¶ bony people are never lavish with anything. they do not waste anything
nor throw anything away. these are the people who save things and store
them away for years against the day when they may find some use for
them. when they do part with them it is always to pass them on "where
they will do some one some good."
careful of money
¶ you never saw a stingy fat man in your life. imagine a
two-hundred-pound miser! neither have you ever seen a really stingy man
who was red-faced and high-chested. nor have you ever found a real
muscular who was a "tightwad."
but you have known some people who were pretty close with their money.
and every one of them was inclined to boniness.
when he is poor
¶ bony men are seldom "broke" for they are[pg ] more careful of expenditures
than any other type. even when they receive small salaries this type of
person always has something laid by. but the extreme osseous never makes
a million. the same caution which prevents his spending much money also
prevents the plunges that make big money.
¶ the osseous cares more for money than any one else. this is what has
enabled him, when combined with some other type, to be so successful in
banking—a business where you risk the other man's money, not your own.
the extreme osseous is never lax or extravagant with his money no matter
how much he has. he never believes in paying any more for a thing than
is necessary. take note of the men who carry purses for silver instead
of letting their change lie loose in their pockets. they are bony every
time! fat people and florid people are the ones who let their greenbacks
fall on the floor while paying the cashier!
fear of the future
¶ "the rainy day" doesn't worry the fat people or the florid ones, but
it is seldom out of the consciousness of the bony men and women. so they
cling to their twenty-dollar-a-week clerkships for[pg ] years because they
are afraid to tackle anything entailing risk.
pays his bills
¶ "i had rather trust a bony man than any other kind," is what the
credit experts have told us. "other things being equal, he is the most
reliable type in money matters, and pays his bills more promptly."
¶ the bony man is one who seldom approaches the credit man, however. he
usually has enough to get the few things he really wants and if not he
waits till he has.
extremely bony husbands give their wives smaller allowances in
proportion to their total income than any other type, and because they
are systematic themselves they are more likely to ask for reports and
itemizations as to where it goes.
the fat husbands and the florid husbands are the ones who give their
wives their last cent and never ask what becomes of it.
the repressed man
¶ the osseous man or woman is always somewhat repressed. unlike the
thoracic, who uncorks and bubbles like a champagne bottle, he keeps the
lid on his feelings.[pg ]
bony people are always more reticent than others. they invariably tell
less of their private or personal affairs. one may live across the hall
from a bony man for years without knowing much about him. he is as
secretive as the thoracic is confiding and as guarded as the alimentive
is naive.
loyal to his few friends
¶ "once your friend always your friend" can be said about the osseous
oftener than any other type.
¶ the osseous does not make friends easily and is not a "mixer" but
keeps his friends for many years. he "takes to" very few people but is
exceedingly loyal to those of his choice.
the "salt of the earth"
¶ people of the osseous type say little, they do little for you and they
do not gush—but they are always there when you need them and "always
the same." they write few letters to you when away, and use few words
and little paper when they do. they are likely to fill every page, to
write neatly, to waste no margins and to avoid flourishes. their letters
seldom require an extra stamp.
plans ahead
foresight, laying plans far into the future, and[pg ] keeping an eye out for
breakers ahead, financially and otherwise, are tendencies which come
natural to the osseous.
he does not like to wait until the last moment to do a thing. he
dislikes unexpectedness and emergencies of any kind. he is always
prepared. for instance a bony person will think out every move of a long
journey before boarding his train. weeks in advance he will have the
schedule marked and put away in his coat pocket—and he knows just which
coat he is going to wear too!
the longest lived
¶ the osseous lives longer than any other type, for two reasons. the
first is that his lack of "nerves" saves him from running down his
batteries. he seldom becomes excited and does not exhaust himself in
emotional orgies.
the second is that he habitually under-eats—usually because he does not
care so much for food as the first three types, but quite often because
he prefers to save the money.
people he dislikes
¶ the bony man does not like people who try to speed him up, hurry him,
or make him change[pg ] his habits. flashy people irritate him. but his
worst aversions are the people who try to dictate to him. this type can
not be driven. the only way to handle him is to let him think he is
having his own way.
likes the submissive
¶ amenable people who never interfere with him yet lend themselves to
his plans, desires and eccentricities are the favorites of this type.
diseases he is most susceptible to
¶ no diseases can be said to strike the osseous more frequently than any
other type.
but moodiness, fear—especially financial fear—long-sustained hatreds
and resentments, and lack of change are indirectly responsible for those
diseases which bring about the end, in the majority of cases.
music he likes
¶ martial, classical music and ballads are favorites with the osseous.
old-time tunes and songs appeal to him strongly.
jazz, which the alimentive loves, is disliked by most bony people.
reading he prefers
¶ only a few kinds of reading, a few favorite[pg ] subjects and a few
favorite authors are indulged in by this type.
he will read as long as twenty-five years on one subject, master it and
ignore practically everything else. when he becomes enamored of an
author he reads everything he writes.
reading that points directly to some particular thing he is really
interested in makes up many of his books and magazines.
he is the kind of man who reads the same newspaper for half a century.
physical assets
¶ his great endurance, capacity for withstanding hardship, indifference
to weather, and his sane, under-eating habits are the chief physical
assets of this type.
physical liabilities
¶ this type has no physical characteristics which can be called
liabilities except the tendency to chronic diseases. even in this he
runs true to form—slow to acquire and slow to cure.
his favorite sports
¶ hiking and golf are the favorite sports of this[pg ] type because these
demand no sudden spurts of energy. he likes them because they can be
carried on with deliberation and independence. he does not care for any
sport involving team work or quick responses to other players. except
when combined with the thoracic type he especially avoids tennis.
favorite entertainments
¶ serious plays in which his favorite actors appear are the
entertainments preferred by this type. he cares least of all for
vaudeville.
social assets
¶ the osseous has no traits which can properly be called social assets.
his general uprightness comes nearest to standing him in good stead
socially, however.
social liabilities
¶ stiffness, reticence, physical awkwardness and the inability to pose
or to praise are the chief social handicaps of this type.
emotional assets
¶ the osseous is not emotional and can not be said to possess any assets
that are purely emotional.[pg ]
emotional liabilities
¶ the lack of emotional fervor and enthusiasm prevents this type from
impressing others.
business assets
¶ keeping his word, orderliness and system are the chief business assets
of this type.
business liabilities
¶ a disinclination to mix, the inability to adapt himself to his patrons
and a tendency to hold people too rigidly to account are the business
handicaps of the osseous.
domestic strength
¶ constancy and faithfulness are his chief domestic assets.
domestic weaknesses
¶ tightness with money, a tendency to be too exacting and dictatorial,
and to fail to show affection are the things that frequently prevent
marriage for the osseous and endanger it when he does marry.
should aim at
¶ the osseous should aim at being more adjustable to people and to his
environment in general.[pg ] he should try to take a greater interest in
others and then show it.
should avoid
¶ indifference and the display of it, solitude and too few interests are
things the osseous needs to avoid.
his strong points
¶ dependability, honesty, economy, faithfulness and his capacity for
finishing what he starts are the strongest points of this type.
his weakest points
¶ stubbornness, obstinacy, slowness, over-cautiousness, coldness and a
tendency to stinginess are the weakest links in people of the extreme
osseous type.
how to deal with this type socially
¶ there is little to be done with the osseous when you meet him socially
except to let him do what he wants to do.
don't interfere with him if you want him to like you.
how to deal with this type in business
¶ as an employee, give him responsibility and then let him alone to do
it his way.[pg ]
then keep your hands off.
don't give him constant advice; don't try to drive him.
let him be as systematic as he likes.
when dealing with him in other business ways rely on him and let him
know you admire his dependability.
[pg ]
remember, the distinguishing marks of the osseous, in the order of
their importance, are proportionately large bones for the body,
prominent joints and a long face. any person who has these is largely of
the osseous type no matter what other types may be included in his
makeup.
[pg ]
the cerebral type
"the thinker"
ll those in whom the nervous system is more highly developed than any
other are cerebrals.
this system consists of the brain and nerves. the name comes from the
cerebrum or thinking part of the brain.
meditation, imagining, dreaming, visualizing and all voluntary mental
processes take place in the cerebrum, or brain, as we shall hereinafter
call it. the brain is the headquarters of the nervous system—its "home
office"—just as the stomach is the home office of the alimentive system
and the heart and lungs the home office of the thoracic.
your freight system
¶ the thoracic system may be compared to a great freight system, with
each of its tributaries[pg ]—from the main trunk arteries down to the
tiniest blood vessels—starting from the heart and carrying its cargo of
blood to every part of the body by means of the power furnished by the
lungs.
your telegraph system
¶ but the nervous system is more like an intricate telegraph system. its
network of nerves runs from every outlying point of the body into the
great headquarters of the brain, carrying sense messages notifying us of
everything heard, seen, touched, tasted or smelled.
as soon as the brain receives a message from any of the five senses it
decides what to do about it and if action is decided on, sends its
orders back over the nerve wires to the muscles telling them what action
to perform.
your working agents
¶ this latter fact—that the muscles are the working agents of the
body—also explains why the muscular type is naturally more active than
any of the others.
source of your raw materials
¶ the body may be compared to a perfectly organized transportation
system and factory com[pg ]bined. the alimentive system furnishes the raw
materials for all the systems to work on.
stationary equipment
¶ the bones of the body are like the telegraph poles, the bridges and
structures for the protection and permanence of the work carried on by
the other systems of the body.
now poles, bridges and structures are less movable, less alterable than
any of the other parts of a transportation system, and likewise the bony
element in man makes him less alterable in every other way than he would
otherwise be. a predominance of it in any individual indicates a
preponderance of this immovable tendency in his nature.
mind and matter are so inseparably bound up together in man's organism
that it is impossible to say just where mind ends and matter begins. but
this we know: that even the mind of the bony person partakes of the same
unbending qualities that are found in the bones of his body.
"every cell thinks"
¶ thomas a. edison, as level-headed and unmystical a scientist as lives,
says, "every cell in us thinks." human analysis proves to us that
something very near this is the case for it shows how the habitual
mental processes of every individual are always "off the same piece of
goods" as his body.[pg ]
[pg ]
thus the fat man's mind acts as his body acts—evenly, unhurriedly,
easefully and comfortably. the florid man's mind has the same quickness
and resourcefulness that distinguish all his bodily processes. the
muscular man's mind acts in the same strenuous way that his body acts,
while the bony man's brain always has an immovable quality closely akin
to the boniness of his body.
he is not necessarily a "bonehead," but this phrase, like "fathead," is
no accident.
the large head on the small body
¶ as pointed out before, the larger any organ or system the more will it
tend to express itself. so, the large-headed, small-bodied man runs more
to mental than to physical activities, and is invariably more mature in
his thinking. (see chart ) conversely, the alimentive type gets its
traits from that elemental stage in human development when we did little
but get and assimilate food, and when thinking was of the simplest form.
in those[pg ] days man was more physical than mental; he had a large stomach
but a small head.
so today we see in the pure alimentive type people who resemble their
alimentive ancestors. they have the same proportionately large stomach
and proportionately small head,—with the stomach-system dominating
their thoughts, actions and lives.
the cerebral is the exact opposite of this. he has a top-heavy head,
proportionately large for his body, and a proportionately undeveloped
stomach system.
his small assimilative system
¶ the extreme cerebral differs from other types chiefly in the fact that
while his head is unusually large compared to the body, his alimentive,
thoracic, muscular and bony systems are smaller and less developed than
the average. the latter fact is due to the same law which causes the
alimentive to have a large body and a small head. nature is a wonderful
efficiency engineer. she provides only as much space as is required for
the functioning of any particular organ, giving extra space only to
those departments that need it.[pg ]
the cerebral-alimentive is the combination which makes most of the
"magnates" and the self-made millionaires. such a man has all the
alimentive's desires for the luxurious comforts and "good things of
life," combined with sufficient brains to enable him to make the money
necessary to get them.
nature doesn't give the pure alimentive a large skull because he doesn't
need it for the housing of his proportionately small brain, but
concentrates on giving him a big stomach fitted with "all modern
conveniences." on the other hand, the head of the cerebral is large
because his brain is large. the skull which is pliable and unfinished at
birth grows to conform to the size and shape of the brain as the glove
takes on the shape of the hand inside it.
stomach vs. brain
¶ because the alimentive and cerebral systems are farthest removed from
each other, evolutionally, a large brain and a large stomach are a very
unusual combination. such an individual would be a combination of the
alimentive and cerebral types and would have the alimentive's fat body
with a large highbrow head of the cerebral. the[pg ] possession of these two
highly developed but opposite kinds of systems places their owner
constantly in the predicament of deciding between the big meal he wants
and the small one he knows he should have for good brain work.
we are so constructed that brain and stomach—each of which demands an
extra supply of blood when performing its work—can not function with
maximum efficiency simultaneously.
why light lunches
¶ when your stomach is busy digesting a big meal your brain takes a
vacation. this little fact is responsible for millions of light
luncheons daily. the strenuous manual worker can empty a full dinner
pail and profit by it but the brain worker long ago discovered that a
heavy midday meal gave him a heavy brain for hours afterwards.
clear thinking and a clear stomach
¶ clear thinking demands a clear stomach because an empty stomach means
that the blood reserves so necessary to vivid thinking are free to go to
the brain. without good blood coursing at a fairly rapid rate through
the brain no man can think keenly or concentratedly. this explains why[pg ]
you think of so many important things when your stomach is empty that
never occur to you when your energy is being monopolized by digestion.
heavy dinners and heavy speeches
¶ all public speakers have learned that a heavy dinner means a heavy
speech.
elbert hubbard's rule when on his speaking tours was one every orator
should follow. "ten dollars extra if i have to eat," said fra
elbertus—a far cry from the days when we "fed up" the preacher at
sunday dinner with the expectation of hearing a better sermon!
uses his head
¶ just as assimilation is the favorite activity of the alimentive type,
head work is the favorite activity of the large-headed cerebral. he is
so far removed, evolutionally, from the stomach stage that his stomach
is as much a remnant with him as the brain is a rudiment with the
extreme alimentive.
the extra blood supply which nature furnishes to any over-developed part
of the body also tends to encourage him in thinking, just as the same
condition encourages the fat man in eating.[pg ]
forgets to eat
¶ an alimentive never forgets dinner time.
but the cerebral is so much more interested in food for his brain than
food for his body that he can go without his meals and not mind it. he
is likely to have a book and a cracker at his meals—and then forget to
eat the cracker!
physical sensitivity
¶ we are "mental" in proportion to the sensitiveness of our mental
organization. the cerebral possesses the most highly developed brain
center of any type and is therefore more sensitive to all those stimuli
which act upon the mind.
his whole body bespeaks it. the fineness of his features is in direct
contrast to some of the other types. the unusual size of his brain
denotes a correspondingly intricate organization of nerves, for the
nerves are tiny elongations of the brain.
the intellectual sensitiveness of any individual can be accurately
estimated by noting the comparative size of his brain and body.
his triangular head and face
¶ a triangle is the geometrical figure approximated by the cerebral's
front face and head.[pg ]
if he is a pure, extreme cerebral a triangle is again what you are
reminded of when you look at his head from the side, for his head stands
on a small neck, his forehead stands out at the top, while his back head
is long. these bring the widest part of his head nearer the top than we
find it in other types.
delicate hands
¶ a thin, delicate hand denotes a larger-than-average cerebral element.
(see chart )
smooth fingers
¶ what have long been known as "smooth fingers" are typical of the
cerebral. these are not to be confused with the fat, pudgy babyish
fingers of the alimentive, for though the latter's fingers are smooth
around, they do not present straight outlines at the sides. they puff
out between the joints.
smooth fingers are characteristic of the extreme cerebral type. they are
called this because their outlines run straight up and down.
the joints of the alimentive finger (see chart ) mark the narrowest
places owing to the fact that the joints are not changeable. in the
osseous fingers (see chart ) the opposite is true. the joints mark
the widest spots and the spaces between are sunken.[pg ]
[pg ]
the fingers of the thoracic are inclined to be pointed like his head,
while the muscular's fingers are square at the end and look the power
they possess.
¶ but the cerebral has fingers unlike any of these. there is no fat to
make them pudgy and no muscle to make them firm. neither are there large
joints to make them knotty. their outlines therefore run in almost
straight lines and the whole hand presents a more frail, aesthetic
appearance.
meditation his keynote
¶ thinking, contemplating, reflecting—all the mental processes coming
under the head of "meditation"—constitute the keynote of this type.
the alimentive lives to eat, the thoracic to feel, the muscular to act,
the osseous to stabilize, but the cerebral lives to meditate.
air castles
¶ he loves to plan, imagine, dream day-dreams, visualize and go over and
over in his mind the manifold possibilities, probabilities and
potentialities of many things.[pg ]
when he carries this to extremes—as the person with a huge head and
tiny body is likely to do—he often overlooks the question of the
practicability of the thing he is planning. he inclines to go
"wild-catting," to dream dreams that are impossible of fruition.
thought for thought's sake
¶ he will sit by the hour or by the day thinking out endless ultimates,
for the sheer pleasure it gives him. other men blame him, criticise him
and ridicule him for this and for the most part he does fail of the
practical success by which the efficient american measures everything.
but the fact must never be forgotten that the world owes its progress to
the men who could see beyond their nose, who could conceive of things no
one had ever actually seen.
this type, more than any other, has been the innovator in all forms of
human progress.
the dreamer
¶ "everything accomplished starts with the dream of it," is a saying we
all know to be true. yet we go on forever giving all the big prizes to
the doers. but the man who can only dream lives in a very hostile world.
his real world is his[pg ] thoughts but whenever he steps out of them into
human society he feels a stranger and he is one.
doesn't fit
¶ the world of today is ruled by people who accomplish. "putting it
over," "delivering the goods," "getting it across," are a part of our
language because they represent the standards of the average american
today.
the cerebral is as much out of place in such an environment as a fish is
on dry land. he knows it and he shows it. he doesn't know what the other
kind are driving at and they know so little of what he is driving at
that they have invented a special name for him—the "nut."
doing isn't his line. he prefers the pleasures of "thinking over" to all
the "putting over" in the world. this type usually is a failure because
he takes it all out in dreaming without ever doing the things necessary
to make his dream come true.
a "visionary"
¶ these predilections for overlooking the obvious, the tangible and the
necessary elements in everyday existence tend to make of the cerebral
what he is so often called—a "visionary."[pg ]
for instance, he will build up in his mind the most imposing
superstructure for an invention and confidently tell you "it will make
millions," but forget to inform himself on such essential questions as
"will it work?" "is it transportable?" or "is there any demand for it?"
ahead of his time
¶ "he was born ahead of his time" applies oftenest to a man of this
type.
he has brains to see what the world needs and not infrequently sees how
the world could get it. but he is so averse to action himself that
unless active people take up his schemes they seldom materialize.
what we owe to the dreamers
¶ men in whom the cerebral type predominated anticipated every step man
has made in his political, social, individual, industrial, religious and
economic evolution. they have seen it decades and sometimes centuries in
advance. but they were always ridiculed at first.
the mutterings of morse
¶ history is replete with the stories of unappreciated genius. in
washington, d. c., you will have[pg ] pointed out to you a great elm, made
historic by samuel morse, inventor of the telegraph. he could not make
the successful people of his day give him a hearing, but he was so
wrapped up in his invention that he used to sit under this tree whenever
the weather permitted, and explain all about it to the down-and-outers
and any one else who would stop. "listen to the mutterings of that poor
old fool" said the wise ones as they hurried by on the other side of the
street. but today people come from everywhere to see "the famous morse
elm" and do homage to the great mind that invented the telegraph.
"langley's folly"
¶ today we fly from continent to continent and air travel is superseding
land and water transportation whenever great speed is in demand. a man
receives word that his child is dangerously ill; he steps into an
airplane and in less than half the time it would take trains or motors
to carry him, alights at his own door.
commerce, industry, war and the future of whole nations are being
revolutionized by this man-made miracle. yet it is but a few short years
since s. p.[pg ] langley was sneered at from one end of this country to the
other because he stooped to the "folly" of inventing a "flying machine."
the trivial telephone
¶ alexander graham bell invented the telephone. but it was many years
before he could induce anybody to finance it, though some of the
wealthiest, and therefore supposedly wisest, business men of the day
were asked to do so. none of them would risk a dollar on it. even after
it had been tested at the centennial exposition in philadelphia and
found to work perfectly, its possibilities were so little realized that
for a long while no one could be found to furnish the funds necessary to
place it upon the market.
the wizardry of wireless
¶ then after the world had become accustomed to transacting millions of
dollars worth of business daily over the once despised telegraph and
telephone it took out its doubts on marconi and his "wireless
telegraphy." "it's impossible," they said. "talk without wires? never!"
but now the radio needles pierce the blue from san diego to shanghai and
from your steamer in[pg ] mid-ocean you can say good night to your loved one
in denver.
frank bacon's play
¶ ideas always have to go begging at first, and the greater the idea the
rougher the sledding.
the most successful play ever put on in america was "lightnin'," written
by frank bacon, a typical cerebral-osseous. it ran every night for three
years in new york city. it has made a million people happy and a million
dollars for its sponsors. but when mr. bacon, who also plays the title
role, took it to the new york producers they refused it a try-out. but
because he had faith in his dream and persisted, his name and his play
have become immortal.
an ideal combination
¶ the ideal combination is a dreamer who can do or a doer who knows the
power of a dream. thinking and acting—almost every individual is doing
too much of one and too little of the other!
the world's two classes
¶ the world is divided roughly into these two classes: those who act
without thinking (and as a[pg ] result are often in jail); and those who
think without acting (and as a result are often in the poorhouse).
to be a success
¶ to be a successful individual today you have got to dream and then do;
plan and then produce; contemplate and then construct; think it out and
then work it out.
if you do the latter at the expense of the former you are doomed to work
forever for other people, to play some other man's game. if you do the
former at the expense of the latter you are doomed to know only the
fringes of life, never to be taken seriously and never to achieve.
pitfalls for dreamers
¶ if you are inclined to take your pleasure out in cerebrating instead
of creating; if it suffices you to see a thing in your imagination
whether it ever comes to pass or not, you are at a decided disadvantage
in this hustling world; and you will never be a success.
pitfalls for the doer
¶ on the other hand if you are content to do what other men dream about
and never have[pg ] dreams of your own you will probably always have a berth
but will never have a million. you will exist but you will never know
what it is to live.
the hungry philosopher
¶ the extreme cerebral can sit on a park bench with an empty purse and
an empty stomach and get as much pleasure out of reflecting on the
"whichness of the what and the whitherness of the wherefore" as an
alimentive gets out of a planked steak. needless to say, each is an
enigma to the other. yet most people imagine that because both are human
and both walk on their hind legs they are alike. they are no more alike
than a cow and a canary.
his frail body
¶ the extreme cerebral type finds it difficult to do things because, as
we have seen, he is deficient in muscle—one of the vital elements upon
which activity and accomplishment are based. this type has little
muscle, little bone, and little fat.
deficient in "horse power"
¶ he is not inactive for the same reason that the alimentive is; his
stomach processes do not slow[pg ] him down. but his muscles are so
undeveloped that he has little inward urge toward activity and little
force back of his movements. his heart and lungs are small, so that he
also lacks "steam" and "horse power."
he prefers to sit rather than to move, exactly as the muscular prefers
to be "up and doing" rather than to sit still.
the man of futile movements
¶ did you ever look on while a pure cerebral man tried to move a kitchen
stove? ever ask the dreamer in your house to bring down a trunk from the
attic?
will you ever forget the almost human perversity with which that stove
and that trunk resisted him; or how amusing it looked to see a grown man
outwitted at every turn by an inert mass?
"i have carried on a life-long feud with inanimate things," a pure
cerebral friend remarked to us recently. "i have a fight on my hands
every time i attempt to use a pair of scissors, a knife and fork, a
hammer or a collar button."
his jerky walk
¶ because he is short the cerebral takes short[pg ] steps. because he lacks
muscle he lacks a powerful stride. as a result he has a walk that is
irregular and sometimes jerky.
when he walks slowly this jerk is not apparent, but when hurried it is
quite noticeable.
is lost in chairs
¶ the cerebral gets lost in the same chair that is itself lost under the
large, spreading osseous; and for the same reason. built for the
average, chairs are as much too large for the cerebral as they are too
small for the big bony man. so the cerebral's legs dangle and his arms
don't reach.
dislikes social life
¶ though a most sympathetic friend, the cerebral does not make many
friends and does not care for many. he is too abstract to add to the
gaiety of social gatherings, for these are based on the enjoyment of the
concrete.
enjoys the intellectuals
¶ readers, thinkers, writers—intellectuals like himself—are the kinds
of people the cerebral enjoys most.
another reason why he has few friends is because[pg ] these people, being in
the great minority, are not easy to find.
ignores the ignorant
¶ people who let others do their thinking for them and those who are not
aware of the great things going on in world movements, are not popular
with this type. he sometimes has a secret contempt for them and ignores
them as completely as they ignore him.
avoids the limelight
¶ modesty and reserve, almost as marked in the men as in the women,
characterize this extreme type. they do things of great moment
sometimes—invent something or write something extraordinary—but even
then they try to avoid being lionized.
they prefer the shadows rather than the spotlight. thus they miss many
of the good things less brainy and more aggressive people gain. but it
does no good to explain this to a cerebral. he enjoys retirement and is
constantly missing opportunities because he refuses to "mix."
cares little for money
¶ friends mean something to the cerebral, fame sometimes means much but
money means little.[pg ] in this he is the exact opposite of the osseous, to
whom the pecuniary advantages or disadvantages of a thing are always
significant.
the pure cerebral finds it difficult to interest himself in his
finances. he seldom counts his change. he will go away from his room
leaving every cent he owns lying on the dresser—and then forget to lock
the door!
this type of person almost never asks for a raise. he is too busy
dreaming dreams to plan what he will do in his old age. he prefers
staying at the same job with congenial associates to finding another
even if it paid more.
very often poor
¶ since we get only what we go after in this world, it follows that the
cerebral is often poor. to make money one must want money. competition
for it is so keen that only those who want it badly and work with
efficiency ever get very much of it.
the cerebral takes so little interest in money that he gets lost in the
shuffle. not until he wakes up some morning with the poorhouse staring
him in the face does he give it serious consideration. and then he does
not do much about it.[pg ]
almost never rich
¶ history shows that few people of the pure cerebral type ever became
rich. even the most brilliant gave so much more thought to their mission
than the practical ways and means that they were usually seriously
handicapped for the funds necessary to its materialization.
madame curie, co-discoverer of radium, said to be the greatest living
woman of this type, is world-famous and has done humanity a noble
service. but her experiments were always carried on against great
disadvantages because she had not the financial means to purchase more
than the most limited quantities of the precious substance.
about clothes
¶ clothes are almost the last thing the cerebral thinks about. as we
have seen, all the other types have decided preferences as to their
clothes—the alimentive demands comfort, the thoracic style, the
muscular durability and the osseous sameness—but the extreme cerebral
type says "anything will do." so we often see him with a coat of one
color, trousers of another and a hat of another, with no gloves at all
and his tie missing.[pg ]
often absent-minded
¶ we have always said people were "absent-minded" when their minds were
absent from what they were doing. this often applies to the cerebral for
he is capable of greater concentration than other types; also he is so
frequently compelled to do things in which he has no interest that his
mind naturally wanders to the things he cares about.
a cerebral professor whom we know sometimes appeared before his harvard
classes in bedroom slippers. a thoracic would not be likely to let his
own brother catch him in his!
writes better than he talks
¶ the poor talker sometimes surprises us by being a good writer. such a
one is usually of the cerebral type.
he likes to think out every phase of a thing and put it into just the
right words before giving it to the world. so, many a cerebral who does
little talking outside his intimate circle does a good deal of
surreptitious writing. it may be only the keeping of a diary, jotting
down memoranda or writing long letters to his friends, but he will write
something. some of the world's greatest ideas have come to[pg ] light first
in the forgotten manuscripts of people of this type who died without
showing their writings to any one. evidently they did not consider them
of sufficient importance or did not care as much about publishing them
as about putting them down.
an inveterate reader
¶ step into the reference rooms of your city library on a summer's day
and you will stand more chance of finding examples of this extreme type
there than in any other spot.
you may have thought these extreme types are difficult to locate, since
the average american is a combination. but it is easy to find any of
them if you look in the right places.
in every case you will find them in the very places where a study of
human analysis would tell you to look for them.
where to look for pure types
¶ when you wish to find some pure alimentives, go to a restaurant that
is famous for its rich foods. when you want to see several extreme
thoracics, drop into any vaudeville show and take your choice from the
actors or from the audience. when you are looking for pure musculars go
to a boxing[pg ] match or a prize fight and you will be surrounded by them.
when looking for the osseous attend a convention of expert accountants,
bankers, lumbermen, hardware merchants or pioneers.
all these types appear in other places and in other vocations, but they
are certain to be present in large numbers any day in any of the
above-named places.
but when you are looking for this interesting little extreme
thinker-type you must go to a library. we specify the reference room of
the library because those who search for fiction, newspapers and
magazines are not necessarily of the pure type. and we specify a day in
summer rather than in winter so that you will be able to select your
subjects from amongst people who are there in spite of the weather
rather than because of it.
interested in everything
¶ "i never saw a book without wanting to read it," said a cerebral
friend to us the other day. this expresses the interest every person of
this type has in the printed page. "i never see a library without
wishing i had time to go there and stay till i had read everything in
it."[pg ]
the book worm
¶ so it is small wonder that such a one becomes known early in life as a
"book worm." as a little child he takes readily to reading and won't
take to much else. because we all learn quickly what we like, he is soon
devouring books for older heads. "why won't he run and play like other
children?" wails mother, and "that boy ought to be made to join the ball
team," scolds father; but "that boy" continues to keep his nose in a
book.
he can talk on almost any subject—when he will—and knows pretty well
what is going on in the world at an age when other boys are oblivious to
everything but gymnasiums and girls.
old for his years
¶ the "little old man" or "little old woman" of ten is always a cerebral
child. the alimentives are the babies of the race and never entirely
grow up no matter how many years they live. but the cerebral is born
old. from infancy he shows more maturity than other children.
the "teacher's pet"
¶ his studiousness and tractableness lead to one reward in childhood,
though it often costs him[pg ] dear as a man. he usually becomes the
teacher's favorite and no wonder: he always has his lessons, he gives
her little trouble and is about all that keeps many a teacher at her
poorly paid post.
little sense of time
¶ the extreme cerebral often has a deficient sense of time. he is less
conscious of the passage of the hours than any other type. the muscular
and the osseous often have an almost uncanny time-sense, but the extreme
cerebral man often lacks it. forgetting to wind his watch or to consult
it for hours when he does, is a familiar habit of this type.
we know a bride in detroit whose flat looked out on a bakery and a
bookstore. she told us that she used to send her cerebral hubby across
the street for the loaf of bread that was found lacking just as they
were ready to sit down to dinner—only to wait hours and then have him
come back with a book under his arm, no bread and no realization of how
long he had been gone.
inclined to be unorthodox
¶ other types tend to follow various religions—according to the
individual's upbringing—but the cerebral composes a large percentage of
the unorthodox.[pg ]
the political reformer
¶ because all forms of personal combat are distasteful to him the pure
cerebral does not go out and fight for reform as often as the muscular
nor die for causes as often as the osseous types.
but almost every cerebral believes in extreme reforms of one kind or
another. he is a comparatively silent but faithful member of clubs,
leagues and other kinds of reform organizations. he may never star in
them. he seldom cares to. but his mite is always ready when
subscriptions are taken, even if he has to go without breakfast for a
week to make up for it.
this type is usually sufficiently intelligent to know the world needs
reforming and sufficiently conscientious to want to help to do it. he is
not bound by traditions or customs as much as other types but does more
of his own thinking. without the foresight and faithfulness of the
cerebrals very few reforms could have started or have lived to finish.
the social nonconformist
¶ ask any small-bodied, large-headed man if he believes in the double
standard of morals, anti-suffrage, eternal punishment, saloons, or the
"four hundred!"[pg ] this little man with the big head may not openly
challenge you or argue with you when you stand up for "things as they
are," for he is a peaceable chap—but he inwardly smiles or sneers at
what he considers your troglodyte ideas. he sees a day coming when
babies will be named for their fathers whether the minister officiated
or not; when the man who now talks about the "good old days of a wide
open saloon on every corner" will himself be a hazy myth; and when
society idlers will not be considered better than people who earn their
livings.
the world's pathfinder
¶ the cerebral therefore leads the world in ideas. the world is managed
by fat men, entertained by florid men, built by muscular men, opposed by
bony men, but is improved in the final analysis by its thinking men.
these thinkers have a difficult time of it. they preach to deaf ears.
and often they die in poverty. but at last posterity comes around to
their way of thinking, abandons the old ruts and follows the trails they
have blazed. therefore many great thinkers who were unknown while alive
became[pg ] famous after death. more often than not, "fame is the food of
the tomb."
indifference to surroundings
¶ a wise man it was who said, "let me see a man's surroundings and i
will tell you what he is." the cerebral does not really live in his
house but in his head, and for that reason does not feel as great an
urge to decorate, amplify or even furnish the place in which he dwells.
step into the room of any little-bodied large-headed man and you will be
struck by two facts—that he has fewer jimcracks and more journals lying
around than the rest of your friends.
in the room of the alimentive you will find cushions, sofas and "eats;"
in that of the thoracic you will find colorful, unusual things; the
muscular will have durable, solid, plain things; the osseous will have
fewer of everything but what he does have will be in order.
but the pure cerebral's furnishings—if he is responsible for them—will
be an indifferent array, with no two pieces matching. furthermore,
everything will be piled with newspapers, magazines, books and
clippings.[pg ]
often die young
¶ "the good die young" is an old saying which may or may not be true.
but there is no doubt that the extreme cerebral type of individual often
dies at an early age.
the reason is clear. an efficient but controlled assimilative system
is the first requisite for long life, and the pure cerebral does not
have an efficient one. moreover, he is prone to neglect what nutritive
mechanism he does have, by irregular eating, by being too poor to afford
wholesome foods, and by forgetting to eat at all.
physical assets
¶ by reason of his deficient physicality the cerebral can not be said to
possess any decided physical assets. but two tendencies which help
decidedly to prolong life are under-eating and his refusal to dissipate.
it has been said many times by the best known experts that "more deaths
are caused annually in america by over-eating than by any other two
causes." under-eating is a very necessary precaution but the cerebral
carries it too far.
the cerebral, lacking a large alimentary system,[pg ] is not tempted to
overload his stomach or overtax his vital organs. and because he is a
highly evolved type, possessing little of the instincts which are at the
bottom of most dissipation, he is not addicted to late hours, wine,
women or excitement.
diseases he is most susceptible to
¶ nervous diseases of all kinds most frequently afflict this type. his
nervous system is supersensitive. it breaks down more easily and more
completely than that of the more elemental types, just as a high-powered
car is more easily wrecked than a truck.
music he likes
¶ "highbrow" music is kept alive mostly by highbrows. while the other
types cultivate a taste for grand opera or simulate it because it is
supposedly proper, the cerebral really enjoys it. in the top gallery at
any good concert you will find many cerebrals.
entertainment he prefers
¶ the serious drama and educational lectures are other favorite
entertainments of the cerebral. he cares little for vaudeville,
girl-shows, or clap-trap farces.[pg ]
the kind of program that keeps the fat man's smile spread from ear to
ear takes the cerebral to the box office for his money.
a steady patron at the movies
¶ the cerebral goes to the movies more than any other type save the fat
man, but not for the same reasons. the large-brained, small-bodied man
cares nothing for most of the recreations with which the other types
amuse themselves, so the theater is almost his only diversion. it is
oftentimes the only kind of entertainment within the reach of his purse;
and it deals with many different subjects, in almost all of which the
pure cerebral has some interest.
don't laugh at same things
¶ but if you will notice next time you go to a movie it will be clear to
you that the fat people and the large-headed people do not laugh at the
same things. the pie-throwing and cutey coquette that convulse the
two-hundred-pounder fail to so much as turn up the corners of the other
man's mouth.
and the subtle things that amuse the cerebral go over the heads of the
pure alimentives.[pg ]
cares for no sports
¶ but the fat man and the large-brained man have one trait in common.
neither of them cares for strenuous sports. the fat man dislikes them
because he is too "heavy on his feet." the cerebral dislikes them
because he is too heavy at the opposite extremity. he expends what
little energy he has in mental activities so has none left for violent
physical exertion.
likes mental games
¶ this type enjoys quiet games requiring thought. chess and checkers are
favorites with them.
the impersonal
¶ the cerebral is the most impersonal of all types. while the alimentive
tends to measure everything from the standpoint of what it can do for
him personally, the cerebral tends to think more impersonally and to be
interested in many things outside of his own affairs.
lacks pugnacity
¶ primitive things of every kind are distasteful to the cerebral. the
instincts of digestion, sex,[pg ] hunting and pugnacity are but little
developed in him. he is therefore a man who likes harmony, avoids coming
to blows, and goes out of his way to keep the peace. such a man does not
go hunting and seldom owns a gun. he dislikes to kill or harm any
creature.
the cleverest crook
¶ the cerebral is usually a naturally moral person. but when lacking in
conscience, either through bad training or other causes, he occasionally
turns to crime for his income. this is because his physical frailty
makes it difficult for him to do heavy work, while his mentality enables
him to think out ways and means of getting a living without it.
though the clumsy criminal may belong to any type, the cleverest
crooks—those who defy detection for years—always have a large element
of the cerebral in their makeup.
big brains in little jobs
¶ there are two kinds of work in the world—head work and hand work;
mental and manual. if you can star in either, life guarantees you a good
living. but if you are good at neither you[pg ] are doomed to dependence.
the cerebral's physical frailty unfits him for the manual and unless he
is school-or self-educated he becomes the sorriest of all human misfits.
he falls between the two and leads a precarious existence working in the
lighter indoor positions requiring the least mentality. if you will keep
your eyes open you will many times note that the little waiter in the
high class restaurant or hotel has a head very large for his body. such
men are much better read, have a far greater appreciation of art and
literature and more natural refinement than the porky patrons they
serve.
social assets
¶ a fine sense of the rights of others and natural modesty and
refinement are the chief social assets of this type.
social liabilities
¶ lack of self-expression, too great reserve and too much abstractness
in conversation are the things that handicap the cerebral. his small
stature and timid air also add to his appearance of insignificance and
cause him to be overlooked at social affairs.[pg ]
emotional assets
¶ sympathy, gentleness and self-sacrifice are other assets of this type.
emotional liabilities
¶ a tendency to nervous excitement and to a lack of balance are the
chief emotional handicaps of this type.
business assets
¶ this type has no traits which can properly be called business assets.
he dislikes business, is repelled by its standards and has no place in
any of its purely commercial branches.
business liabilities
¶ his inability to "keep his feet on the ground," and his tendency to
"live in the clouds" and to be generally impractical unfit this type for
business life.
domestic strength
¶ tenderness, consideration and idealism are the chief domestic assets
of the cerebral type.
domestic weakness
¶ inability to provide for his family, incapacity for making the money
necessary to meet their[pg ] needs, and his tendency to spend the little he
does have on impossible schemes, are what wreck the domestic life of
many splendid cerebral men. her inability to make one dollar do the work
of two is a serious handicap to the cerebral wife or mother.
should aim at
¶ this man should aim at building up his body and practicalizing his
mental processes.
should avoid
¶ the cerebral should avoid shallow, ignorant people, speculation and
those situations that carry him farther away from the real world.
his strong points
¶ his thinking capacity, progressiveness, unselfishness, and highly
civilized instincts are the strongest points of this type.
his weakest points
¶ impracticality, dreaminess, physical frailty and his tendency to plan
without doing, are the traits which stand in the way of his success.
how to deal with this type socially
¶ don't expect him to be a social lion. don't[pg ] expect him to mingle with
many. invite him when there are to be a few congenial souls, and if he
wanders into the library leave him alone.
how to deal with this type in business
¶ don't employ this man for heavy manual labor or where there is more
arm work than head work. give him mental positions or none.
if you are dealing with him as a tradesman, resist the temptation to
take advantage of his impracticality and don't treat him as if you
thought money was everything.
[pg ]
remember, the chief distinguishing marks of the cerebral, in the order
of their importance, are the high forehead and a proportionately large
head for the body. any person who has these is largely of the cerebral
type no matter what other types may be included in his makeup.
[pg ]
to understand combinations
etermine which type predominates in a subject.
if there is any doubt in your mind about this do these four things:
st. note the body build—which one of the five body types (as shown in
charts , , , , ) does he most resemble? (in doing this it will aid
you if you will note whether fat, bone or muscle predominates in his
bodily structure.)
nd. decide which of the five typical faces his face most resembles.
rd. decide which of the five typical hands his hands most resemble.
th. if still undecided, note his voice, gestures and movements and they
will leave no doubt in your mind as to which of these types comes first
and which second.
having decided which type predominates and which is second in him, the
significance of this combination is made clear to you by the following
law:[pg ]
law of combination
¶ the type predominating in a person determines what he does throughout
his life—the nature of his main activities.
the type which comes second in development will determine the way he
does things—the methods he will follow in doing what his predominant
type signifies.
the third element, if noticeable, merely "flavors" his personality.
thus, a cerebral-muscular-alimentive does mental things predominantly
throughout his life, but in a more muscular way than if he were an
extreme cerebral. the alimentive element, being third down the list,
will tend to make him eat and assimilate more food than he otherwise
would.
[pg ]
types that should and should not marry each other
 am so sorry to hear the browns are being
divorced. i have known george and mary for years and they are as fine a
man and woman as i ever saw. but they just don't seem able to get along
together."
how many times you have heard something like this. and the speaker got
nearer the truth than he knew. for the georges and marys everywhere are,
on the whole, fine men and women.
married to the wrong one
¶ each one is all right in himself, but merely married to the wrong
person—a fact we have recognized when both george and mary made
successes of their second ventures and lived happily ever after.[pg ]
human happiness, as we have noted in the introduction to this volume, is
attained only through doing what the organism was built to do, in an
environment that is favorable. marriage is only the attempt of two
people to attain these two ends individually, mutually and
simultaneously.
difficulties of double harness
¶ now, since it is almost impossible for one to achieve happiness when
untrammeled and free, is it to be wondered at that so few achieve it in
double harness? for the difficulties to be surmounted are doubled and
the helps are halved by the presence of a running mate.
mere marriedness is not mating
¶ that "two can live on less than one" is not true—but it is nearer the
truth than that two can find ultimate happiness together easier than
either can find an approximation of happiness alone.
this is not saying that any one who is unmated can have happiness as
complete as that which comes to the rightly mated—for nothing else in
life can compare with that—but they must be rightly mated, not merely
married.
no one who has observed or thought on this sub[pg ]ject will deny that it is
a thousand times better not to be married at all than to be married to
the wrong person.
secrets told by statistics
¶ surveys of the causes for divorce during the past ten years in the
united states have revealed some startling facts—facts which only prove
again that human analysis shows us the truth about ourselves as no
science has ever shown it to us before.
one of the most illuminating facts these surveys have revealed is that
only those men and women can be happy together whose natures
automatically encourage each other in the doing of the things each likes
to do, in the way each likes to do them.
inborn inclination determines the things every human being prefers to
do, concerning all the fundamental activities of his life, and also the
manner in which he prefers to do them. these inborn inclinations, as we
have previously pointed out, are written all over us in the unmistakable
language of type.
when we know a man's type we know what[pg ] things he prefers to do in
life's main experiences and how he prefers to do them. and we know
that unless he is permitted to do approximately what he wants to do in
approximately the way he prefers, he becomes unhappy and unsuccessful.
infatuation no guide
¶ these biological bents are so deeply embedded in every individual that
no amount of affection, admiration, or respect, or passion for any other
individual suffices to enable any one to go through long years doing
what he dislikes and still be happy. only in the first flush of
infatuation can he sacrifice his own preferences for those of another.
after a while passion and infatuation ooze away. nature sees to that,
just as she sees to their coming in the first place. then there return
the old leanings, preferences, tendencies and cravings inherent in the
type of each.
the real "reversion to type"
¶ under this urge of his type each reverts gradually but irresistibly to
his old habits, doing largely what he prefers to do in the ways that are
to his liking. when that day comes the real test of their marriage
begins. if the distance between them is[pg ] too great they can not cross
that chasm, and thereafter each lives a life inwardly removed from the
other.
they make attempts to cross the barrier and some of these are successful
for a short while. they talk to and fro across the void sometimes; but
their communings become less frequent, their voices less distinct, until
at last each withdraws into himself. there he lives, in the world of his
own nature—as completely separated from his mate as though they dwelt
on different planets.
we can know
¶ "but how is one to know the right person?" you ask. by recognizing
science's recent discovery to the effect that certain types can travel
helpfully, happily and harmoniously together and that certain others
never can.
what every individual owes to himself
¶ every individual owes it to himself to find the right work and the
right mate, because these are fundamental needs of every human being.
lacking them, life is a failure; possessing but one of them, life is
half a failure.
to obtain and apply the very fullest knowledge[pg ] toward the attainment of
these two great requisites should be the aim of every person.
neglected subjects
¶ despite the fact that these are the most vital problems pertaining to
human happiness and that every individual's life depends for its glory
or defeat, joy or sorrow upon the right settlement of them—they are two
of the most neglected.
divorce courts
¶ our divorce courts are full of splendid men and women who are there
not because they are weak or wrong, but because they stepped into
nature's age-old instinct trap without realizing where it would lead
them.
these men and women who pay so heavy a price for their ignorance and
blindness are not to blame. most of them have been taught that to be
legally bound together was sufficient guarantee of marital bliss.
but experience has shown us that there are certain kinds of people each
individual can associate with in harmony and that there are those with
whom he could never be happy though a hundred ministers pronounced them
mated for life.[pg ]
times will change
¶ but the time is coming when we will select our mates scientifically,
not merely sentimentally. it is also coming when we will know what every
child is fitted to do by looking at him, just as we know better today
than to set a shepherd dog on the trail of criminals or a bloodhound to
herd sheep.
the great quest
¶ instead of beclouding the significance and the sanity of life's great
quest; instead of encouraging every manner of mismating as we do today,
we will some day arm our children with knowledge enabling them to wisely
choose their life work and their life mate.
dolly's dimple
¶ the fact that dolly has a dimple may make your senses whirl but it is
not sufficient basis for marriage. there are things of vastly greater
importance, though of course this does not seem possible to you at the
time.
sammy's smile
¶ and though sammy sports a smile the gods might envy, he may not be the
right man for dolly. even a smile that never comes off, great[pg ]
lubricator that it undeniably is, is not sufficient foundation for a
"till-death-do-us-part" contract.
little things vs. big things
¶ when we hear of a divorce we assume that it was caused by the
inability of those two people to agree upon fundamentals. we suppose
that they found within themselves wide divergences of opinion, feeling
or attitude regarding really worth while questions—social, religious,
political or economic. we are inclined to imagine that "the little
things" should take care of themselves and that only the "big things"
such as these should be allowed to separate two lives, once they have
been joined together.
what the records show
¶ yet the exact opposite is what happens, according to the divorce
records of the united states.
these records show that divorces do not arise out of differences in what
we have always called the big things of life, but out of those things
which we have always called the little ones.
why he can't change
¶ we do not expect a husband or wife to change[pg ] his religion and take on
his partner's faith. we imagine this is an inherent thing more or less
deeply imbedded in him and not to be altered, while we consider it only
fair and right for john to give up his favorite sport, his hobby and
some of his habits for mary's sake.
at the risk of shocking the supersensitive, it must be admitted that
most individuals get their religious leanings from external
sources—parents, teachers, ministers, friends and especially by the
accident of being born in a certain country, among a certain sect or
within a certain community.
on the other hand, one's preferences in the matter of diversions are
born in him, part and parcel of his very being and remain so to the end
of his life. accordingly, just as it is easier to change the frosting on
a cake than to change the inside, it is easier to change a man's
religion than to change his activities.
diversion and divorce
¶ most of the divorces granted in america during the past ten years have
been demanded, not on grounds dealing with the so-called fundamentals,
but for differences regarding so-called unimportant[pg ] things. and more
than seventy out of every hundred divorces every year in this country
are asked for on grounds pertaining to diversion.
in other words, more than seventy per cent of american divorces are
granted because husbands and wives can not adapt themselves to each
other in the matter of how they shall spend their leisure hours.
"people who can not play together will not work together long," said
elbert hubbard. human analysis, which shows that each type tends
automatically to the doing of certain things in certain ways whenever
free to act, proves that this is just as literal as it sounds.
the only time we are free to act is during our leisure hours. all other
hours are mortgaged to earning a living—in the accomplishment of which
we often have very little outlet for natural trends. so it is only
"after hours" and "over sundays" that the masses of mankind have an
opportunity to express their real natures.
uncongenial work affects marriage
¶ the less one's work permits him to do the things he enjoys the more
surely will he turn to[pg ] them in the hours when this restraint is
removed. if such a one has a husband or wife who encourages him in the
following of his natural bents during leisure hours, that marriage
stands a big chance of being happy.
these two people may differ widely in their respective religious
ideas—one may be a catholic, the other a protestant, or one a shaker
and the other a christian scientist—but they can build lasting
happiness together.
on the other hand, two people who agree perfectly as to religious,
social and political views but who can not agree as to the disposition
of their leisure hours are bound for the rocks.
as the honeymoon fades, each reverts to the kind of recreation congenial
to his type. if his mate is averse to his diversions each goes his own
way.
the eternal triangle
¶ the tragedy of "the other man" and "the other woman" is not a mystery
to him who understands human analysis. it is always the result of
finding some one of kindred standards and tastes—that is, some one
whose type is congenial. the eternal triangle arises again and again in[pg ]
human lives, not accidentally, but as the inevitable result of violating
inexorable laws.
law of marital happiness
¶ the application of the law to each of the five types will be explained
in the following sections of this chapter.
part one
¶ just as each type reacts differently to all the other situations in
life, each reacts differently to love.
the alimentive, as we have pointed out, is less mature than the other
types, with the thoracic next, and so on down to the cerebral which is
the most mature of all. because the alimentive has[pg ] rightly been called
"the baby of the race;" because no extremely fat person ever really
grows up, this type prefers those love-expressions natural to the
immature.
the most affectionate type
¶ caressing, petting, fondling and cuddling—those demonstrations not of
wild passion but of affection such as children enjoy—are most often
used by alimentive men and women when in love.
¶ because they are inclined to bestow little attentions more or less
promiscuously, they often get the reputation of being flirtatious when
they are not. such actions also are often taken by the one to whom they
are directed as indicating more than the giver means.
so beware of taking the little pats of fat people too seriously. they
mean well, but have the baby's habit of bestowing innocent smiles and
caresses everywhere.
why they are loved
¶ each type has traits peculiar to itself which tend to make others fall
in love with it. in the alimentive the outstanding trait which wins love
is his sweet disposition.[pg ]
the human ego is so constituted that we tend to like all interesting
people who do not offer us opposition. the alimentive is amenable,
affable, agreeable. his ready smile, his tendency to promote harmony and
his general geniality bring him love and keep it for him while more
clever types lose it.
millionaires marry them
¶ "why does a brilliant business man marry that little fat woman who is
not his equal mentally?" the world has asked many a time. human analysis
answers it, as it answers so many of the other age-long queries about
human eccentricities.
¶ the little fat woman has a sweet disposition—one of the most soothing
of human attributes. the business man has enough of "brilliant" people
all day. when he gets home he is rather inclined to be merely the "tired
business man," and in that state nothing is more agreeable than a wife
with a smile.
¶ as for fat husbands, many a wife supports them in preference to being
supported by another and less agreeable man.
the prettiest type
¶ when a woman becomes engaged her friends[pg ] all inquire, "what does he
do?" but when a man's engagement is announced every one asks, "what does
she look like?" so it is small wonder that men have placed prettiness
near the top of the list, and the alimentive woman is the prettiest of
all types. this little fact must not be overlooked when searching for
the causes which have prompted so many of the world's wealthiest men to
marry them. other men may have to content themselves with plain wives,
but the man of means can pick and choose—and every man prefers a pretty
wife to a plain one.
feminine prettiness (not beauty) consists of the rose-bud mouth, the
baby eyes, the cute little nose, the round cheeks, the dimpled chin,
etc.—all more or less monopolized by the alimentive type.
the "womanly" type
¶ the fat woman's refusal to worry keeps the wrinkles away and as long
as she does not become obese she remains attractive. her "clinging-vine"
ways make men call her the most "womanly" type, and even when she tips
the scales at two hundred and fifty they are still for her. then they
say "she looks so motherly."[pg ]
so the fat woman goes through life more loved by men than any other
type, and in old age she presents a picture of calmness and domestic
serenity that is appealing to everybody.
marry earliest and oftenest
¶ being in demand, the alimentive woman marries earlier than any other
type. as a widow the same demand takes her off the marriage market while
younger and brainier women pine their lives away in spinsterhood.
look back and you will recall that it was the pretty, plump girls who
had beaux earliest, married earliest, and who, even when left with
several children, did not remain widows long.
desirable traits of alimentive wives
¶ next to her sweet disposition, the traits which make the alimentive
wife most pleasant to get along with are serenity, optimism and good
cooking.
her weaknesses
¶ many an alimentive wife loses her husband's love because of her too
easy-going habits. unless controlled, these lead to slovenliness in
personal appearance and housekeeping.[pg ]
the alimentive wife and money
¶ the alimentive wife usually has her share of the family income because
she has the endearing ways that wring it out of hubby.
sales people everywhere say, "we like to see a fat woman coming, for she
usually has money, spends it freely and is easy to please."
in disagreements
¶ what they do with their quarrels after they are through with them
determines to a great extent the ultimate success of any pair's
marriage. alimentive husbands and wives bury the hatchet sooner than
other types and they avoid altercations.
lives anywhere
¶ the alimentive wife offers less resistance to her husband's plans than
any other. so when he announces they are moving to some other
neighborhood, city or state she acquiesces with better grace than other
types.
family friends
¶ the responsibility of adding new friends to the family rests equally
upon each partner in marriage. the average husband, by reason of
mingling more[pg ] with the world, has the greater opportunity, but every
wife can and should consider that she owes it to herself, her husband
and her children to contribute her quota.
alimentive husbands and wives add their share of new acquaintances to
any marriage in which they are partners. the alimentive wife always
enjoys having people in to dinner and the alimentive husband enjoys
bringing them. the warmth of hospitality in alimentive homes brings them
more friendships than come to other types.
fat man also marries young
¶ the fat man marries young, but for a different reason than the fat
woman. the fat man, as you will note, "gets a job" early in life. from
that time on his services seldom go begging.
he makes a good salary earlier than other types and is therefore sooner
in a position to marry.
the "ladies' man"
¶ just as the fat woman is "a man's woman," so the fat man is almost
invariably "a ladies' man." the fat man usually "knows women" better
than any other type and it is certain that the fat woman "knows men."
her record proves it.[pg ]
no fat bachelors
¶ just as there are few fat "old maids," there are few fat bachelors.
you can count on the fingers of one hand all the really overweight ones
you ever knew.
the best "provider"
¶ because he makes money easily through the various forms of his
superior business qualifications, the average fat man has plenty of
money for his family and likes to spend it upon them. he is the best
provider of all the types. fat people are the most lenient parents and
usually over-indulge their children.
the husband who makes a habit for years of sending home crates of the
first strawberries, melons and oranges of the season is a fat one every
time.
desirable traits of fat husbands
¶ his generous provision for his family and the fact that he is
essentially a "family man" are two desirable traits of the alimentive
husband. he depends more on his home than other types, he marries young
to have a home and he is seldom farther away from it than he has to be.[pg ]
it is unfortunate that the one type which makes the best "travelling
man" is more inconvenienced by the absence from home than any other type
would be. but he has not submitted silently. all the world knows what a
"hard life" the traveling salesman leads and how he misses "the wife,
the kids and the good home cooking."
weaknesses of alimentive husbands
¶ the alimentive husband has but one weakness that materially endangers
his marital happiness. he is inclined to be too easy and extravagant,
and not to save money.
mates for alimentives
¶ because of his amenability the alimentive can marry almost any type
and be happy. but for fullest happiness, those who are predominantly
alimentive—that is, those in whom the alimentive type comes
first—should marry, as a first choice, those who are predominantly
muscular. the muscular shares the alimentive's ambition to "get on in
the world" and at the same time adds to the union the practicality which
offsets the too easy-going, lackadaisical tendencies of the alimentive.[pg ]
the second choice for the predominantly alimentive should be the one who
is predominantly thoracic. these two types have much in common. the
brilliance and speed of the thoracic keeps the alimentive "looking to
his laurels," and thus tends to prevent the carelessness which is so
great a handicap to the predominantly alimentive.
the third choice of the predominantly alimentive may be one who is also
predominantly alimentive, but in that case it should be an
alimentive-muscular or an alimentive-cerebral.
the last type the pure alimentive should ever marry is the pure
cerebral.
part two
¶ the thoracic in love exhibits the same general traits which
characterize him in all his other relationships.
the most beautiful woman
¶ the thoracic woman is the most beautiful[pg ] type of all. she is not
"pretty" like the alimentive, but her refined features and beautiful
coloring give her a distinctive appearance.
the handsomest man
¶ the thoracic is also the handsomest man of all. he is tall,
high-chested, wide-shouldered and has the masculine face resulting from
his high-bridged, prominent nose and high cheek bones.
the thoracic charmer
¶ the thoracic has more of that quality we call "charm" than any other
type. charm is largely self-expression by tactful methods. since this
type is the most self-expressive and the most tactful it possesses
naturally this invaluable trait.
both men and women of this type have an elusive, attractive something in
their personalities that others do not have—a very personal appeal that
makes an immediate impression. it pierces farther beneath the surface of
strangers than other types do on much longer acquaintance. the thoracic
does not seem a stranger at all. his own confidences, given to you
almost immediately upon meeting you, remove the barriers.[pg ]
the lure of the thoracic
¶ there is about the thoracic person a lure that others seldom have. you
do not attempt to describe it. you say "he is just different," and he
is. no other type has his spontaneity and instantaneous responsiveness.
so while the alimentive is always liked, it is in a more mild, easy,
comfortable way. the alimentive does not stir the blood but has a
strong, tender, even hold on people. the thoracic, on the other hand,
intrigues your attention, impales it, and holds it.
love at first sight
¶ the thoracics fall in love at first sight much more often than other
types. they also cause others to fall in love with them without
preliminaries, for they pursue the object of their affections with a
fire and fury that is almost irresistible.
¶ hundreds of persons marry each year who have known each other but a
few days or weeks. in every instance you will find that one of them is a
thoracic—and usually both. no other type can become so hopelessly in
love on such short notice.
the most flirtatious
¶ the thoracic is a born philanderer.[pg ]
he does not mean to mislead or injure, but flirtation is second nature
to him. this comes from the fact that flirtation, more than any other
human experience, contains that adventurous, thrilling element he
desires.
overheard in transit
¶ we overheard the following conversation in the street car the other
day between two young women who occupied the seat in front of us: "i was
sorry to hurt him," explained the thoracic. "i did love him last week
and i told him so, but i don't love him any more and i do love somebody
else now." she really loved him—last week!
thoracics can have a severe case of love, and get just as completely
over it in a week as the rest of us get over the measles.
the joy of life
¶ a joy in living expresses itself in almost everything the thoracic
does, especially when he is young. such people appear almost electrical.
these are traits of great fascination and the thoracic uses them freely
upon others throughout his life.
always blushing
¶ his over-developed circulatory system causes[pg ] the thoracic to blush
easily and often. this tendency has long been capitalized by women but
is not so much enjoyed by men.
most easily hurt
¶ because of his supersensitiveness the thoracic's feelings are more
easily hurt than those of other types, as every one who has ever had a
florid friend or sweetheart will remember.
they forgive quickly and completely, but every little thing said,
looked, or acted by the loved one is translated in terms of the
personal. bony people especially find it difficult to understand or be
tolerant of this trait in the thoracic, because it is the exact opposite
of themselves. they call the thoracic "thin-skinned," and the thoracic
replies that the bony man has "a skin like a walrus." and each is right
from his own viewpoint.
the chivalrous thoracic man
¶ with his keen intuitions, his sense of the fitness of things and his
trigger-like adeptness, the thoracic man easily becomes an attentive and
chivalrous companion.
where the bony man is often oblivious to the fine points of courtesy,
the thoracic anticipates his[pg ] friend's every wish and movement, picks up
her handkerchief almost before she has dropped it, opens doors
instantaneously and specializes in those graces dear to the heart of
woman.
he is likely to do as much for the very next lady he meets just as soon
as he meets her. these ready courtesies cost the thoracic husband as
many explanations as the caressing habit costs the alimentive.
breaches of promise
¶ more bona fide breach of promise suits are brought against the
thoracic man than any other. he thinks rapidly, speaks almost as quickly
as he thinks and about what he thinks.
consequently many an honorable man has awakened some morning to find he
has to "pay the piper" for an impulsive proposal made to a girl he would
not walk across the street now to see.
many a girl, too, when she is "in love with love" promises to marry, and
the next day wonders what made her do it.
this is the type of chameleon-like girl whose vagaries and "sweet
uncertainties" form the theme of many short stories, in most of which
she is pictured as "the eternal feminine."[pg ]
she gets much attention
¶ nevertheless, many a man prefers this creature of "a million moods" to
the staid and sedate girl of other types. so the thoracic girl seldom
lacks for attention. she does not have as many intimate friends as the
fat girl, for she is less comforting, and comfort is one of the first
requisites of friendship. but she has a longer line of beaux dancing
attendance upon her, sending her flowers, candy and messages.
the stunning girl
¶ another reason why the thoracic girl has more attention from men is
that she is the most smartly-gowned of all the types. the new, the
extreme, the "very latest" in women's clothes are first seen on the
thoracic girl. she is the type men call "stunning."
men prefer companions who appear well—whom other men admire. the
thoracic woman demands the same of the men she goes about with, and for
these two reasons many thoracics marry those in whom their own type
predominates.
the "merry widows"
¶ make a note of the "dashing widows," you[pg ] have known—those who were
called "the merry widows"—and you will recall a large thoracic element
in each.
for this type of woman, unlike the home-keeping alimentive, enjoys being
a widow and remains one. she usually has many chances to remarry but her
changeable, gaiety-loving nature revels in the freedom, sophistication
and distinction of widowhood.
the appearance of endless youth given by her alive, responsive
personality deceives the most discerning as to her age. the woman of
fifty who enthralls the youths of twenty-five is usually of the thoracic
type.
refuses to grow old
¶ this woman refuses to grow old, just as the alimentive refuses to grow
up. she clings to her beauty as does no other type. she it is who
self-sacrificingly starves herself to retain her slenderness, who
massages and exercises and "cold-creams" herself hours a day before the
shrine of eternal youth. her high color, "all her own," is a decided
asset in this direction.
this woman devotes as much attention to her[pg ] grooming at sixty as the
alimentive does at twenty. for this reason you may any day see two women
of forty together, one an alimentive and the other a thoracic—and take
the plump one to be several or many years older than the florid one.
love the "bright lights"
¶ thoracic men and women care more about "the bright lights" than other
types. the alimentive likes what he calls "a good time"—with fun and
plenty of "refreshments"—but the thoracic's idea of a good time usually
includes a touch of "high life."
this all comes from his love of thrill and novelty and is innocent
enough. but it leads to misunderstandings and broken homes unless the
thoracic marries the right type of person.
¶ the osseous, for instance, has nothing in his consciousness by which
to understand the desire for excitement which is so strong in the
thoracic. we have all known good wives and loving mothers whose marital
happiness was destroyed because they could not compel themselves to lead
the drab existence laid out for them by their bony, stony husbands. in
many cases the wife, who only[pg ] wanted a little innocent fun, was less to
blame than her unbending spouse.
why she went insane
¶ one day several years ago we drove up to a lonely farmhouse in montana
just as a tragedy was enacted. the mother was being taken to the state
asylum for the insane. the seven little children watched the strange
performance, unable to understand what had happened. the father, a tall,
raw-boned, angular man was almost as mystified as the children.
"crazy?" he said, "i don't believe it. say, what did she have to go
crazy about? she hasn't seen anything to excite her. why, she's not been
off this farm for twenty years!"
the "gay devil" husband
¶ the same thing happens every day between severe, bony wives and their
florid, frolicking husbands. "she is a perfect housekeeper and a good
wife" exclaim her friends—"why should her husband spend his evenings
away from home?" these questions will continue to be asked until we
realize that being "a good housekeeper and a good wife" does not fill
the bill with a thoracic man.[pg ] a wife who will leave the dinner dishes
in the kitchen sink occasionally and run away with him for a "lark" on a
moment's notice is the kind that retains the love of her florid husband.
a husband who is willing to leave his favorite magazine, pipe, and
slippers to take her out in the evening is the kind a thoracic woman
likes. she even prefers a "gay devil" to a "stick"—as she calls the
slow ones.
makes him jealous
¶ the thoracic man wants his wife to look well and be pleasing but no
husband wants his wife to be irresistibly attractive to other men. so it
often happens that the thoracic woman causes her husband much jealousy.
her youthful actions and distinctive dressing make her a magnet for all
eyes. if he happens to be too different in type to understand her
naturalness and pure-mindedness in this he often suffers keenly.
sometimes he causes her to suffer for it when they get home.
human analysis makes us all more tolerant of each other. it enables us
to know why people act as they do, and, best of all, that they mean well
and not ill most of the time.[pg ]
dislikes the monotonous
¶ the thoracic, you will remember, dislikes monotony. everything
savoring of routine, sameness—the dead level—wears on him.
three meals a day three hundred and sixty-five days in a year, with the
same person, in the same room, at the same table, is unspeakably irksome
to him. he may love that other person with completeness and constancy,
but he occasionally demands what bernard shaw calls "domestic change of
air."
"my wife's gone to the country," was the biggest song hit of its year
because there were so many florid men who understood just how that man
felt!
¶ the florid wife is as loving as any other but she heaves a sigh of
relief and invites her women friends in for a party when john goes away
on business.
not easy to live with
¶ thoracic husbands or wives are not as easy to live with as the
alimentive. they are too affectable, too susceptible to sudden changes
of mood. they live alternately on the crest of the wave and in the
depths, and rob the home of that serenity which is essential to
harmony.[pg ]
impulsive tendencies which made the sweetheart adorable are less
attractive in the wife. and hubby's hair-trigger temperament she now
calls just plain temper.
desirable traits of thoracics
¶ that they are the most charming in manner, the most tasteful in dress
and the most entertaining of any type constitute the traits which make
the thoracic husband or wife desirable and attractive.
live beyond means
¶ husbands and wives of this type present this marital problem however:
they tend to live beyond their means. the husband in such a case seldom
confides the true state of his financial affairs to his wife while the
thoracic wife, bent on making the best possible appearance, finds it
almost impossible to trim down expenditures to fit the family purse.
the habit of entertaining extravagantly and almost constantly also costs
the thoracic household dear.
¶ the desire on the part of a thoracic husband or wife to move
frequently from that particular house, neighborhood, or city presents
another difficulty.[pg ]
should marry own type
¶ for the reasons stated above and throughout this work, the
predominantly thoracic person should marry his own type as first choice.
no other can understand his impulsiveness.
his second choice should be a person predominantly of the alimentive
type. the alimentive is more like the thoracic than any other, and in
the places where they differ the alimentive gives in with better grace
than other types.
the third choice may be a predominantly muscular person. in the latter
case, however, the muscular should have either thoracic or alimentive
tendencies combined with his muscularity.
because they are so different as to be almost opposites, and therefore
unable to understand each other, the last person the thoracic should
marry is the osseous.
part three
¶ the muscular does not marry early like the alimentive nor hastily like
the thoracic. his is a practical nature and his practicality is
expressed[pg ] here as in everything else. back of his marriage you will
often find some of the same practical reasons that prompt his other
activities.
marries between twenty-five and thirty-five
¶ most musculars are still unmarried at twenty-five when their
alimentive friends have families and when their thoracic ones have had a
divorce or two. but few musculars are unmarried at thirty-five, though
at that age their osseous and cerebral friends are often still single.
the muscular does not marry on nothing, and as he does not star in any
line of work as early in life as the alimentive or thoracic he does not
have the means to marry as early in life as they. but he is a splendid
worker, gets something to do and does it fairly well.
the alimentive spends too much on food and other comforts and the
thoracic too much on luxuries, but the muscular, while not mercenary,
saves a larger portion of his income.
make "sensible" marriages
¶ so at somewhere around thirty the muscular is prepared to establish a
home. by that time he has lived past the rash stage and selects a mate
as[pg ] much like himself as possible, in order not to be thwarted in his
aims for "getting somewhere in the world"—aims which dominate this type
all his life.
a mate for wearing qualities
¶ this type selects his mate as he selects his clothes—for wearing
quality. he prefers plain, simple people, for he is plain and simple
himself. they are not carried off their feet by impulse as are some of
the other types. they therefore choose wives and husbands whose lovable
qualities show signs of durability.
the most positive lover
¶ the muscular makes love almost as strenuously as he does everything
else. he does not do it especially gracefully like the thoracic, nor
caressingly like the alimentive, but intensely and in dead earnest. he
does not cut short the courtship like the thoracic, nor extend it for
years like the osseous, but marries as soon as the practical
requirements can be met.
the alimentive is the most affectionate in love and the thoracic the
most flirtatious, but the muscular is the most positive.[pg ]
the fatal handicap
¶ the muscular has more strong traits than any other type from the
marital point of view, but he has one weakness of such magnitude that it
often counterbalances them. his pugnacity causes him to give way
frequently to violent outbursts of anger. in them he says bitter things
that are almost impossible to forgive.
this type's chief handicap in all his relations is his tendency to fight
too quickly, to say too much when angry, and thus to make enemies.
in marriage this is a serious handicap which loses many an otherwise
ideal husband or wife the chance for happiness.
another muscular trait which makes life difficult for his mate is his
tendency to be so generous with outsiders that his family suffers.
also this type of husband or wife is inclined to sacrifice the social
side of family life to work and thus widen the distance between husband
and wife as the years go on.
desirable traits
¶ working capacity, generosity and squareness are qualities making for
the success of the muscular marriage.[pg ]
the muscular wife, more often than any other, helps earn the living when
things go wrong financially.
the muscular usually dislikes flirtations and gives his mate little
anxiety on this score.
mates for musculars
¶ the muscular has four choices in the selection of a mate. there is but
one type he should never marry and that is the osseous. the stubborness
of the osseous, when pitted against the muscular's pugnacity, causes
constant warfare. the predominantly muscular person should choose a mate
who is also predominantly muscular. no other type aids him in the
practical affairs of the family's future. but it is well for him when
this muscular has decided cerebral tendencies. second choice for the
muscular is a mate predominantly cerebral. the muscular in this case
furnishes the brawn to work out the plans made by the brain of the
cerebral, and the combination is one that stands a good chance of
happiness. third choice is the thoracic, and fourth choice the
alimentive.[pg ]
part four
¶ bring to mind all the men and women you have known who waited ten,
twenty or thirty years for the one they had given their hearts to. you
will recall that they all had large bones or large joints for their
bodies. such people are always predominantly osseous.
the loved one may marry but the bony man or woman remains faithful; it
must be the one they want or none.
the riddle solved
¶ this fact accounts for some of the incongruous matches in middle or
later life of old friends who seem to be unfitted to each other. often
one of them has waited many years for the other to consent, for children
to grow up, or for death to clear the way.
one lover through life
¶ osseous men and women are so constituted that it is practically
impossible for them to love many times during a lifetime.
bony people, even when young, have fewer sweethearts than other types.
the large-boned boy or[pg ] girl is usually ill at ease in the presence of
the other sex, avoids social affairs, and does not attract love as early
in life as other types do.
they suffer keenly from the near-ostracism resulting from this, but are
powerless to change it.
live apart from others
¶ because they live more or less apart from their fellows, even as
children, and tend to withdraw into themselves, the osseous see little
of the other sex, learn little about it and come to think of it as
unapproachable.
as we have seen, the alimentive feels at ease with the other sex, the
thoracic charms them, the muscular cultivates them when he is in
earnest, but the osseous avoids them. if he does not marry he becomes
more and more awkward in their presence as he grows older. such a person
will often go a block out of his way to avoid meeting a person of the
opposite sex.
marries less often
¶ this naturally leads to the unmated life which characterizes so many
men and women of the osseous type.
we asked you to recall the one or two alimentive[pg ] bachelors and
spinsters you ever knew, the three or four thoracics and the not more
than half a dozen musculars who didn't marry. but it will take some time
to enumerate the osseous people you know who have never married. this
type constitutes a very large proportion of the unmarried.
most difficult to live with
¶ when the osseous does marry he is the most difficult of all types to
live with, because he is inclined to be immovable and unbending.
to give and take has long been considered the secret of happy marriage
and certainly is one of them. but this type finds it almost impossible
to adapt himself to his mate. he wants everything in a certain way at a
certain time and for a certain purpose. whoever opposes him is pretty
ruthlessly handled.
another marital liability of this type is his disinclination and
inability to make new friends. he contributes to the family circle only
those few intimates he has had for years.
likes to dominate
¶ the osseous is inclined to dominate and often to domineer over his
mate and over his family[pg ] in general. this is as true of the women as of
the men. as we have seen, type and not sex is what causes the big
distinctions between people.
the hen-pecked husband
¶ whenever you see a hen-pecked husband look at his wife. you will
always find that she has either large joints, large bones or a square
jaw.
many times we have heard men declare "they would show such a wife how to
act," but unless they could change her boniness they would find it
difficult to "show her" much of anything.
the reason the husband of such a woman seldom resists is because he is
nine times out of ten an alimentive or a cerebral—types that prefer to
be bossed rather than to boss.
the same combination is usually present when the husband dominates the
wife. he is almost invariably bony and she is either alimentive or
cerebral. and other women say, "i'd like to show such a husband what i
would do if he tried to tyrannize over me as he does over her!" but such
a woman often prefers a husband who relieves her of the responsibility
of decisions, and two such people sometimes lead surprisingly happy
lives together.[pg ]
mates for the osseous
¶ therefore the type best fitted to live in harmony with the
predominantly osseous is the predominantly alimentive. second choice is
the predominantly cerebral, for the reasons stated above. there is no
third choice.
the pure osseous and pure thoracic should not marry because they are too
far removed from each other in all their tendencies ever to understand
each other.
the one type the pure osseous should never mate with is his own. nothing
but trouble results when two of the extreme bony type marry, for each
has definite views, desires and preferences—and neither can give in.
part five
¶ the cerebral type takes most of his love out in dreaming. he is as
impractical about his affections as about all else and often nothing but
hopes come of it. next to the osseous he marries less frequently than
any other type.[pg ]
head and heart in the clouds
¶ the cerebral often remains single because he can not come down to
earth long enough to propose, or if he does he is so gentle and timid
about it the girl is afraid to trust her life to him.
timidity his curse
¶ timidity costs the cerebral man most of the good things he could
otherwise get out of life. he is almost afraid to fall in love, afraid
to speak after he does and afraid to face the hostile world with two
lives on his hands.
women like him
¶ the average woman likes the cerebral type of man but seldom loves or
adores him. his helplessness appeals to her motherly sympathy.
can not buffet the world
¶ but women are afraid to marry the extreme type even when the feeling
he prompts is more than mere protectiveness. they know he can not buffet
the world for them and their offspring.
so, even when they love him best they usually marry the fat salesman,
the muscular worker who always has a good job, the thoracic promoter
who[pg ] promises luxury, or the osseous man who won't take "no" for an
answer.
always leap year for him.
¶ when this type of man does marry it is often due as much to her
proposal as his. he is especially aided in his courtship if "she"
happens to be a quick-spoken thoracic, a straight-from-the-shoulder
muscular, or one of those determined osseous girls.
the much-loved cerebral woman
¶ the cerebral woman is more fortunate in achieving marriage than the
cerebral man. the impracticality which so seriously handicaps him, since
the husband is supposed to support the family, is not quite so much of a
handicap to her.
men who love her at all, love her for her tenderness, conscientiousness
and delicacy and deem it a pleasure to work for her, and she is one type
of woman who usually appreciates it.
the cerebral's weaknesses
¶ the tendency to dream his life away instead of doing tangible things
that assist in the progress of the family is the greatest marital
handicap of the cerebral type.[pg ]
inability to make money results directly from this, and since money is
so important in the rearing and educating of children, those who can not
get it are bound to face hardship and disillusionment.
the saddest sight
¶ the most pathetic sight to be seen anywhere is that of the delicate,
intellectual man who loves his family dearly, has the highest ideals and
yet is unable to provide for them.
when love flies out the window
¶ "when poverty comes in the door love flies out the window" is a saying
as old as it is sad.
¶ and it is as true as it is both old and sad.
despite the philosophers—who are all cerebrals themselves!—love should
grow in sheltered soil, protected from the buffetings of wind and storm.
without means no man can provide this protection. happy marriage, as we
have seen, is based on the cultivation of the strong points and the
submergence of the weak ones of each partner. poverty does more to bring
out the worst in people and conceal the best than anything else in the
world. so, although this type is high-minded, more idealistic in his
love than any other type and has fewer[pg ] of the lower instincts, he makes
less of a success of marriage than any other type.
mates for the cerebral
¶ because he lives in his mind and not in his external world the
predominantly cerebral must marry one who also is predominantly
cerebral.
the reading of books, attendance at good plays, and the study of great
movements constitute the chief enjoyments of this type and if he has a
mate who cares nothing for these things his marriage is bound to be a
failure.
the cerebral he marries should, however, be inclined to the muscular
also.
second choice for this type is the predominantly muscular and third
choice is the osseous. the firmness of the latter is often a desirable
element in the combination, for the cerebral does not mind giving the
reins over to his osseous mate; he does not like driving anyhow.
the last type of all for the pure cerebral to marry is the pure
alimentive because it is farthest removed from his own type. these two
have very little in common.[pg ]
remember, in marriage, type is not a substitute for love. both are
essential to ideal mating. people contemplating matrimony are like
two autoists planning a long journey together, each driving his own
car. whether they can make the same speed, climb the same grades
"on high" and be well matched in general, depends on the type of
these two cars. but it takes love to supply the gas, the
self-starters and the spark plugs![pg ]
vocations for each type
"fame and failure"
he masses of mankind form a vast pyramid. at the very tip-top peak are
gathered the few who are famous. in the bottom layer are the many
failures. between these extremes lie all the rest—from those who live
near the ragged edge of down-and-out-land to those who storm the doors
of the house of greatness.
again, between these, and making up the large majority, are the myriads
of laborers, clerks, small business men, housekeepers—that
myriad-headed mass known as "the back bone of the world."
yet the great distance from the lower layer to the tip-top peak is not
insurmountable. many have covered it almost overnight.
a favorite fallacy
¶ for fame is not due, as we have been led to believe, solely to years
of plodding toil. a thousand[pg ] years of labor could never have produced
an edison, a marconi, a curie, a rockefeller, a roosevelt, a wilson, a
bryan, a ford, a babe ruth, a carpentier, a mary pickford, a caruso, a
spencer or an emerson.
fame's foundation
¶ the reserved seat in the tip-top peak of the pyramid is procured only
by him who has found his real vocation.
to such a one his work is not hard. no hours are long enough to tire
his body; no thought is difficult enough to weary his mind; to him there
is no day and no night, no quitting time, no saturday afternoons and no
sundays. he is at the business for which he was created—and all is
play.
edison sleeps four hours
¶ thomas a. edison so loves his work that he sleeps an average of less
than four hours of each twenty-four. when working out one of his
experiments he forgets to eat, cares not whether it is day or night and
keeps his mind on his invention until it is finished.
yet he has reached the age of seventy-four with every mental and
physical faculty doing one[pg ] hundred per cent service—and the prize
place in the tip-top peak of the wizards of the world is his! he started
at the very bottom layer, an orphan newsboy. he made the journey to the
pinnacle because early in life he found his vocation.
failures who became famous
¶ each one of the world's great successes was a failure first.
it is interesting to note the things at which some of them failed.
darwin was a failure at the ministry, for which he was educated. herbert
spencer was a failure as an engineer, though he struggled years in that
profession. abraham lincoln was such a failure at thirty-three as a
lawyer that he refused an invitation to visit an old friend "because,"
he wrote, "i am such a failure i do not dare to take the time."
babe ruth was a failure as a tailor. hawthorne was a failure as a custom
house clerk when he wrote the "scarlet letter." theodore roosevelt was a
failure as a cowboy in north dakota and gave up his frontiering because
of it.
these men were failures because they tried to do things for which they
were not intended. but each[pg ] at last found his work, and when he did, it
was so easy for him it made him famous.
play, not work, brings fame
¶ fame comes only to the man, or woman, who loves his work so well that
it is not work but play. it comes only to him who does something with
marvellous efficiency. work alone can not produce that kind of
efficiency.
outdistancing competition
¶ fame comes from doing one thing so much better than your competitors
that your results stand out above and beyond the results of all others.
any man who will do efficiently any one of the many things the world is
crying for can place his own price upon his work and get it. he can get
it because the world gladly pays for what it really wants, and because
the efficient man has almost no competition.
efficiency comes from enjoyment
¶ but here's the rub. you will never do anything with that brilliant
efficiency save what you like to do. efficiency does not come from duty,
or[pg ] necessity, or goading, or lashing, or anything under heaven save
nothing less will ever release those hidden powers, those miraculous
forces which, for the lack of a better name, we call "genius."
knowing what are not your vocations
¶ elimination of what are distinctly not your vocations will help you
toward finding those that are. to that end here are some tests which
will clear up many things for you. they will help you to know especially
whether or not the vocations you have been contemplating are fitted to
you.
how to test yourself
¶ whenever you are considering your fitness for any vocation, ask
yourself these questions:
self-question —am i considering this vocation chiefly because i
would enjoy the things it would bring—such as salary, fame, social
position or change of scene?
if, in your heart, your answer is "yes," this is not a vocation for
you.[pg ]
the movie hopeful
¶ the above test can best be illustrated by the story of a young woman
who wanted to be told that she had ability to act. "i am determined to
go into the movies," she told us. "do you think i would be a success?"
"when you picture yourself in this profession what do you see yourself
doing?" we asked.
"oh, everything wonderful," she replied. "i see myself driving my own
car—one of those cute little custom-made ones, you know—and wearing
the most stunning clothes and meeting all those big movie stars—and
living all the year round in california!"
"is that all you ever see yourself doing?" we inquired.
"yes—but isn't that enough?"
"all but one—the acting."
she then admitted that in the eight years she had been planning to enter
the movies she had never once really visualized herself acting, or
studying any part, or doing any work—nothing but rewards and
emoluments.[pg ]
pleasure or pay?
self-question —knowing the requirements of this vocation—its
tasks, drudgeries, hours of work, concentration and kind of
activity—would i choose to follow them in preference to any other
kind of activity even if the income were the same?
would i do these things for the pleasure of doing them and not for
the pay?
if, in your heart, you can answer "yes" to these questions, your problem
is settled; you will succeed in that vocation. for you will so enjoy
your work that it will be play. being play, you will do it so happily
that you will get from it new strength each day.
because you are doing what you were built to do, you will think of
countless improvements, inventions, ways of marketing them. this will
promote you over the others who are there only for the pay envelope; it
will raise your salary; it will eventually and inevitably take you to
the top.
a man we know aptly illustrates this point. he was a bookkeeper. he had
held the same position for twenty-three years and was getting $ a
month. he had little leisure but used all he did[pg ] have—evenings,
saturday afternoons, sundays and his ten-day vacations—making things.
in that time he had built furniture for his six-room house—every kind
of article for the kitchen, bathroom and porch. and into everything he
had put little improving touches such as are not manufactured in such
things.
we convinced him that his wife was not the only woman who would
appreciate these step-saving, work-reducing, leisure-giving
conveniences. he finally believed it enough to patent some of his
inventions, and today he is a rich man.
of "your own accord"
¶ one more question will shed much light on the matter of your talents.
here it is:
self-question —do i tend to follow, of my own accord, for the
sheer joy of it, the kinds of activity demanded by this vocation
which i am contemplating?
if you do not you will never succeed in this line of work.
thought it would do him good
¶ one incident will serve to illustrate the foregoing test. a young man
asked us if he could[pg ] succeed as a public speaker. he had decided to
become a lecturer and had spent two years studying for that work.
"do you enjoy talking? do you like to explain and expatiate? when out
with others do you furnish your share of the conversation or a little
more?" were the questions we put to him.
to all of the questions he answered "no."
"but i thought this was just the line of work i ought to go into," he
explained, "i have always been diffident and i thought the training
would do me good."
life pays the producer
¶ expecting the world to pay you handsomely while remaking you is
short-sighted, to say the least. the public schools are free, like
life's education, but you don't get a salary for attending them.
to be a success you must produce something out of the ordinary for the
world. and you will produce nothing unusual save what your particular
organism was built to produce. to know what this is, classify the kind
of activities you "take to" naturally. you can be a star in some line[pg ]
that calls for those activities. you will never succeed in any calling
which demands the opposite kinds of activities or reactions.
the worst place for her
¶ a few years ago, in san francisco, a young woman came to us for
vocational advice. she had decided to find an opening in a
silk-importing establishment, for none of whose duties she was
qualified. when asked how she happened to hit upon the thing for which
she unquestionably had no ability, she said:
"i thought it would give me a world outlook (which i need); compel me to
learn fabrics (something i think every woman ought to know); force me to
attend to details (which i have always hated but which i must learn to
master); and because it would bring me into contact with people (i
dislike them but think i should learn to deal with them)."
when considering a position
¶ when a position is being considered the questions an applicant should
be asking himself are, "what must i do in this position? am i qualified?
can i make good? do i like the activities demanded by this position?"[pg ]
but ninety-nine out of every hundred applicants for a vacancy ask no
question of themselves whatever, and only one of anybody else. that
question is to the employer and it is only four words: "what does it
pay?"
he overlooks the fact that if the salary involved is large enough to be
attractive he will soon be severed from it unless he makes good. he also
forgets that if the salary is small he can force it to grow if he is big
enough himself.
if the particular task he is considering does not warrant a large
salary, his employers will find one for him that does if he shows he has
ability.
every business in the world is looking for people who can do a few
things a trifle better than the mass of people are doing them today, and
whenever they find them they pay them well—because it pays them in the
long run.
the big-salaried men
¶ don't be afraid that you may develop ability and then find no market
for it. the only jobs that have to go begging are the big-salaried ones,
because the combination of intelligence and efficiency is not easy to
find. the men who are draw[pg ]ing from $, to $, a year are not
supermen. they are not very different from anybody else. but they found
a line that fitted their particular talents, and they went ahead
cultivating those talents without asking for everything in advance.
looking for "chicken feed"
¶ while touring through the rockies last summer we came one day to a log
shack perched on the mountain-side near the road. in the back-yard was
the owner, just ready to feed his chickens. as he flung out the grain
they came from every direction, crowding and jostling each other and
frantically pecking for the tiny morsels he threw on the ground. several
dozen flocked around him. but three or four stayed on the outer edge,
ready to scamper for the big grains he threw now and then amongst the
boulders up on the hillside.
"i do that just to see them use their heads," he explained. "people are
just like that. they rush for the little chances where all the
competition is, instead of staying out where they can see a big chance
when it comes."
life is full of opportunities for every person who will consult his own
capacities and aim for the big chance.[pg ]
causes of misfits
¶ various influences are responsible for the misfit, chief amongst which
are his loving parents. many fathers and mothers, with the best
intentions in the world, urge their children to enter vocations for
which they have no natural fitness whatever. these same parents often
discourage in their children the very talents which, if permitted to
develop, would make them successful.
such a child has small chance in the world if it happens that his
parents are sufficiently well-to-do to hold the purse strings on his
training. not until he has failed at the work they choose for him will
such parents desist. when they finally allow him to take to the work he
prefers they are usually surprised to see how clever he is.
but if he does not succeed at it they should bear in mind that it is
doubtless due to their having cheated him out of his priceless
youth—the years when the mind is moldable, impressionable and full of
inspiration.
poverty's one advantage
¶ in this situation alone does the child of poverty-ridden parents have
greater opportunities than the[pg ] child of the well-to-do. he at least
chooses his own work, and this is one more little reason why the world's
most successful men so often come from the ranks of the poor.
"ruined by too much mothering and fathering" is a verdict we would
frequently render if we knew the facts.
richard and dorothy
¶ one instance in which fate took a hand was very interesting. a new
york widow, whose husband had left his large fortune entirely to her,
nursed definite ambitions for her son and daughter. richard, she had
decided, should become a stock-raiser and farmer on the
several-thousand-acre ranch they owned in texas. dorothy should study
art in paris.
but it so happened that richard and dorothy disliked the respective
vocations laid out for them, while each wanted to do the very thing the
other was being driven to do. richard was small, dark, sensitive,
esthetic—and bent on being an artist. dorothy, who was six feet in her
stockings, laughed at art and wanted to be a farmer.
but mother was obdurate and mother held the family purse. so, in the
spring of , dorothy[pg ] was sent to paris to study the art richard
loved, and richard was sent to the texas ranch that dorothy wanted.
then the war broke and dorothy hurried from paris to avoid german
shells, while richard enlisted to escape the texas ranch. dorothy, in
her element at last, took over the ranch (of which richard had made a
failure), turned it into one vast war garden, became a farmerette and is
there now—a shining success.
richard got to paris during the war and when it closed refused to come
home. he wrote his mother that the war had taught him he could earn his
own living—an accomplishment he is achieving today with his art. the
mother herself is happier than she ever was before, and proud of her
children's success.
three kinds of parents
¶ parents can be divided into three classes—those who over-estimate
their children, those who under-estimate their children, and those who
do not estimate them at all.
the great majority are in the first group. this accounts for the fact
that most fathers and mothers are disillusioned, as their children, one
by one, fall short of their cherished hopes.[pg ]
those who under-estimate their children are in that small group—of
parents who live to be happily surprised at their achievements.
the best parents of all are those who allow their children to follow
their natural talents.
don'ts for parents
¶ don't push your child into any vocation he dislikes.
don't be like the parents we dined with recently. as we sat around the
table they pointed out their four children as follows: "there's
georgie—we're going to make a doctor of him. our best friend is a
doctor. we'll make a lawyer out of johnnie. there's been a lawyer in the
family for generations. jimmie is to be a minister. we thought it was
about time we had one of them in the family."
"what about helen?" we asked.
"oh, helen—why, she's going to marry and have a nice home of her own."
any student of human analysis would have recognized that of this quartet
of children not one was being directed into the right vocation. he would
have seen that the square-jawed muscular jimmie would make a much better
lawyer than a minister;[pg ] that little johnnie should be a teacher or a
lecturer; that fat georgie was born for business instead of medicine;
and that helen had more ability than any of her brothers.
the woman misfit
¶ too many parents have gone on the theory that belonging to the female
sex was a sure indication of home-making, mothering, housekeeping
abilities.
the commercial world is full of women who have starved, wasted and
shriveled their lives away behind counters, desks and typewriters when
they were meant for motherhood and wifehood.
the homes of the land are also full of women who, with the brains and
effort they have given to scrubbing, washing and cooking, could have
become "captains of industry."
the sealed parcel
¶ if you are a parent don't allow yourself to set your heart on any
particular line of work for your children. your child is a sealed parcel
and only his own tendencies, as they appear during youth, can tell what
that parcel really contains.
allow these traits to unfold naturally, normally and freely. don't
complicate your own problem by[pg ] trying to advise him too soon. don't
praise certain professions. children are intensely suggestible. the
knowledge that father and mother consider a certain profession
especially desirable oftentimes influences a child to waste time working
toward it when he has no real ability for it. every hour of youth is
precious and this wastage is unspeakably expensive.
on the other hand, do not attempt to prejudice your child against any
profession. don't let him think, for instance, that you consider
overalls a badge of inferiority, or a white collar the mark of
superiority. many a man in blue denim today could buy and sell the
collar-and-cuff friends of his earlier years. the size of a man's
laundry bill is no criterion of his income.
popular misconceptions
¶ other parents make the equally foolish mistake of showing their
dislike of certain professions. not long ago we heard a father say in
the presence of his large family, "i don't want any of my boys to be
lawyers. lawyers are all liars. ministers are worse; they're all a bunch
of sissies. doctors are all fakes. actors are all bad eggs; and business
is one big game of cheat or be cheated. i'm going to see that every boy
i've got becomes a farmer."[pg ]
misdirected mothering
¶ a very unfortunate case came to our attention several years ago. in
chicago a mother brought her eighteen-year-old son to us for vocational
counsel. "i am determined that james shall be a minister," she said. "my
whole happiness depends upon it. i have worked, slaved and sacrificed
ever since his father died that he might have the education for it. now
i want you to tell james to be a minister."
we refused to take the case, explaining that our analyses didn't come to
order but had to fit the facts as we found them. she still insisted upon
the analysis. it revealed the fact that james was deficient mentally,
save in one thing. his capacity for observing was lightning-like in its
swiftness and microscopic in its completeness. and his capacity for
judging remote motives from immediate actions was uncannily accurate.
he was a human ferret, as had been proven many times during his boyhood.
at one time the jewelry store in which he worked as a shipping clerk
lost a valuable necklace, and after the police of chicago had failed to
find a clew, james' special ability was reported and he was given a
week's vacation[pg ] to work on the case. he took the last three days for a
long-desired trip to milwaukee. he had landed the thief in the first
four. we told the mother that her boy's ability was about the farthest
removed from the ministerial that could well be imagined, but that he
would make an excellent detective.
"i shall never permit it!" she cried. "his father was a policeman. i
distrust that whole class of people! i am taking james to the
theological seminary tomorrow"—and away she went with him. two months
later she came to us in great distress. she had received a letter from
the dean saying james had attended but one day's classes. then he had
announced that he was going home. instead he had cultivated a gang of
underworld crooks for the purpose of investigating their methods and had
gotten into serious trouble.
nevers for all
¶ never choose a vocation just because it looks profitable. it won't
bring profits to you long unless you are built for it.
never choose a vocation just because it looks easy. no work will be
easy for you except that which nature intended for you.[pg ]
never choose a vocation just because it permits the wearing of good
clothes. you need more than a permit; you need ability.
never choose a vocation just because the hours are short. you can't
fool employers that way. they also know they are short, and pay you
accordingly. the extra play these leisure hours give you will amount to
nothing but loss to you ten years hence.
never choose a vocation just because it is popular or sounds
interesting.
"i am going to be a private secretary," said a young woman near us at
the theater recently.
"what will you have to do?" asked her friend.
"oh, i don't know," the girl answered, "but it sounds so fascinating,
don't you think?"
never turn your back on a profession just because it is old-fashioned,
middle class or ordinary. if you have talents fitting you for such
vocations you are lucky, for these are the ones for which there is the
greatest demand. demand is a big help. if you can add a new touch to
such a one you are made.
why she taught german
¶ never choose a vocation just because your[pg ] friends are in it, nor
refuse another just because your worst enemy is in it.
two friends come to mind in this connection. one is a splendid woman we
knew at college. she became a german teacher and up to the outbreak of
the war had an instructorship in a western state university. the
elimination of german lost her the position.
"why did you ever choose german, anyhow, ruth?" we asked her. "your
abilities lie in such a different direction."
"because my favorite teacher in high school taught german," she replied.
enemies and engineering
¶ an opposite case is that of a friend of ours who has worked in an
uncongenial profession for thirty years. "you were meant for
engineering, tom," we told him. "with all the leanings you had in that
direction, how did it happen you didn't follow it?"
"because the man who cheated my father out of all he had was an
engineer!" he said.
never choose a new vocation just because you are restless. you will be
more so if you get into the wrong one.[pg ]
the "society" delusion
¶ never choose a vocation just because it promises social standing.
the entree it gives will fail you unless you make good. and social
standing isn't worth much anyhow. when you are in the work for which you
were born you won't worry about social standing. it will come to you
then whether you want it or not. and when it does you will care very
little about it.
the entering wedge
¶ never take a certain job for life just because people are
dependent upon you. save enough to live one month without a job,
preparing yourself meanwhile for an entering wedge into a vocation you
do like. then take a smaller-paying place if necessary to get started.
if you really like the work you will do it so well you will promote
yourself. you owe it to those who are dependent upon you to do this.
jack of all trades
¶ never do anything just to show you can. don't let your versatility
tempt you into following a number of lines of work for the purpose of
demonstrating your ability. versatility can be the great[pg ]est handicap of
all; it tempts you to neglect intensive study, to flit, to become a
"jack of all trades and master of none."
only three kinds of work
¶ there are but three general classes of work. they are:
each individual is fitted by nature to do one of these better than the
others and there will be one class for which he has the least ability.
in the other one of the three he might make a mediocre success. every
individual should find a vocation furnishing that one of these three
kinds of work for which he has the greatest ability. then he should go
into the particular branch of that vocation which is best adapted to
his personality, training, education, environment and experience.
[pg ]
part one
¶ as stated in chapter i, alimentives are born for business. they can
sell almost anything in the line of food, clothing, or shelter because
they are so interested in them themselves they can make them interesting
to others. they like money for the comforts which money alone can bring
and business furnishes a wider field for money-making than any other. so
the alimentive likes the commercial world for itself and for what it
brings him.
sells things to people
¶ the alimentive can deal with both people and things, but it should be
in the capacity of selling the things to the people.
chances for money-making
¶ the alimentives have the greatest opportunities today for making
fortunes and many of the multi-millionaires of america are combinations
of this type with the cerebral. this is due to the fact that the world
must be fed, clothed and sheltered and the alimentive, more than any
other type, excels in the marketing, manufacturing and merchandizing of
these things.[pg ]
a good overseer
¶ the alimentive makes an excellent overseer also. he is so genial,
likable and yet so bent on saving himself work that he can get more work
out of others than can any other type.
so he succeeds as a foreman, supervisor, boss, superintendent, manager
and sales department head.
capitalizes his "comfort" instincts
¶ the alimentive loves comforts. he feels he must have them. because any
man's success will be found to lie in the direction which most nearly
satisfies his basic instincts, the alimentive succeeds by making "the
good things of life" look so interesting to others they are willing to
buy them from him at the best prices.
the alimentively inclined
¶ every man who is largely alimentive in type can sell commodities or
oversee the work of others. every woman who is largely alimentive can
also sell the same commodities, oversee the work of others in her
department and become a good cook.
things to avoid
¶ the alimentive should avoid vocations dealing[pg ] exclusively with ideas.
books are almost the only things an alimentive can not sell
successfully. this is due to the fact that he is not as interested in
ideas as in things, and the things he is interested in—food and
comforts—are the farthest removed from books.
partners to select
¶ when he goes into partnership the alimentive should endeavor to do so
with a practical muscular, a clever thoracic or another alimentive.
partners and employees to avoid
¶ he should avoid as partners the pure cerebrals and the pure osseous.
the former are too high brow and visionary for him, and the osseous are
too critical of his easy ways.
bosses to avoid
¶ the alimentive, when looking for employment, should try to avoid the
boss who is a pure cerebral or a pure osseous. the cerebral may be a
good planner but his plans and those of the alimentives will not work
well together. the cerebral can not see the alimentive's point of view
clearly enough to forgive him for his too primitive methods. the pure
osseous boss soon becomes disgusted because[pg ] the alimentive is so
lacking in system. he usually comes out all right in the end, but the
orderly osseous is too exasperated by what he considers the alimentive's
slackness, to wait for the end.
localities to avoid
¶ the alimentive should avoid all frontiers. he can not work well
without conveniences, and since these are few and far between in
unsettled regions it is much more difficult for him to be a success
there.
vocations for pure alimentives
¶ cooking, catering, nursing, merchandizing of all food and drink
stuffs, the conducting of cafes, restaurants, hotels, cafeterias, rest
rooms and all places maintained for the ease, comfort and feeding of
mankind, are the general vocations for pure or extreme alimentives.
vocations for alimentive-thoracics
¶ the merchandizing of the artistic, novel and esthetic in food,
clothing and shelter; conducting of tea rooms, confectionery stores,
smart specialty and clothing shops. salesmanship of restricted residence
districts, fancy cars, etc.[pg ]
vocations for alimentive-musculars
¶ the merchandizing of more practical commodities such as potatoes,
meat, middle class homes, durable clothing. alimentive-muscular women
make excellent dressmakers.
vocations for the alimentive-osseous
¶ merchandizing of farms, ranches, timber, lumber, hardware. bond
salesmanship.
vocations for alimentive-cerebrals
¶ merchandizing, manufacturing and marketing of food, clothing and
shelter commodities on a large scale in world markets. this type
combination exists in most of the world's millionaires.
part two
¶ the thoracic type works best with people. every person in whom this
type predominates will make his greatest success only in vocations
bringing him into contact with people.[pg ]
the born entertainer
¶ as we have pointed out, the thoracic is a born entertainer. his
greatest abilities lie in the direction of the stage and all forms of
its activities.
capitalizes his approbative instincts
¶ the thoracic loves the approval and applause of others. he is clever,
dazzling, often scintillating, brilliant and magnetic. all these enable
him to win fame behind the foot-lights, upon the screen and in many
