she said, "hello i'm elizabeth! i'm sorry i was such
a hassle last week, and thank you for trying to take care of me so well. i was too
sick to know any better." she said she had gone out our back door the week before
and crawled under a pile of fallen leaves on the ground in our back yard with a black
tarp over them. we had looked under the tarp at least fifty times during the days
past, but never thought to look under the leaves as well.
this amazing occurrence made my head go bong to say the least;
it was obvious that elizabeth had not been 'schizophrenic' because of her genetics,
nor because of stress, nor malnutrition, nor hypoglycemia, nor because of any of
the causes of mental illness i had previously learned to identify and rectify, but
because of food allergies. elizabeth was spontaneously cured because she'd had nothing
to eat for a week. the composting pile of leaves hiding her had produced enough heat
to keep her warm at night and the heap contained sufficient moisture to keep her
from getting too dehydrated. she looked wonderful, with clear shiny blue eyes, clear
skin with good color, though she was slightly slimmer than when i had last seen her.
i then administered coca's pulse test (see the appendix)
and quickly discovered elizabeth was wildly intolerant to wheat and dairy products.
following the well known health gurus of that time like adelle davis, i had self-righteously
been feeding her home-made whole wheat bread from hand-ground organic wheat, and
home-made cultured yogurt from our own organically-fed goats. but by doing this i
had only maintained her insanity. elizabeth was an intelligent young woman, and once
she understood what was causing her problems, she had no trouble completely eliminating
certain foods from her diet. she shuddered at the thought that had she not come to
my place and discovered the problem, she would probably have died on the back ward
of some institution for the chronically mentally ill. 
as for me, i will always be grateful to her for opening my
eyes and mind a little wider. elizabeth's case showed me why russian schizophrenics
put on a  day water fast had such a high recovery rate. i also remembered all the
esoteric books i had read extolling the benefits of fasting. i also remembered two
occasions during my own youth when i had eaten little or nothing for approximately
a month each without realizing that i was "fasting." and doing this had
done me nothing but good.
once when i was thirteen my mother sent my "little"
brother and i to a residential fundamentalist bible school. i did not want to go
there, although my brother did; he had decided he wanted to be a evangelical minister.
i hated bible school because i was allowed absolutely no independence of action.
we were required to attend church services three times a day during the week, and
five services on sunday. as i became more and more unhappy, i ate less and less;
in short order i wasn't eating at all. the school administration became concerned
after i had dropped about  pounds in two months, notified my mother and sent me
home. i returned to at-home schooling. i also resumed eating. 
i fasted one other time for about a month when i was .
it happened because i had nothing to do while visiting my mother before returning
to university except help with housework and prepare meals. the food available in
the backwoods of central b.c. didn't appeal to me because it was mostly canned vegetables,
canned milk, canned moose meat and bear meat stews with lots of gravy and greasy
potatoes. i decided to pass on it altogether. i remember rather enjoying that time
as a fine rest and i left feeling very good ready to take on the world full force
ahead. at that time i didn't know there was such a thing as fasting, it just happened
that way.
after elizabeth went on her way, i decided to experimentally
fast myself. i consumed only water for two weeks. but i must have had counter intentions
to this fast because i found myself frequently having dreams about sugared plums,
and egg omelets, etc. and i didn't end up feeling much better after this fast was
over (although i didn't feel any worse either), because i foolishly broke the fast
with one of my dream omelets. and i knew better! every book i'd ever read on fasting
stated how important it is to break a fast gradually, eating only easy-to-digest
foods for days or weeks before resuming one's regular diet. 
from this experiment i painfully learned how important it
is to break a fast properly. those eggs just didn't feel right, like i had an indigestible
stone in my belly. i felt very tired after the omelet, not energized one bit by the
food. i immediately cut back my intake to raw fruits and vegetables while the eggs
cleared out of my system. after a few days on raw food i felt okay, but i never did
regain the shine i had achieved just before i resumed eating. 
this is one of the many fine things about fasting, it allows
you to get in much better communication with your own body, so that you can hear
it when it objects to something you're putting in it or doing to it. it is not easy
to acquire this degree of sensitivity to your body unless you remove all food for
a sufficiently long period; this allows the body to get a word in edgewise that we
are willing and able to listen to. even when we do hear the body protesting, we frequently
decide to turn a deaf ear, at least until the body starts producing severe pain or
some other symptom that we can't ignore.
within a few years after elizabeth's cure i had handily repaired
quite a few mentally ill people in a harmless way no one had heard of; many new people
were knocking at my door wanting to be admitted to my drug free, home-based treatment
program. so many in fact that my ability to accommodate them was overwhelmed. i decided
that it was necessary to move to a larger facility and we bought an old, somewhat
run-down estate that i called great oaks school of health because of the magnificent
oak trees growing in the front yard. 
at great oaks initially i continued working with psychotics,
employing fasting as a tool, especially in those cases with obvious food allergies
as identified by coca's pulse test, because it only takes five days for a fasting
body to eliminate all traces of an allergic food substance and return to normal functioning.
if the person was so severely hypoglycemic that they were unable to tolerate a water
fast, an elimination diet (to be described in detail later) was employed, while stringently
avoiding all foods usually found to be allergy producing.
i also decided that if i was going to employ fasting as my
primary medicine, it was important for me to have a more intense personal experience
with it, because in the process of reviewing the literature on fasting i saw that
there were many different approaches, each one staunchly defended by highly partisan
advocates. for example, the capital "n" natural, capital "h"
hygienists, such a herbert shelton, aggressively assert that only a pure water fast
can be called a fast. sheltonites contend that juice fasting as advocated by paavo
airola, for example, is not a fast but rather a modified diet without the benefits
of real fasting. colon cleansing was another area of profound disagreement among
the authorities. shelton strongly insisted that enemas and colonics should not be
employed; the juice advocates tend to strongly recommend intestinal cleansing.
to be able to intelligently take a position in this maze
of conflict i decided to first try every system on myself. it seems to me that if
i can be said to really own anything in this life it is my own body, and i have the
absolute right to experiment with it as long as i'm not irresponsible about important
things such as care of my kids. i also feel strongly that it was unethical to ask
anyone to do anything that i was not willing or able to do myself. just imagine what
would happen if all medical doctors applied this principal in their practice of medicine,
if all surgeons did it too!
i set out to do a complete and fully rigorous water fast
according to the natural hygiene model--only pure water and bed rest (with no colon
cleansing) until hunger returns, something the hygienists all assured me would happen
when the body had completed its detoxification process. the only aspect of a hygienic
fast i could not fulfill properly was the bed rest part; unfortunately i was in sole
charge of a busy holistic treatment center (and two little girls); there were things
i had to do, though i did my chores and duties at a very slow pace with many rest
periods. 
i water fasted for  days dropping from  pounds to 
pounds on a ' " frame. at the end i looked like a nazi concentration camp
victim. i tended to hide when people came to the door, because the sight of all my
bones scared them to death. despite my assurances visitors assumed i was trying to
commit suicide. in any case i persevered, watching my body change, observing my emotions,
my mental functioning, and my spiritual awareness. i thought, if moses could fast
for  days so can i, even though the average length of a full water fast to skeletal
weight for a person that is not overweight is more in the order of  days. i broke
the fast with small amounts of carrot juice diluted / with water and stayed on
that regimen for two more weeks. 
after i resumed eating solid food it took six weeks to regain
enough strength to be able to run the same distance in the same time i had before
fasting, and it took me about six months to regain my previous weight. my eyes and
skin had become exceptionally clear, and some damaged areas of my body such as my
twice-broken shoulder had undergone considerable healing. i ate far smaller meals
after the fast, but food was so much more efficiently absorbed that i got a lot more
miles to the gallon from what i did eat. i also became more aware when my body did
not want me to eat something. after the fast, if i ignored my body's protest and
persisted, it would immediately create some unpleasant sensation that quickly persuaded
me to curb my appetite.
i later experimented with other approaches to fasting, with
juice fasts, with colon cleansing, and began to establish my own eclectic approach
to fasting and detoxification, using different types of programs for different conditions
and adjusting for psychological tolerances. i'll have a lot more to say about fasting.
after my own rigorous fasting experience i felt capable of
supervising extended fasts on very ill or very overweight people. great oaks was
gradually shifting from being a place that mentally ill people came to regain their
sanity to being a spa where anyone who wanted to improve their health could come
for a few days, some weeks or even a few months. it had been my observation from
the beginning that the mentally ill people in my program also improved remarkably
in physical health; it was obvious that my method was good for anyone. even people
with good health could feel better. 
by this time i'd also had enough of psychotic people anyway,
and longed for sane, responsible company.
so people started to come to great oaks school of health
to rest up from a demanding job, to drop some excess weight, and generally to eliminate
the adverse effects of destructive living and eating habits. i also began to get
cancer patients, ranging from those who had just been diagnosed and did not wish
to go the ama-approved medical route of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation, to
those with well-advanced cancer who had been sent home to die after receiving all
of the above treatments and were now ready to give alternative therapies a try since
they expected to die anyway. i also had a few people who were beyond help because
their vital organs had been so badly damaged that they knew they were dying, and
they wanted to die in peace without medical intervention, in a supportive hospice
cared for by people who could confront death.
great oaks school was intentionally named a "school"
of health partially to deflect the attentions of the ama. it is, after all, entirely
legal to teach about how to maintain health, about how to prevent illness, and how
to go about making yourself well once you were sick. education could not be called
"practicing medicine without a license." great oaks was also structured
as a school because i wanted to both learn and teach. toward this end we started
putting out a holistic health newsletter and offering classes and seminars to the
public on various aspects of holistic health. from the early s through the early
s i invited a succession of holistic specialists to reside at gosh, or to teach
at great oaks while living elsewhere. these teachers not only provided a service
to the community, but they all became my teachers as well. i apprenticed myself to
each one in turn.
there came and went a steady parade of alternative practitioners
of the healing arts and assorted forms of metapsychology: acupuncturists, acupressurists,
reflexologists, polarity therapists, massage therapists, postural integrationists,
rolfers, feldenkries therapists, neurolinguistic programmers, biokinesiologists,
iridologists, psychic healers, laying on of handsers, past life readers, crystal
therapists, toning therapists in the person of patricia sun, color therapy with lamps
and different colored lenses a la stanley bourroughs, bach flower therapists, aroma
therapists, herbalists, homeopaths, tai chi classes, yoga classes, arica classes,
guergieff and ouspensky fourth-way study groups, est workshops, zen meditation classes.
refugee lamas from tibet gave lectures on the book of the dead and led meditation
and chanting sessions, and we held communication classes using scientology techniques.
there were anatomy and physiology classes, classes on nutrition and the orthomolecular
approach to treating mental disorders (given by me of course); there were chiropractors
teaching adjustment techniques, even first aid classes. and we even had a few medical
doctors of the alternative ilk who were interested in life style changes as an approach
to maintaining health. 
classes were also offered on colon health including herbs,
clays, enemas, and colonics. so many of my client at great oaks were demanding colonics
in conjunction with their cleansing programs, that i took time out to go to indio,
calif. to take a course in colon therapy from a chiropractor, and purchase a state
of the art colonic machine featuring all the gauges, electric water solenoids and
stainless steel knobs one could ask for.
during this period almost all alternative therapists and
their specialties were very interesting to me, but i found that most of the approaches
they advocated did not suit my personality. for example, i think that acupuncture
is a very useful tool, but i personally did not want to use needles. similarly i
thought that rolfing was a very effective tool but i did not enjoy administering
that much pain, although a significant number of the clients really wanted pain.
some of the techniques appealed to me in the beginning, and i used them frequently
with good results but over time i decided to abandon them, mostly because of a desire
to simplify and lighten up my bag of tricks.
because of my enthusiasm and successes great oaks kept on
growing. originally the estate served as both the offices of the holt adoption agency
and the holt family mansion. the holt family had consisted of harry and bertha holt,
six of their biological children, and eight adopted korean orphans. for this reason
the ten thousand square foot two story house had large common rooms, and lots and
lots of bedrooms. it was ideal for housing spa clients and my own family. the adjoining
holt adoption agency office building was also very large with a multitude of rooms.
it became living space for those helpers and hangers-on we came to refer to as "community
members." my first husband added even more to the physical plant constructing
a large, rustic gym and workshop. 
many "alternative" people visited and then begged
to stay on with room and board provided in exchange for their work. a few of these
people made a significant contribution such as cooking, child care, gardening, tending
the ever-ravenous wood-fired boiler we used to keep the huge concrete mansion heated,
or doing general cleaning. but the majority of the 'work exchangers' did not really
understand what work really was, or didn't have sufficient ethical presence to uphold
the principle of fair exchange, which is basically giving something of equal value
for getting something of value and, perhaps more importantly, giving in exchange
what is needed and asked for. 
i also found that community members, once in residence, were
very difficult to dislodge. my healing services were supporting far too much dead
wood. this was basically my own fault, my own poor management.
still, i learned a great deal from all of this waste. first
of all it is not a genuine service to another human being to give them something
for nothing. if a fair exchange is expected and received, positive ethical behavior
is strengthened, allowing the individual to maintain their self-respect. i also came
to realize what an important factor conducting one's life ethically is in the individual
healing process. those patients who were out exchange in their relationships with
others in one or more areas of their life frequently did not get well until they
changed these behaviors.
toward the end of , after providing a decade of services
to a great many clients, many of these in critical condition, i reached to point
where i was physically, mentally, and spiritually drained. i needed a vacation desperately
but no one, including my first husband, could run great oaks in my absence much less
cover the heavy mortgage. so i decided to sell it. this decision stunned the community
members and shocked the clientele who had become dependent on my services. i also
got a divorce at this time. in fact i went through quite a dramatic life change in
many areas--true to pattern, a classic mid-life crisis. all i kept from these years
was my two daughters, my life experiences, and far too many books from the enormous
great oaks library.
 these changes were however, necessary for my survival. any
person who works with, yes, lives on a day-to-day basis with sick people and who
is constantly giving or outflowing must take time out to refill their vessel so that
they can give again. failure to do this can result in a serious loss of health, or
death. most healers are empathic people who feel other peoples' pains and stresses
and sometimes have difficulty determining exactly what is their own personal 'baggage'
and what belongs to the clients. this is especially difficult when the therapy involves
a lot of 'hands on' techniques.
after leaving great oaks it took me a couple of years to
rest up enough to want to resume practicing again. this time, instead of creating
a substantial institution, steve, my second husband and my best friend, built a tiny
office next to our family home. i had a guest room that i would use for occasional
residential patients. usually these were people i had known from great oaks days
or were people i particularly liked and wanted to help through a life crisis. 
at the time i am writing this book over ten years have passed
since i sold great oaks. i continue to have an active outpatient practice, preferring
to protect the privacy of my home and family life since i was remarried by limiting
inpatients to a special few who required more intensive care, and then, only one
at a time, and then, with long spells without a resident. 
chapter two 
the nature and cause of disease 
from the hygienic dictionary
toxemia. [] "toxemia is the basic cause of all
so-called diseases. in the process of tissue-building (metabolism), there is cell-building
(anabolism) and cell destruction (catabolism). the broken-down tissue is toxic. in
the healthy body (when nerve energy is normal), this toxic material is eliminated
from the blood as fast as it is evolved. but when nerve energy is dissipated from
any cause (such as physical or mental excitement or bad habits) the body becomes
weakened or enervated. when the body is enervated, elimination is checked. this,
in turn, results in a retention of toxins in the blood--the condition which we speak
of as toxemia. this state produces a crisis which is nothing more than heroic or
extraordinary efforts by the body to eliminate waste or toxin from the blood. it
is this crisis which we term disease. such accumulation of toxin when once established,
will continue until nerve energy has been restored to normal by removing the cause.
so-called disease is nature's effort to eliminate toxin from the blood. all so-called
diseases are crises of toxemia." john h. tilden, m.d., toxemia explained.
[] toxins are divided into two groups; namely exogenous, those formed in the alimentary
canal from fermentation and decomposition following imperfect or faulty digestion.
if the fermentation is of vegetables or fruit, the toxins are irritating, stimulating
and enervating, but not so dangerous or destructive to organic life as putrefaction,
which is a fermentation set up in nitrogenous matter--protein-bearing foods, but
particularly animal foods. endogenous toxins are autogenerated. they are the waste
products of metabolism. dr. john. h. tilden, impaired health: its cause and cure,
suppose a fast-growing
city is having traffic jams. "we don't like it!" protest the voters."
why are these problems happening?" asks the city council, trying to look like
they are doing something about it. 
experts then proffer answers. "because there are too
many cars," says the get a horse society. the auto makers suggest it is because
there are uncoordinated traffic lights and because almost all the businesses send
their employees home at the same time. easy to fix! and no reason whatsoever to limit
the number of cars. the asphalt industry suggests it is because the size and amount
of roads is inadequate. 
what do we do then? tax cars severely until few can afford
them? legislate opening and closing hours of businesses to stagger to'ing and fro'ing?
hire a smarter municipal highway engineer to synchronize the traffic lights? build
larger and more efficient streets? demand that auto companies make cars smaller so
more can fit the existing roads? tax gasoline prohibitively, pass out and give away
free bicycles in virtually unlimited quantities while simultaneously building mass
rail systems? what? which?
when we settle on a solution we have simultaneously chosen
what we consider the real, underlying cause of the problem. if our chosen reason
was the real reason. then our solution results in a real cure. if we picked wrongly,
our attempt at solution may result in no cure, or create a worse situation than we
had before.
the american medical association style of medicine (a philosophy
i will henceforth call allopathic) has a model that explains the causes of illness.
it suggests that anyone who is sick is a victim. either they were attacked by a "bad"
organism--virus, bacteria, yeast, pollen, cancer cell, etc.--or they have a "bad"
organ--liver, kidney, gall bladder, even brain. or, the victim may also have been
cursed by bad genes. in any case, the cause of the disease is not the person and
the person is neither responsible for creating their own complaint nor is the victim
capable of making it go away. this institutionalized irresponsibility seems useful
for both parties to the illness, doctor and patient. the patient is not required
to do anything about their complaint except pay (a lot) and obediently follow the
instructions of the doctor, submitting unquestioningly to their drugs and surgeries.
the physician then acquires a role of being considered vital to the survival of others
and thus obtains great status, prestige, authority, and financial remuneration.
perhaps because the sick person is seen to have been victimized,
and it is logically impossible to consider a victimizer as anything but something
evil, the physician's cure is often violent, confrontational. powerful poisons are
used to rejigger body chemistry or to arrest the multiplication of disease bacteria
or to suppress symptoms; if it is possible to sustain life without them, "bad,"
poorly-functioning organs are cut out.
i've had a lot of trouble with the medical profession. over
the years doctors have made attempts to put me in jail and keep me in fear. but they
never stopped me. when i've had a client die there has been an almost inevitable
coroner's investigation, complete with detectives and the sheriff. fortunately, i
practice in rural oregon, where the local people have a deeply-held belief in individual
liberty and where the authorities know they would have had a very hard time finding
a jury to convict me. had i chosen to practice with a high profile and had i located
great oaks school of health in a major market area where the physicians were able
to charge top dollar, i probably would have spent years behind bars as did other
heroes of my profession such as linda hazzard and royal lee.
so i have acquired an uncomplimentary attitude about medical
doctors, a viewpoint i am going to share with you ungently, despite the fact that
doing so will alienate some of my readers. but i do so because most americans are
entirely enthralled by doctors, and this doctor-god worship kills a lot of them.
however, before i get started on the medicos, let me state
that one area exists where i do have fundamental admiration for allopathic medicine.
this is its handling of trauma. i agree that a body can become the genuine victim
of fast moving bullets. it can be innocently cut, smashed, burned, crushed and broken.
trauma are not diseases and modern medicine has become quite skilled at putting traumatized
bodies back together. genetic abnormality may be another undesirable physical condition
that is beyond the purview of natural medicine. however, the expression of contra-survival
genetics can often be controlled by nutrition. and the expression of poor genetics
often results from poor nutrition, and thus is similar to a degenerative disease
condition, and thus is well within the scope of natural medicine.
today's suffering american public is firmly in the ama's
grip. people have been effectively prevented from learning much about medical alternatives,
have been virtually brainwashed by clever media management that portrays other medical
models as dangerous and/or ineffective. legislation influenced by the allopathic
doctors' union, the american medical association, severely limits or prohibits the
practice of holistic health. people are repeatedly directed by those with authority
to an allopathic doctor whenever they have a health problem, question or confusion.
other types of healers are considered to be at best harmless as long as they confine
themselves to minor complaints; at worst, when naturopaths, hygienists, or homeopaths
seek to treat serious disease conditions they are called quacks, accused of unlicensed
practice of medicine and if they persist or develop a broad, successful, high-profile
and (this is the very worst) profitable practice, they are frequently jailed. 
even licensed mds are crushed by the authorities if they
offer non-standard treatments. so when anyone seeks an alternative health approach
it is usually because their complaint has already failed to vanish after consulting
a whole series of allopathic doctors. this highly unfortunate kind of sufferer not
only has a degenerative condition to rectify, they may have been further damaged
by harsh medical treatments and additionally, they have a considerable amount of
brainwashing to overcome. 
the ama has succeeded at making their influence over information
and media so pervasive that most people do not even realize that the doctors' union
is the source of their medical outlook. whenever an american complains of some malady,
a concerned and honestly caring friend will demand to know have they yet consulted
a medical doctor. failure to do so on one's own behalf is considered highly irresponsible.
concerned relatives of seriously ill adults who decline standard medical therapy
may, with a great show of self-righteousness, have the sick person judged mentally
incompetent so that treatment can be forced upon them. when a parent fails to seek
standard medical treatment for their child, the adult may well be found guilty of
criminal negligence, raising the interesting issue of who "owns" the child,
the parents or the state.
it is perfectly acceptable to die while under conventional
medical care. happens all the time, in fact. but holistic alternatives are represented
as stupidly risky, especially for serious conditions such as cancer. people with
cancer see no choice but to do chemotherapy, radiation, and radical surgery because
this is the current allopathic medical approach. on some level people may know that
these remedies are highly dangerous but they have been told by their attending oncologist
that violent therapies are their only hope of survival, however poor that may be.
if a cancer victim doesn't proceed immediately with such treatment their official
prognosis becomes worse by the hour. such scare tactics are common amongst the medical
profession, and they leave the recipient so terrified that they meekly and obediently
give up all self-determinism, sign the liability waiver, and submit, no questions
asked. many then die after suffering intensely from the therapy, long before the
so-called disease could have actually caused their demise. i will later offer alternative
and frequently successful (but not guaranteed) approaches to treating cancer that
do not require the earliest-possible detection, surgery or poisons.
if holistic practitioners were to apply painful treatments
like allopaths use, ones with such poor statistical outcomes like allopaths use,
there would most certainly be witch hunts and all such irresponsible, greedy quacks
would be safely imprisoned. i find it highly ironic that for at least the past twenty
five hundred years the basic principle of good medicine has been that the treatment
must first do no harm. this is such an obvious truism that even the ama doctors pledge
to do the same thing when they take the hippocratic oath. yet virtually every action
taken by the allopath is a conscious compromise between the potential harm of the
therapy and its potential benefit.
in absolute contrast, if a person dies while on a natural
hygiene program, they died because their end was inevitable no matter what therapy
was attempted. almost certainly receiving hygienic therapy contributed to making
their last days far more comfortable and relatively freer of pain without using opiates.
i have personally taken on clients sent home to die after they had suffered everything
the doctors could do to them, told they had only a few days, weeks, or months to
live. some of these clients survived as a result of hygienic programs even at that
late date. and some didn't. the amazing thing was that any of them survived at all,
because the best time to begin a hygienic program is as early in the degenerative
process as possible, not after the body has been drastically weakened by invasive
and toxic treatments. later on, i'll tell you about some of these cases.
something i consider especially ironic is that when the patient
of a medical doctor dies, it is inevitably thought that the blessed doctor did all
that could be done; rarely is any blame laid. if the physician was especially careless
or stupid, their fault can only result in a civil suit, covered by malpractice insurance.
but let a holistic practitioner treat a sick person and have that person follow any
of their suggestions or take any natural remedies and have that person die or worsen
and it instantly becomes the natural doctor's fault. great blame is placed and the
practitioner faces inquests, grand juries, manslaughter charges, jail time and civil
suits that can't be insured against.
allopathic medicine rarely makes a connection between the
real causes of a degenerative or infectious disease and its cure. the causes are
usually considered mysterious: we don't know why the pancreas is acting up, etc.
the sick are sympathized with as victims who did nothing to contribute to their condition.
the cure is a highly technical battle against the illness, whose weapons are defined
in latin and far beyond the understanding of a layperson. 
hygienic medicine presents an opposite view. to the naturopath,
illness is not a perplexing and mysterious occurrence over which you have no control
or understanding. the causes of disease are clear and simple, the sick person is
rarely a victim of circumstance and the cure is obvious and within the competence
of a moderately intelligent sick person themselves to understand and help administer.
in natural medicine, disease is a part of living that you are responsible for, and
quite capable of handling. 
asserting that the sick are pitiable victims is financially
beneficial to doctors. it makes medical intervention seem a vital necessity for every
ache and pain. it makes the sick become dependent. i'm not implying that most doctors
knowingly are conniving extortionists. actually most medical doctors are genuinely
well-intentioned. i've also noticed that most medical doctors are at heart very timid
individuals who consider that possession of a md degree and license proves that they
are very important, proves them to be highly intelligent, even makes them fully qualified
to pontificate on many subjects not related to medicine at all. 
doctors obtain an enormous sense of self-importance at medical
school, where they proudly endured the high pressure weeding out of any free spirit
unwilling to grind away into the night for seven or more years. anyone incapable
of absorbing and regurgitating huge amounts of rote information; anyone with a disrespectful
or irreverent attitude toward the senior doctor-gods who arrogantly serve as med
school professors, anyone like this was eliminated with especial rapidity. when the
thoroughly submissive, homogenized survivors are finally licensed, they assume the
status of junior doctor-gods.
but becoming an official medical deity doesn't permit one
to create their own methods. no no, the ama's professional oversight and control
system makes continued possession of the license to practice (and the high income
that usually comes with it) entirely dependent on continued conformity to what is
defined by the ama as "correct practice." any doctor who innovates beyond
strict limits or uses non-standard treatments is in real danger of losing their livelihood
and status. 
not only are licensed graduates of ama-sanctioned medical
schools kept on a very tight leash, doctors of other persuasions who use other methods
to heal the sick or help them heal themselves are persecuted and prosecuted. extension
of the ama's control through regulatory law and police power is justified in the
name of preventing quackery and making sure the ignorant and gullible public receives
only scientifically proven effective medical care. 
those on the other side of the fence view the ama's oppression
as an effective way to make sure the public has no real choices but to use union
doctors, pay their high fees and suffer greatly by misunderstanding of the true cause
of disease and its proper cure. if there are any actual villains responsible for
this suppressive tragedy some of them are to be found in the inner core of the ama,
officials who may perhaps fully and consciously comprehend the suppressive system
they promulgate. 
hygienists usually inform the patient quite clearly and directly
that the practitioner has no ability to heal them or cure their condition and that
no doctor of any type actually is able to heal. only the body can heal itself, something
it is eager and usually very able to do if only given the chance. one pithy old saying
among hygienists goes, "if the body can't heal itself, nothing can heal it."
the primary job of the hygienic practitioner is to reeducate the patient by conducting
them through their first natural healing process. if this is done well the sick person
learns how to get out of their own body's way and permit its native healing power
to manifest. unless later the victim of severe traumatic injury, never again will
that person need obscenely expensive medical procedures. hygienists rarely make six
figure incomes from regular, repeat business.
this aspect of hygienic medicine makes it different than
almost all the others, even most other holistic methods. hygiene is the only system
that does not interpose the assumed healing power of a doctor between the patient
and wellness. when i was younger and less experienced i thought that the main reason
traditional medical practice did not stress the body's own healing power and represented
the doctor as a necessary intervention was for profit. but after practicing for over
twenty years i now understand that the last thing most people want to hear is that
their own habits, especially their eating patterns and food choices, are responsible
for their disease and that their cure is to only be accomplished through dietary
reform, which means unremittingly applied self-discipline.
one of the hardest things to ask of a person is to change
a habit. the reason that ama doctors have most of the patients is they're giving
the patients exactly what they want, which is to be allowed to continue in their
unconscious irresponsibility.
the cause of disease
ever since natural medicine arose in opposition to the violence
of so-called scientific medicine, every book on the subject of hygiene, once it gets
past its obligatory introductions and warm ups, must address the cause of disease.
this is a required step because we see the cause of disease and its consequent cure
in a very different manner than the allopath. instead of many causes, we see one
basic reason why. instead of many unrelated cures, we have basically one approach
to fix all ills that can be fixed.
a beautiful fifty cent word that means a system for explaining
something is paradigm, pronounced para-dime. i am fond of this word because it admits
the possibility of many differing yet equally true explanations for the same reality.
of all available paradigms, natural hygiene suits me best and has been the one i've
used for most of my career. 
the natural hygienist's paradigm for the cause of both degenerative
and infectious disease is called the theory of toxemia, or "self-poisoning."
before explaining this theory it will help many readers if
i digress a brief moment about the nature and validity of alternative paradigms.
not too many decades ago, scientists thought that reality was a singular, real, perpetual--that
natural law existed much as a tree or a rock existed. in physics, for example, the
mechanics of newton were considered capital "t" true, the only possible
paradigm. any other view, not being true, was false. there was capital "n"
natural capital "l" law.
more recently, great uncertainty has entered science; it
has become indisputable that a theory or explanation of reality is only true only
to the degree it seems to work; conflicting or various explanations can all work,
all can be "true." at least, this uncertainty has overtaken the hard, physical
sciences. it has not yet done so with medicine. the ama is convinced (or is working
hard to convince everyone else) that its paradigm, the allopathic approach, is truth,
is scientific, and therefore, anything else is falsehood, is irresponsibility, is
a crime against the sick. 
but the actual worth or truth of any paradigm is found not
in its "reality," but in its utility. does an explanation or theory allow
a person to manipulate experience and create a desired outcome. to the extent a paradigm
does that, it can be considered valuable. judged by this standard, the theory of
toxemia must be far truer than the hodgepodge of psuedoscience taught in medical
schools. keep that in mind the next time some officious medical doctor disdainfully
informs you that theory of toxemia was disproven in  by doctors jeckel and hyde.
why people get sick
this is the theory of toxemia. a healthy body struggles continually
to purify itself of poisons that are inevitably produced while going about its business
of digesting food, moving about, and repairing itself. the body is a marvelous creation,
a carbon, oxygen combustion machine, constantly burning fuel, disposing of the waste
products of combustion, and constantly rebuilding tissue by replacing worn out, dead
cells with new, fresh ones. every seven years virtually every cell in the body is
replaced, some types of cells having a faster turnover rate than others, which means
that over a seven year period several hundred pounds of dead cells must be digested
(autolyzed) and eliminated. all by itself this would be a lot of waste disposal for
the body to handle. added to that waste load are numerous mild poisons created during
proper digestion. and added to that can be an enormous burden of waste products created
as the body's attempts to digest the indigestible, or those tasty items i've heard
called "fun food." add to that burden the ruinous effects of just plain
overeating. 
the waste products of digestion, of indigestion, of cellular
breakdown and the general metabolism are all poisonous to one degree or another.
another word for this is toxic. if these toxins were allowed to remain and accumulate
in the body, it would poison itself and die in agony. so the body has a processing
system to eliminate toxins. and when that system does break down the body does die
in agony, as from liver or kidney failure. 
the organs of detoxification remove things from the body's
system, but these two vital organs should not be confused with what hygienists call
the secondary organs of elimination, such as the large intestine, lungs, bladder
and the skin, because none of these other eliminatory organs are supposed to purify
the body of toxins. but when the body is faced with toxemia, the secondary organs
of elimination are frequently pressed into this duty and the consequences are the
symptoms we call illness.
the lungs are supposed to eliminate only carbon dioxide gas;
not self-generated toxic substances. the large intestine is supposed to pass only
insoluble food solids (and some nasty stuff dumped into the small intestine by the
liver). skin eliminates in the form of sweat (which contains mineral salts) to cool
the body, but the skin is not supposed to move toxins outside the system. but when
toxins are flowed out through secondary organs of elimination these areas become
inflamed, irritated, weakened. the results can be skin irritations, sinusitis or
a whole host of other "itises" depending on the area involved, bacterial
or viral infections, asthma. when excess toxemia is deposited instead of eliminated,
the results can be arthritis if toxins are stored in joints, rheumatism if in muscle
tissues, cysts and benign tumors. and if toxins weaken the body's immune response,
cancer. 
the liver and the kidneys, the two heroic organs of detoxification,
are the most important ones; these jointly act as filters to purify the blood. hygienists
pay a lot of attention to these organs, the liver especially.
in an ideal world, the liver and kidneys would keep up with
their job for  years or more before even beginning to tire. in this ideal world,
the food would of course, be very nutritious and free of pesticide residues, the
air and water would be pure, people would not denature their food and turn it into
junk. in this perfect world everyone would get moderate exercise into old age, and
live virtually without stress. in this utopian vision, the average healthy productive
life span would approach a century, entirely without using food supplements or vitamins.
in this world doctors would have next to no work other than repairing traumatic injuries,
because everyone would be healthy. but this is not the way it is.
in our less-than-ideal world virtually everything we eat
is denatured, processed, fried, salted, sweetened, preserved; thus more stress is
placed on the liver and kidneys than nature designed them to handle. except for a
few highly fortunate individuals blessed with an incredible genetic endowment that
permits them to live to age  on moose meat, well-larded white flour biscuits, coffee
with evaporated milk and sugar, brandy and cigarettes (we've all heard of someone
like this), most peoples' liver and kidneys begin to break down prematurely. thus
doctoring has become a financially rewarding profession.
most people overburden their organs of elimination by eating
whatever they feel like eating whenever they feel like it. or, they irresponsibly
eat whatever is served to them by a mother, wife, institution or cook because doing
so is easy or expected. eating is a very habitual and unconscious activity; frequently
we continue to eat as adults whatever our mother fed us as a child. i consider it
unsurprising that when people develop the very same disease conditions as their parents.
they wrongly assume the cause is genetic inheritance, when actually it was just because
they were putting their feet under the same table as their parents.
toxemia also comes about from following the wrongheaded recommendations
of allopathic-inspired nutritional texts and licensed dietitians. for example, people
believe they should eat one food from each of the four so-called basic food groups
at each meal, thinking they are doing the right thing for their health by having
four colors of food on every plate, when they really aren't. what they have actually
done is force their bodies to attempt the digestion of indigestible food combinations,
and the resulting indigestion creates massive doses of toxins. i'll have a lot more
to say about that later when i discuss the art of food combining. 
table : the actual food groups*
starches
proteins
fats
sugars
watery vegetables
bread
meats
butter
honey
zucchini
potatoes
eggs
oils
fruit
green beans
noodles
fish
lard
sugar
tomatoes
manioc/yuca
most nuts
nuts
molassas
peppers
baked goods
dry beans
avocado
malt syrup
eggplant
grains
nut butters
maple syrup
radish
winter squash
split peas
dried fruit
rutabaga
parsnips
lentils
melons
turnips
sweet potatoes
soybeans
carrot juice
brussels sprouts
yams
tofu
beet juice
celery
taro root
tempeh
cauliflower
plantains
wheat grass juice
broccoli
beets
"green" drinks
okra
spirulina
lettuce
algae
endive
yeast
cabbage
dairy
carrots
* standard dietitians divide our foods into four basic food groups
and recommend the ridiculous practice of mixing them at every meal. this guarantees
indigestion and lots of business for the medical profession. this chart illustrates
the actual food groups. it is usually a poor practice to mix different foods from
one group with those from another.
the digestive process
after we have eaten our four-color meal--often we do this
in a hurry, without much chewing, under a lot of stress, or in the presence of negative
emotions--we give no thought to what becomes of our food once it has been swallowed.
we have been led to assume that anything put in the mouth automatically gets digested
flawlessly, is efficiently absorbed into the body where it nourishes our cells, with
the waste products being eliminated completely by the large intestine. this vision
of efficiency may exist in the best cases but for most there is many a slip between
the table and the toilet. most bodies are not optimally efficient at performing all
the required functions, especially after years of poor living habits, stress, fatigue,
and aging. to the natural hygienist, most disease begins and ends with our food;
most of our healing efforts are focused on improving the process of digestion. 
digestion means chemically changing the foods we eat into
substances that can pass into the blood stream and circulate through the body where
nutrition is used for bodily functions. our bodies use nutritional substances for
fuel, for repair and rebuilding, and to conduct an incredibly complex biochemistry.
scientists are still busily engaged in trying to understand the chemical mysteries
of our bodies. but as bewildering as the chemistry of life is, the chemistry of digestion
itself is actually a relatively simple process, and one doctors have had a fairly
good understanding of for many decades. 
though relatively straightforward, a lot can and does go
wrong with digestion. the body breaks down foods with a series of different enzymes
that are mixed with food at various points as it passes from mouth to stomach to
small intestine. an enzyme is a large, complex molecule that has the ability to chemically
change other large, complex molecules without being changed itself. digestive enzymes
perform relatively simple functions--breaking large molecules into smaller parts
that can dissolve in water. 
digestion starts in the mouth when food is mixed with ptyalin,
an enzyme secreted by the salivary glands. pylatin converts insoluble starches into
simple sugars. if the digestion of starchy foods is impaired, the body is less able
to extract the energy contained in our foods, while far worse from the point of view
of the genesis of diseases, undigested starches pass through the stomach and into
the gut where they ferment and thereby create an additional toxic burden for the
liver to process. and fermenting starches also create gas. 
as we chew our food it gets mixed with saliva; as we continue
to chew the starches in the food are converted into sugar. there is a very simple
experiment you can conduct to prove to yourself how this works. get a plain piece
of bread, no jam, no butter, plain, and without swallowing it or allowing much of
it to pass down the throat, begin to chew it until it seems to literally dissolve.
pylatin works fast in our mouths so you may be surprised at how sweet the taste gets.
as important as chewing is, i have only run into about one client in a hundred that
actually makes an effort to consciously chew their food. 
horace fletcher, whose name has become synonymous with the
importance of chewing food well (fletcherizing), ran an experiment on a military
population in canada. he required half his experimental group to chew thoroughly,
and the other half to gulp things down as usual,. his study reports significant improvement
in the overall health and performance of the group that persistently chewed. fletcher's
report recommended that every mouthful be chewed  times for half a minute before
being swallowed. try it, you might be very surprised at what a beneficial effect
such a simple change in your approach to eating can make. not only will you have
less intestinal gas, if overweight you will probably find yourself getting smaller
because your blood sugar will elevate quicker as you are eating and thus your sense
of hunger will go away sooner. if you are very thin and have difficulty gaining weight
you may find that the pounds go on easier because chewing well makes your body more
capable of actually assimilating the calories you are consuming.
 a logical conclusion from this data is that anything that
would prevent or reduce chewing would be unhealthful. for example, food eaten when
too hot tends to be gulped down. the same tends to happen when food is seasoned with
fresh jalapeo or habaneo peppers. people with poor teeth should blend or mash
starchy foods and then gum them thoroughly to mix them with saliva. keep in mind
that even so-called protein foods such as beans often contain large quantities of
starches and the starch portion of protein foods is also digested in the mouth.
once the food is in the stomach, it is mixed with hydrochloric
acid, secreted by the stomach itself, and pepsin, an enzyme. together these break
proteins down into water-soluble amino acids. to accomplish this the stomach muscles
agitate the food continuously, somewhat like a washing machine. this extended churning
forms a kind of ball in the stomach called a bolis. 
many things can and frequently do go wrong at this stage
of the digestive process. first, the stomach's very acid environment inactivates
pylatin, so any starch not converted to sugar in the mouth does not get properly
processed thereafter. and the most dangerous misdigetion comes from the sad fact
that cooked proteins are relatively indigestible no matter how strong the constitution,
no matter how concentrated the stomach acid or how many enzymes present. it is quite
understandable to me that people do not wish to accept this fact. after all, cooked
proteins are so delicious, especially cooked red meats and the harder, more flavorful
fishes. 
to appreciate this, consider how those enzymes that digest
proteins work. a protein molecule is a large, complex string of amino acids, each
linked to the next in a specific order. suppose there are only six amino acids: ,
, , , , and . so a particular (imaginary) protein could be structured: , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , etc. thus you should see that by combining
a limited number of amino acids there can be a virtually infinite number of proteins.
but proteins are rarely water soluble. as i said a few paragraphs
back, digestion consists of rendering insoluble foods into water-soluble substances
so they can pass into the blood stream and be used by the body's chemistry. to make
them soluble, enzymes break down the proteins, separating the individual amino acids
one from the other, because amino acids are soluble. enzymes that digest proteins
work as though they are mirror images of a particular amino acid. they fit against
a particular amino acid like a key fits into a lock. then they break the bonds holding
that amino acid to others in the protein chain, and then, what i find so miraculous
about this process, the enzyme is capable of finding yet another amino acid to free,
and then yet another. 
so with sufficient churning in an acid environment, with
enough time (a few hours), and enough enzymes, all the recently eaten proteins are
decomposed into amino acids and these amino acids pass into the blood where the body
recombines them into structures it wants to make. and we have health. but when protein
chains are heated, the protein structures are altered into physical shapes that the
enzymes can't "latch" on to. the perfect example of this is when an egg
is fried. the eggwhite is albumen, a kind of protein. when it is heated, it shrivels
up and gets hard. while raw and liquid, it is easily digestable. when cooked, largely
indigestable.
stress also inhibits the churning action in the stomach so
that otherwise digestible foods may not be mixed efficiently with digestive enzymes.
for all these reasons, undigested proteins may pass into the gut.
along with undigested starches. when starches convert best
to sugars under the alkaline conditions found in the mouth. once they pass into the
acid stomach starch digestion is not as efficient. if starches reach the small intestine
they are fermented by yeasts. the products of starch fermentation are only mildly
toxic. the gases produced by yeast fermentations usually don't smell particularly
bad; bodies that regularly contain starch fermentation usually don't smell particularly
bad either. in otherwise healthy people it can take many years of exposure to starch
fermentation toxins to produce a life-threatening disease. 
but undigested proteins aren't fermented by yeasts, they
putrefy in the gut (are attacked by anaerobic bacteria). many of the waste products
of anaerobic putrefaction are highly toxic and evil smelling; when these toxins are
absorbed through the small or large intestines they are very irritating to the mucous
membranes, frequently contributing to or causing cancer of the colon. protein putrefaction
may even cause psychotic symptoms in some individuals. meat eaters often have a very
unpleasant body odor even when they are not releasing intestinal gasses.
adding a heavy toxic burden from misdigested foods to the
normal toxic load a body already has to handle creates a myriad of unpleasant symptoms,
and greatly shortens life. but misdigestion also carries with it a double whammy;
fermenting and/or putrefying foods immediately interfere with the functioning of
another vital organ--the large intestine--and cause constipation. 
most people don't know what the word constipation really
means. not being able to move one's bowels is only the most elementary type of constipation.
a more accurate definition of constipation is "the retention of waste products
in the large intestine beyond the time that is conducive to health." properly
digested food is not sticky and exits the large intestine quickly. but improperly
digested food (or indigestible food) gradually coats the large intestine, making
an ever-thicker lining that interferes with the intestine's functioning. far worse,
this coating steadily putrefies, creating additional highly-potent toxins. lining
the colon with undigested food can be compared to the mineral deposits filling in
the inside of an old water pipe, gradually choking off the flow. in the colon, this
deposit can become rock-hard, just like water pipe scale.
since the large intestine is also an organ that removes moisture
and water-soluble minerals from the food and moves them into the blood stream, when
the large intestine is lined with putrefying undigested food waste, the toxins of
this putrefaction are also steadily moved into the bloodstream and place an even
greater burden on the liver and kidneys, accelerating their breakdown, accelerating
the aging process and contributing to a lot of interesting and unpleasant symptoms
that keep doctors busy and financially solvent. i'll have quite a bit more to say
about colon cleansing later.
the progress of disease: irritation, enervation, toxemia
disease routinely lies at the end of a three-part chain that
goes: irritation or sub-clinical malnutrition, enervation, toxemia. irritations are
something the person does to themselves or something that happens around them. stresses,
in other words. 
mental stressors include strong negative emotional states
such as anger, fear, resentment, hopelessness, etc. behind most diseases it is common
to find a problematic mind churning in profound confusion, one generated by a character
that avoids responsibility. there may also be job stress or ongoing hostile relationships,
often within the family. 
indigestible foods and misdigestion are also stressful irritations,
as are mild recreational poisons such as "soft" drugs, tobacco and alcohol.
opiates are somewhat more toxifying, primarily because they paralyze the gut and
induce profound constipation. stimulants like cocaine and amphetamines are the most
damaging recreational drugs ; these are highly toxic and rapidly shorten life.
repeated irritations and/or malnutrition eventually produce
enervation. the old-time hygienists defined enervation as a lack of or decline in
an unmeasurable phenomena, "nerve energy." they viewed the functioning
of vital organs as being controlled by or driven by nerve force, sometimes called
life force or lan vital. whatever this vital force actually is, it can be observed
and subjectively measured by comparing one person with another. some people are full
of it and literally sparkle with overflowing energy. beings like this make everyone
around them feel good because they somehow momentarily give energy to those endowed
with less. others possess very little and dully plod through life. 
as vital force drops, the overall efficiency of all the body's
organs correspondingly decline. the pancreas creates less digestive enzymes; the
thymus secretes less of its vital hormones that mobilize the immune system; the pituitary
makes less growth hormone so the overall repair and rebuilding of cells and tissues
slows correspondingly; and so forth. it does not really matter if there is or is
not something called nerve energy that can or cannot be measured in a laboratory.
vital force is observable to many people. however, it is measurable by laboratory
test that after repeated irritation the overall functioning of the essential organs
and glands does deteriorate.
enervation may develop so gradually that it progresses below
the level of awareness of the person, or times of increased enervation can be experienced
as a complaint--as a lack of energy, as tiredness, as difficulties digesting, as
a new inability to handle a previously-tolerated insult like alcohol. 
long-term consumption of poor-quality food causes enervation.
the body is a carbon/oxygen engine designed to run efficiently only on highly nutritious
food and this aspect of human genetic programming cannot be changed significantly
by adaptation. given enough generations a human gene pool can adapt to extracting
its nutrition from a different group of foods. for example, a group of isolated fijians
currently enjoying long healthy lives eating a diet of seafoods and tropical root
crops could suddenly be moved to the highlands of switzerland and forced to eat the
local fare or starve. but most of the fijians would not have systems adept at making
those enzymes necessary to digest cows milk. so the transplanted fijians would experience
many generations of poorer health and shorter life spans until their genes had been
selected for adaptation to the new dietary. ultimately their descendants could become
uniformly healthy on rye bread and dairy products just like the highland swiss were.
however, modern industrial farming and processing of foodstuffs
significantly contributes to mass, widespread enervation in two ways. humans will
probably adjust to the first; the second will, i'm sure, prove insurmountable. first,
industrially processed foods are a recent invention and our bodies have not yet adapted
to digesting them. in a few more generations humans might be able to accomplish that
and public health could improve on factory food. in the meanwhile, the health of
humans has declined. industrially farmed foods have also been lowered in nutritional
content compared to what food could be. i gravely doubt if any biological organism
can ever adapt to an overall dietary that contains significantly lowered levels of
nutrition. i will explain this more fully in the chapter on diet.
secondary eliminations are disease
however the exact form the chain from irritation or malnutrition
to enervation progresses, the ultimate result is an increased level of toxemia, placing
an eliminatory burden on the liver and kidneys in excess of their ability. eventually
these organs begin to weaken. decline of liver and/or kidney function threatens the
stability and purity of blood chemistry. rather than risk complete incapacitation
or death from self-poisoning, the overloaded, toxic body, guided by its genetic predisposition
and the nature of the toxins (what was eaten, in what state of stress), cleverly
channels surplus toxins into its first line of defense--alternative or secondary
elimination systems. 
most non-life-threatening yet highly annoying disease conditions
originate as secondary eliminations. for example, the skin was designed to sweat,
elimination of fluids. toxemia is often pushed out the sweat glands and is recognized
as an unpleasant body odor. a healthy, non-toxic body smells sweet and pleasant (like
a newborn baby's body) even after exercise when it has been sweating heavily. other
skin-like organs such as the sinus tissues, were designed to secrete small amounts
of mucus for lubrication. the lungs eliminate used air and the tissues are lubricated
with mucus-like secretions too. these secretions are types of eliminations, but are
not intended for the elimination of toxins. when toxins are discharged in mucus through
tissues not designed to handle them, the tissues themselves become irritated, inflamed,
weakened and thus much more subject to bacterial or viral infection. despite this
danger, not eliminating surplus toxins carries with it the greater penalty of serious
disability or death. because of this liability, the body, in its wisdom, initially
chooses secondary elimination routes as far from vital tissues and organs as possible.
almost inevitably the skin or skin-like mucus membranes such as the sinuses, or lung
tissues become the first line of defense.
 thus the average person's disease history begins with colds,
flu, sinusitis, bronchitis, chronic cough, asthma, rashes, acne, eczema, psoriasis.
if these secondary eliminations are suppressed with drugs (either from the medical
doctor or with over the counter remedies), if the eating or lifestyle habits that
created the toxemia are not changed, or if the toxic load increases beyond the limits
of this technique, the body then begins to store toxins in fat or muscle tissues
or the joint cavities, overburdens the kidneys, creates cysts, fibroids, and benign
tumors to store those toxins. if toxic overload continues over a longer time the
body will eventually have to permit damages to vital tissues, and life-threatening
conditions develop.
hygienic doctors always stress that disease is remedial effort.
illness comes from the body's best attempt to lighten its toxic load without immediately
threatening its survival. the body always does the very best it can to remedy toxemia
given its circumstances, and it should be commended for these efforts regardless
of how uncomfortable they might be to the person inhabiting the body. symptoms of
secondary elimination are actually a positive thing because they are the body's efforts
to lessen a dangerously toxic condition. secondary eliminations shouldn't be treated
immediately with a drug to suppress the process. if you squelch the bodies best and
least-life-threatening method to eliminate toxins, the body will ultimately have
to resort to another more dangerous though probably less immediately uncomfortable
channel. 
the conventional medical model does not view disease this
way and sees the symptoms of secondary elimination as the disease itself. so the
conventional doctor takes steps to halt the body's remedial efforts, thus stopping
the undesirable symptom and then, the symptom gone, proclaims the patient cured.
actually, the disease is the cure.
a common pattern of symptom suppression under the contemporary
medical model is this progression: treat colds with antihistamines until the body
gets influenza; suppress a flu repeatedly with antibiotics and eventually you get
pneumonia. or, suppress eczema with cortisone ointment repeatedly, and eventually
you develop kidney disease. or, suppress asthma with bronkiodialators and eventually
you need cortisone to suppress it. continue treating asthma with steroids and you
destroy the adrenals; now the body has become allergic to virtually everything.
the presence of toxins in an organ of secondary elimination
is frequently the cause of infection. sinuses and lungs, inflamed by secondary eliminations,
are attacked by viruses or bacteria; infectious diseases of the skin result from
pushing toxins out of the skin. more generalized infections also result from toxemia;
in this case the immune system has become compromised and the body is overwhelmed
by an organism that it normally should be able to resist easily. the wise cure of
infections is not to use antibiotics to suppress the bacteria while simultaneously
whipping the immune system; most people, including most medical doctors, do not realize
that antibiotics also goose the immune system into super efforts. but when one chooses
to whip a tired horse, eventually the exhausted animal collapses and cannot rise
again no matter how vigorously it is beaten. the wise cure is to detoxify the body,
a step that simultaneously eliminates secondary eliminations and rebuilds the immune
system.
the wise way to deal with the body's eliminative efforts
is to accept that disease is an opportunity to pay the piper for past indiscretions.
you should go to bed, rest, and drink nothing but water or dilute juice until the
condition has passed. this allows the body to conserve its vital energy, direct this
energy toward healing the disordered body part, and catch up on its waste disposal.
in this way you can help your body, be in harmony with its efforts instead of working
against it which is what most people do.
please forgive another semi-political polemic here, but in
my practice i have often been amazed to hear my clients complain that they have not
the time nor the ability to be patient with their body, to rest it through an illness
because they have a job they can't afford to miss or responsibilities they can't
put down. this is a sad commentary on the supposed wealth and prosperity of the united
states. in our country most people are enslaved by their debts, incurred because
they had been enthralled by the illusion of happiness secured by the possession of
material things. debt slaves believe they cannot miss a week of work. people who
feel they can't afford to be sick think they can afford to live on pills. so people
push through their symptoms by sheer grit for years on end, and keep that up until
their exhausted horse of a body breaks down totally and they find themselves in the
hospital running up bills to the tune of several thousand dollars a day. but these
very same people do not think they can afford the loss of a few hundred dollars of
current income undertaking some virtually harmless preventative maintenance on their
bodies.
given half a chance the body will throw off toxic overburdens
and cleanse itself. and once the body has been cleansed of toxemia, disagreeable
symptoms usually cease. this means that to make relatively mild but unwanted symptoms
lessen and ultimately stop it is merely necessary to temporarily cut back food intake,
eating only what does not cause toxemia. these foods i classify as cleansing, such
as raw fruits and vegetables and their juices. if the symptoms are extreme, are perceived
as overwhelming or are actually life-threatening, detoxification can be speeded up
by dropping back to only dilute raw juices or vegetable broth made only from greens,
without eating the solids. in the most extreme cases hygienists use their most powerful
medicine: a long fast on herb teas, or just water. i will have a lot to say about
fasting, later.
when acutely ill, the most important thing to do is to just
get out of the body's way, and let it heal itself. in our ignorance we are usually
our own worst enemy in this regard. we have been very successfully conditioned to
think that all symptoms are bad. but i know from experience that people can and do
learn a new way of viewing the body, an understanding that puts them at cause over
their own body. it allows you to be empowered in one more area of life instead of
being dependent and at the mercy of other peoples decisions about your body.
finally, and this is why natural medicine is doubly unpopular,
to prevent the recurrence of toxemia and acute disease states, person must discover
what they are doing wrong and change their life. often as not this means elimination
of the person's favorite (indigestible) foods and/or (stress-producing) bad habits.
naturally, i will have a lot more to say about this later, too.
chapter three 
fasting
from the hygienic dictionary 
cure. [] there is no "cure" for disease;
fasting is not a cure. fasting facilitates natural healing processes. foods do not
cure. until we have discarded our faith in cures, there can be no intelligent approach
to the problems presented by suffering and no proper use of foods by those who are
ill. herbert shelton, the hygienic system, v. , fasting and sunbathing. []
all cure starts from within out and from the head down and in reverse order as the
symptoms have appeared. hering"s law of cure. [] life is made up of
crises. the individual establishes a standard of health peculiarly his own, which
must vary from all other standards as greatly as his personality varies from others.
the individual standard may be such as to favor the development of indigestion, catarrh,
gout, rheumatic and glandular inflammations, tubercular developments, congestions,
sluggish secretions and excretions, or inhibitions of various functions, both mental
and physical, wherever the environmental or habit strain is greater than usual. the
standard of resistance may be opposed so strenuously by habits and unusual physical
agencies--that the body breaks down under the strain. this is a crisis. appetite fails,
discomfort or pain forces rest, and, as a result of physiological rest (fasting)
and physical rest (rest from daily work and habits), a readjustment takes place,
and the patient is "cured." this is what the profession and the people
call a cure, and it is for the time being--until an unusual enervation is brought
on from accident or dissipation; then another crisis. these crises are the ordinary
sickness of all communities--all catalogued diseases. when the cold is gone or the
hay-fever fully relieved, it does not mean the patient is cured. indeed, he is as
much diseased as before he suffered the attack--the crisis--and he never will be cured
until the habits of life that keep up toxin poisoning are corrected. to recover from
a crisis is not a cure; the tendency is back to the individual standard; hence all
crises are self-limited, unless nature by maltreatment is prevented from reacting.
all so-called healing systems ride to glory on the backs of self-limited crises,
and the self-deluded doctors and their credulous clients, believe, when the crises
are past, that a cure has been wrought, whereas the real truth is that the treatment
may have delayed reaction. this is largely true of anything that has been done except
rest. a cure consists in changing the manner of living to such a rational standard
that full resistance and a balanced metabolism is established. i suppose it is not
quite human to expect those of a standardized school of healing to give utterance
to discovered truth which, if accepted by the people, would rob them of the glory
of being curers of disease. indeed, nature, and nature only, cures; and as for crises,
they come and go, whether or not there is a doctor or healer within a thousand miles.
dr. john.h. tilden, impaired health: its cause and cure, . 
the accelerated healing process that occurs during fasting
can scarcely be believed by a person who has not fasted. no matter how gifted the
writer, the experiential reality of fasting cannot be communicated. the great novelist
upton sinclair wrote a book about fasting and it failed to convince the multitudes.
but once a person has fasted long enough to be certain of what their own body can
do to fix itself, they acquire a degree of independence little known today. many
of those experienced with fasting no longer dread being without health insurance
and feel far less need for a doctor or of having a regular checkup. they know with
certainty that if something degenerates in their body, their own body can fix it
by itself.
like upton sinclair and many others who largely failed before
me, i am going to try to convince you of the virtues of fasting by urging you to
try fasting yourself. if you will but try you will be changed for the better for
the rest of your life. if you do not try, you will never know.
to prompt your first step on this health-freedom road, i
ask you to please carefully consider the importance of this fact: the body"s
routine energy budget includes a very large allocation for the daily digestion and
assimilation of the food you eat. you may find my estimate surprising, but about
one-third of a fairly sedentary person"s entire energy consumption goes into
food processing. other uses for the body"s energy include the creation or rebuilding
of tissues, detoxification, moving (walking, running, etc.), talking, producing hormones,
etc. digestion is one aspect of the body"s efforts that we can readily control,
it is the key to having or losing health.
the effort of digestion
digestion is a huge, unappreciated task, unappreciated because
few of us are aware of its happening in the same way we are aware of making efforts
to use our voluntary muscles when working or exercising. digestion begins in the
mouth with thorough chewing. if you don"t think chewing is effort, try making
coleslaw in your own mouth. chew up at least half a big head of cabbage and three
big carrots that have not been shredded. grind each bit until it liquefies and has
been thoroughly mixed with saliva. i guarantee that if you even finish the chore
your jaw will be tired and you will have lost all desire to eat anything else, especially
if it requires chewing. 
making the saliva you just used while chewing the cabbage
is by itself, a huge and unappreciated chemical effort. 
once in the stomach, chewed food has to be churned in order
to mix it with hydrochloric acid, pepsin, and other digestive enzymes. manufacturing
these enzymes is also considerable work! churning is even harder work than chewing
but normally, people are unaware of its happening. while the stomach is churning
(like a washing machine) a large portion of the blood supply is redirected from the
muscles in the extremities to the stomach and intestines to aid in this process.
anyone who has tried to go for a run, or take part in any other strenuous physical
activity immediately after a large meal feels like a slug and wonders why they just
can"t make their legs move the way they usually do. so, to assist the body while
it is digesting, it is wise to take a siesta as los latinos do instead of expecting
the blood to be two places at once like los norteamericanos.
after the stomach is through churning, the partially digested
food is moved into the small intestine where it is mixed with more pancreatin secreted
by the pancreas, and with bile from the gall bladder. pancreatin further solubilizes
proteins. bile aids in the digestion of fatty foods. manufacturing bile and pancreatic
enzymes is also a lot of effort. only after the carbohydrates (starches and sugars),
proteins and fats have been broken down into simpler water soluble food units such
as simple sugars, amino acids and fatty acids, can the body pass these nutrients
into the blood thorough the little projections in the small intestines called villi.
the leftovers, elements of the food that can"t be solubilized
plus some remaining liquids, are passed into the large intestine. there, water and
the vital mineral salts dissolved in that water, are extracted and absorbed into
the blood stream through thin permeable membranes. mucous is also secreted in the
large intestine to facilitate passage of the dryish remains. this is an effort. (intestinal
mucous can become a route of secondary elimination, especially during fasting. while
fasting, it is essential to take steps to expel toxic mucous in the colon before
the poisons are re adsorbed.) the final residue, now called fecal matter, is squeezed
along the length of the large intestines and passes out the rectum.
if all the digestive processes have been efficient there
now are an abundance of soluble nutrients for the blood stream to distribute to hungry
cells throughout the body. it is important to understand the process at least on
the level of oversimplification just presented in order to begin to understand better
how health is lost or regained through eating, digestion, and elimination. and most
importantly, through not eating.
how fasting heals
its an old hygienic maxim that the doctor does not heal,
the medicines do not heal, only the body heals itself. if the body can"t heal
then nothing can heal it. the body always knows best what it needs and what to do.
but healing means repairing damaged organs and tissues and
this takes energy, while a sick body is already enervated, weakened and not coping
with its current stressors. if the sick person could but somehow increase the body"s
energy resources sufficiently, then a slowly healing body could heal faster while
a worsening one, or one that was failing or one that was not getting better might
heal. 
fasting does just that. to whatever degree food intake is
reduced the body"s digestive workload is proportionately reduced and it will
naturally, and far more intelligently than any physician could order, redirect energy
to wherever it decides that energy is most needed. a fasting body begins accessing
nutritional reserves (vitamins and minerals) previously stored in the tissues and
starts converting body fat into sugar for energy fuel. during a time of water fasting,
sustaining the body"s entire energy and nutritional needs from reserves and
fat does require a small effort, but far less effort than eating. i would guess a
fasting body used about five percent of its normal daily energy budget on nutritional
concerns rather than the  percent it needs to process new food. thus, water fasting
puts something like  percent more energy at the body"s disposal. this is true
even though the water faster may feel weak, energyless.
i would worry if sick or toxic fasters did not complain about
their weakness. they should expect to feel energyless. in fact, the more internal
healing and detoxification the body requires, the tireder the faster feels because
the body is very hard at work internally. a great deal of the body"s energy
will go toward boosting the immune system if the problem is an infection. liberated
energy can also be used for healing damaged parts, rebuilding failing organs, for
breaking down and eliminating deposits of toxic materials. only after most of the
healing has occurred does a faster begin to feel energetic again. don"t expect
to feel anything but tired and weak.
the only exception to this would be a person who has already
significantly detoxified and healed their body by previous fasting, or the rare soul
that has gone from birth through adulthood enjoying extraordinarily good nutrition
and without experiencing the stressors of improper digestion. when one experienced
faster i know finds himself getting "run down" or catching a cold, he quits
eating until he feels really well. instead of feeling weak as most fasters do, as
each of the first four or five days of water fasting pass, he experiences a resurgence
of more and more energy. on the first fasting day he would usually feel rotten, which
was why he started fasting in the first place. on the second fasting day he"d
feel more alert and catch up on his paper work. by his third day on only water he
would be out doing hard physical chores like cutting the grass, splitting wood or
weeding his vegetable garden. day four would also be an energetic one, but if the
fast extended beyond that, lowering blood sugar would begin to make him tired and
he"d feel forced to begin laying down.
after a day of water fasting the average person"s blood
sugar level naturally drops; making a faster feel somewhat tired and "spacey,"
so a typical faster usually begins to spend much more time resting, further reducing
the amount of energy being expended on moving the body around, serendipitously redirecting
even more of the body"s energy budget toward healing. by the end of five or
six days on water, i estimate that from  to  percent of the body"s available
energy is being used for healing, repair and detoxification.
the amount of work that a fasting body"s own healing
energy can do and what it feels like to be there when it is happening is incredible.
but you can"t know it if you haven"t felt it. so hardly anyone in our present
culture knows.
as i mentioned in the first chapter, at great oaks school
i apprenticed myself to the traveling masters of virtually every system of natural
healing that existed during the 's. i observed every one of them at work and tried
most of them on my clients. after all that i can say with experience that i am not
aware of any other healing tool that can be so effective as the fast.
essentials of a successful, safe fast
. fast in a bright airy room, with exceptionally good ventilation, because fasters
	not only need a lot of fresh air; their bodies give off powerfully offensive odors.
	. sun bathe if possible in warm climates for  to  minutes in the morning
	before the sun gets too strong.
	. scrub/massage the skin with a dry brush, stroking toward the heart, followed
	by a warm water shower two to four times a day to assist the skin in eliminating
	toxins. if you are too weak to do this, have an assisted bed bath.
	. have two enemas daily for the first week of a fast and then once daily until
	the fast is terminated.
	. insure a harmonious environment with supportive people or else fast alone
	if you are experienced. avoid well-meaning interference or anxious criticism at all
	cost. the faster becomes hypersensitive to others" emotions.
	. rest profoundly except for a short walk of about  yards morning and night.
	. drink water! at least three quarts every day. do not allow yourself to become
	dehydrated!
	. control yourself! break a long fast on diluted non-sweet fruit juice such
	as grapefruit juice, sipped a teaspoon at a time, no more than eight ounces at a
	time no oftener than every  or  hours. the second day you eat, add small quantities
	of fresh juicy fruit to the same amount of juice you took the day before no oftener
	than every  hours. by small quantities i mean half an apple or the equivalent. on
	the third day of eating, add small quantities of vegetable juice and juicy vegetables
	such as tomatoes and cucumbers.
	control yourself! the second week after eating resumed add complex vegetable
	salads plus more complex fruit salads. do not mix fruit and vegetables at meals.
	the third week add raw nuts and seeds no more than / ounce three times daily. add
	/ avocado daily. fourth week increase to  ounces of raw soaked nuts and seeds
	daily and / avocado daily. cooked grains may also be added, along with steamed
	vegetables and vegetable soups.
the prime rules of fasting
another truism of natural hygiene is that we dig our own
graves with our teeth. it is sad but true that almost all eat too much quantity of
too little quality. dietary excesses are the main cause of death in north america.
fasting balances these excesses. if people were to eat a perfect diet and not overeat,
fasting would rarely be necessary. 
there are two essential rules of fasting. if these rules
are ignored or broken, fasting itself can be life threatening. but if the rules are
followed, fasting presents far less risk than any other important medical procedure
with a far greater likelihood of a positive outcome. and let me stress here, there
is no medical procedure without risk. life itself is fraught with risk, it is a one-way
ticket from birth to death, with no certainty as to when the end of the line will
be reached. but in my opinion, when handling degenerative illness and infections,
natural hygiene and fasting usually offer the best hope of healing with the least
possible risk.
the first vital concern is the duration of the fast. two
eliminatory processes go on simultaneously while fasting. one is the dissolving and
elimination of the excess, toxic or dysfunctional deposits in the body, and second
process, the gradual exhaustion of the body"s stored nutritional reserves. the
fasting body first consumes those parts of the body that are unhealthy; eventually
these are all gone. simultaneously the body uses up stored fat and other reserve
nutritional elements. a well-fed reasonably healthy body usually has enough stored
nutrition to fast for quite a bit longer than it takes to "clean house."
while house cleaning is going on the body uses its reserves
to rebuild organs and rejuvenate itself. rebuilding starts out very slowly but the
repairs increase at an ever-accelerating rate. the "overhaul" can last
only until the body has no more reserves. because several weeks of fasting must pass
by before the "overhaul" gets going full speed, it is wise to continue
fasting as long as possible so as to benefit from as much rejuvenation as possible.
it is best not to end the fast before all toxic or dysfunctional
deposits are eliminated, or before the infection is overcome, or before the cause
for complaint has been healed. the fast must be ended when most of the body"s
essential-to-life stored nutritional reserves are exhausted. if the fast goes beyond
this point, starvation begins. then, fasting-induced organic damage can occur, and
death can follow, usually several weeks later. almost anyone not immediately close
to death has enough stored nutrition to water fast for ten days to two weeks. most
reasonably healthy people have sufficient reserves to water fast for a month. later
i will explain how a faster can somewhat resupply their nutritional reserves while
continuing to fast, and thus safely extend the fasting period.
the second essential concern has to do with adjusting the
intensity of the fast. some individuals are so toxic that the waste products released
during a fast are too strong, too concentrated or too poisonous for the organs of
elimination to handle safely, or to be handled within the willingness of the faster
to tolerate the discomforts that toxic releases generate. the highly-toxic faster
may even experience life-threatening symptoms such as violent asthma attacks. this
kind of faster has almost certainly been dangerously ill before the fast began. others,
though not dangerously sick prior to fasting, may be nearly as toxic and though not
in danger of death, they may not be willing to tolerate the degree of discomfort
fasting can trigger. for this reason i recommend that if at all possible, before
undertaking a fast the person eat mostly raw foods for two months and clean up all
addictions. this will give the body a chance to detoxify significantly before the
water fast is started, and will make water fasting much more comfortable. seriously,
dangerously ill people should only fast with experienced guidance, so the rapidity
of their detoxification process may be adjusted to a lower level if necessary.
a fast of only one week can accomplish a significant amount
of healing. slight healing does occur on shorter fasts, but it is much more difficult
to see or feel the results. many people experience rapid relief from acute headache
pain or digestive distress such as gas attacks, mild gallbladder pain, stomach aches,
etc., after only one day"s abstention from food. in one week of fasting a person
can relieve more dangerous conditions such as arthritic pain, rheumatism, kidney
pain, and many symptoms associated with allergic reactions,. but even more fasting
time is generally needed for the body to completely heal serious diseases. that"s
because eliminating life-threatening problems usually involve rebuilding organs that
aren"t functioning too well. major rebuilding begins only after major detoxification
has been accomplished, and this takes time.
yes, even lost organ function can be partially or completely
restored by fasting. aging and age-related degeneration is progressive, diminishing
organ functioning. organs that make digestive enzymes secrete less enzymes. the degenerated
immune system loses the ability to mobilize as effectively when the body is attacked.
liver and kidney efficiency declines. the adrenals tire, becoming incapable of dumping
massive amounts of stress-handling hormones or of repeating that effort time after
time without considerable rest in between. the consequences of these inter-dependent
deterioration"s is a cascade of deterioration that contributes to even more
rapid deterioration"s. the name for this cascading process is aging. its inevitable
result--death.
fasting can, to a degree, reverse aging. because fasting
improves organ functioning, it can slow down aging.
fasters are often surprised that intensified healing can
be uncomfortable. they have been programmed by our culture and by allopathic doctors
to think that if they are doing the right thing for their bodies they should feel
better immediately. i wish it weren"t so, but most people have to pay the piper
for their dietary indiscretions and other errors in living. there will be aches and
minor pains and uncomfortable sensations. more about that later. a rare faster does
feel immediately better, and continues to feel ever better by the day, and even has
incredible energy while eating nothing, but the majority of us folks just have to
tough it out, keeping in mind that the way out is the way through. it is important
to remind yourself at times that even with some discomfort and considering the inconvenience
of fasting that you are getting off easy--one month of self-denial pays for those
years of indulgence and buys a regenerated body.
length of the fast
how long should a person fast? in cases where there are serious
complaints to remedy but where there are no life threatening disease conditions,
a good rule of thumb is to fast on water for one complete day ( hours) for each
year that the person has lived. if you are  years old, it will take  consecutive
days of fasting to restore complete health. however, thirty fasting days, done a
few days here and a few there won"t equal a month of steady fasting; the body
accomplishes enormously more in  or l days of consecutive fasting, than  or 
days of fasting accumulated sporadically, such as one day a week. this is not to
say that regular short fasts are not useful medicine. periodic day-long fasts have
been incorporated into many religious traditions, and for good reason; it gives the
body one day a week to rest, to be free of digestive obligations, and to catch up
on garbage disposal. i heartily recommend it. but it takes many years of unfailingly
regular brief fasting to equal the benefits of one, intensive experience. 
fasting on water much longer than fifteen consecutive days
may be dangerous for the very sick, (unless under experienced supervision) or too
intense for those who are not motivated by severe illness to withstand the discomfort
and boredom. however, it is possible to finish a healing process initiated by one
long water fast by repeating the fast later. my husband"s healing is a good
example of this. his health began to noticeably decline about age  and he started
fasting. he fasted on water  to  days at a time, once a year, for five consecutive
years before most of his complaints and problems entirely vanished.
the longest fast i ever supervised was a  day water fast
on an extraordinarily obese woman, who at " " weighed close to  pounds.
she was a mormon; generally members of the lds church eat a healthier diet than most
americans, but her"s included far too much of what i call "healthfood junkfood,"
in the form of whole grain cakes and cookies, lots of granola made with lots of honey,
oil, and dried fruit, lots of honey heaped atop heavily buttered whole grain bread.
(i will explain more about the trap of healthfood junkfood later on.) a whole foods
relatively meatless diet is far superior to its refined white flour, white sugar
and white grease (lard) counterpart, but it still produced a serious heath problem
in just  years of life. like many women, she expressed love-for-family in the kitchen
by serving too-much too-tasty food. the mormons have a very strong family orientation
and this lady was no exception, but she was insecure and unhappy in her marriage
and sought consolation in food, eaten far in excess of what her body needed. 
on her  day water fast she lost about  pounds, but was
still grossly overweight when the fast ended. toward the end it became clear that
it was unrealistic to try to shrink this woman any closer to normal body weight because
to her, fat represented an invaluable insulation or buffer that she was not prepared
to give up. as the weight melted away on the fast and she was able to actually feel
the outline of a hip bone her neurosis became more and more apparent, and the ability
to feel a part of her skeleton was so upsetting to her that her choice was between
life threatening obesity and pervasive anxiety. 
her weight was still excessive but the solace of eating was
even more important. this woman needed intensive counseling not more fasting. unfortunately,
at the end she choose to remain obese. fat was much less frightening to her than
confronting her emotions and fears. the positive side was that after the fast she
was able to maintain her weight at  instead of  which was an enormous relief
to her exhausted heart.
another client i fasted for  days was a " "
tall, chronic schizophrenic man who weighed in at  pounds. he was so big he could
barely get through my front door, and mine was an extraordinarily wide door in what
had been an upper-class mansion. this man, now in his mid twenties, had spent his
last seven years in a mental institution before his parents decided to give him one
last chance by sending to great oaks school. the state mental hospitals at that time
provided the mentally ill with cigarettes, coffee, and lots of sugary treats, but
none of these substances were part of my treatment program so he had a lot of immediate
withdrawal to go through. the quickest and easiest way to get him through it was
to put him on a water fast after a few days of preparation on raw food. 
this was not an easily managed case! he was wildly psychotic,
on heavy doses of chloropromazine, with many bizarre behaviors. besides talking to
himself continuously in gibberish, he collected bugs, moss, sticks, piles or dirt,
and switched to smoking oak leaves instead of cigarettes. he was such a fire hazard
that i had to move him to a downstairs room with concrete floor. even in the basement
he was a fire hazard with his smoking and piles of sticks and other inflammables
next to his bed, but all of this debris was his "precious." i knew that
i was in for trouble if i disturbed his precious, but the insects and dirt piles
seemed to be expanding exponentially.
one day the dirt exceeded my tolerance level. to make a long
story short he caught me in the act of cleaning up his precious. was he furious!
all  pounds of him! (by this time he had lost  pounds.) he barreled into me,
fists flying, and knocked me into the pipes next to the furnace and seemed ready
to really teach me what was what. i prefer to avoid fights, but if they are inevitable,
i can really get into the spirit of the thing. i"d had lots of childhood practice
defending myself because i was an incurable tomboy who loved to wrestle; i could
usually pin big boys who considered themselves tough. so i began using my fists and
what little martial arts training i had to good use. after i hurt him a bit he realized
that i was not going to be easily intimidated, and that in fact he was in danger
of getting seriously damaged. so he called a truce before either of us were badly
beaten up. he had only a few bruises and welts, nothing serious. 
after that he refrained from collecting things inside the
building (he continued to collect outside). this compromise was fine with me, and
the incident allowed me to maintain the authority i needed to bully him into co-operating
with the program: taking his vitamins, and sticking to his fast until he finally
reached  pounds. after  days on water he actually looked quite handsome, he
no longer smoked, he was off psychotropic medication, and his behaviors were within
an acceptable range as long as your expectations were not too high. 
he was well enough to live outside a hospital and also clear-headed
enough to know that if he let too many people know how well he really was, he might
have to give up his mental disability pension and actually become responsible for
himself. no way, jose! this fellow knew a good thing when he saw it. so he continued
to pull bizarre stunts just often enough in front of the right audience to keep his
disability checks coming in, while managing to act sane enough to be allowed to live
comfortably at home instead of in the hospital. by keeping to my program he could
stay off mind-numbing psychotropic medication if he kept up his megavitamins and
minerals. this compromise was tolerable from his point of view, because there were
no side effects like he experienced from his tranquilizers. 
it is very rare for a mentally ill person who has spent more
than a few months in a mental hospital to ever usefully return to society because
they find "mental illness" too rewarding.
my own  day long fast
fasters go through a lot of different emotional states, these
can get intense and do change quite rapidly. the physical body, too, will manifest
transitory conditions. some can be quite uncomfortable. but, i don"t want to
leave the reader with the impression that fasting is inevitably painful. so i will
now recount my own longest fast in detail. 
when i did my own  day water fast followed by two weeks
on carrot juice diluted / with water, which really amounted to  consecutive
days, my predominant sensation for the first three days was a desire to eat that
was mostly a mental condition, and a lot of rumbling and growling from my stomach.
this is not real hunger, just the sounds the stomach likes to make when it is shrinking.
after all, this organ is accustomed to being filled at regular intervals, and then,
all of a sudden, it gets nothing, so naturally the stomach wants to know what is
going on. once it realizes it is on temporary vacation, the stomach wisely decides
to reduce itself to a size suitable for a retired organ. and it shuts up. this process
usually takes three to five days and for most people, no further "hunger pangs"
are felt until the fast is over. 
real hunger comes only when the body is actually starving.
the intense discomforts many people experience upon missing a meal are frequently
interpreted as hunger but they aren"t. what is actually happening is that their
highly toxic bodies are taking the opportunity presented by having missed a meal
or two to begin to cleanse. the toxins being released and processed make assorted
unpleasant symptoms such as headaches and inability to think clearly. these symptoms
can be instantly eliminated by the intake of a bit of food, bringing the detox to
a screeching halt.
two weeks into the fast i experienced sharp abdominal pains
that felt like i imagine appendicitis feels, which compelled me toward the nearest
toilet in a state of great urgency where i productively busied myself for about half
an hour. as i mentioned earlier, i was experimentally adhering to a rigid type of
fast of the sort recommended by dr. herbert shelton, a famous advocate of the natural
hygiene school. shelton was such a powerful writer and personality that there still
exists a natural hygiene society that keeps his books in print and maintains his
library. the words "natural hygiene" are almost owned by the society like
a trademark and they object when anyone describes themselves as a hygienist and then
advocates any practice that dr. shelton did not approve of. 
per dr. shelton, i was going to fast from the time hunger
left until the time it returned and i was not going to use any form of colon cleansing.
shelton strongly opposed bowel cleansing so i did no enemas nor colonics, nor herbs,
nor clays, nor psyllium seed designed to clean the bowel, etc. obviously at day 
the bowel said, enough is enough of this crap, and initiated a goods house cleaning
session. when i saw what was eliminated i was horrified to think that i had left
that stuff in there for two weeks. i then started to wonder if the sheltonites were
mistaken about this aspect of fasting. nonetheless, i persevered on the same regimen
because my hunger had not returned, my tongue was still thickly coated with foul-smelling,
foul-tasting mucus and i still had some fat on my feet that had not been metabolized.
shelton said that cleansing is not complete until a skeletal
condition is reached--that is, absolutely no fat reserves are left. up until that
time i did not even know that i had fat on my feet, but much to my surprise, as the
weeks went on, not only did my breasts disappear except for a couple of land marks
well-known to my babies, but my ribs and hip bones became positively dangerous to
passersby, and my shoes would not stay on my feet. this was not all that surprising
because i went from  pounds down to  on a " " frame with substantial
bone structure.
toward the end of the fast my eyes became brighter and clearer
blue, my skin took on a good texture, my breath finally became sweet, my tongue cleared
up and became pink, my mind was clear, and my spiritual awareness and sensitivity
was heightened. in other words, i was no longer a walking hulk of stored-up toxemia.
i also felt quite weak and had to rest for ten minutes out every hour in horizontal
position. (i should have rested much more.) i also required very little sleep, although
it felt good to just lie quietly and rest, being aware of what was going on in various
parts of my body. 
during the last few weeks on water i became very attentive
to my right shoulder. two separate times in the past, while flying head first over
the handlebars of my bicycle i had broken my shoulder with considerable tearing of
ligaments and tendons. at night when i was totally still i felt a whole crew of pixies
and brownies with picks and shovels at work in the joint doing major repair work.
this activity was not entirely comfortable, but i knew it was constructive work,
not destructive, so i joined the work crew with my mind"s eye and helped the
work along.
it seemed my visualizations actually did help. ever since,
i"ve had the fasters i supervised use creative imagery or write affirmations
to help their bodies heal. there are lots of books on this subject. i"ve found
that the techniques work far better on a faster than when a person is eating normally.
after breaking the fast it took me six weeks to regain enough
strength that i could run my usual distance in my regular time; it took me six months
to regain my full  pound weight because i was very careful to break the fast slowly
and correctly. coming off water with two weeks on dilute carrot juice i then added
small portions of raw food such as apples, raw vegetables, sprouts, vegetable juices,
and finally in the fourth week after i began drinking dilute carrot juice, i added
seven daily well-chewed almonds to my rebuilding diet. much later i increased to
 almonds, but that was the maximum amount of such highly concentrated fare my body
wanted digest at one time for over one year. i found i got a lot more miles to the
gallon out of the food that i did eat, and did not crave recreational foods. overall
i was very pleased with my educational fast, it had taught me a great deal.
if i had undertaken such a lengthy fast at a time when i
was actually ill, and therefore had felt forced into it, my experience could have
been different. a positive mental attitude is an essential part of the healing process
so fasting should not be undertaken in a negative, protesting mental state. the mind
is so powerful that fear or the resistance fear generates can override the healing
capacity of the body. for that reason i always recommend that people who consider
themselves to be healthy, who have no serious complaints, but who are interested
in water fasting, should limit themselves to ten consecutive days or so, certainly
never more than . few healthy people, even those with a deep interest in the process,
can find enough personal motivation to overcome the extreme boredom of water fasting
for longer than that. healthy people usually begin protesting severely after about
two weeks. if there is any one vital rule of fasting, one never should fast over
strong, personal protest. anytime you"re fasting and you really desire to quit,
you probably should. unless, of course, you are critically ill. then you may have
no choice--its fast or die.
common fasting complaints and discomforts
the most frequently heard complaints of fasters are headaches,
dry, cracked lips, dizziness, blurred vision with black spots that float, skin rashes,
and weakness in the first few days plus what they think is intense hunger. the dizziness
and weakness are really real, and are due to increased levels of toxins circulating
in the blood and from unavoidably low blood sugar which is a natural consequence
of the cessation of eating. the blood sugar does reestablish a new equilibrium in
the second and third week of the fast and then, the dizziness may cease, but still,
it is important to expect dizziness at the beginning. 
it always takes more time for the blood to reach the head
on a fast because everything has slowed down, including the rate of the heart beat,
so blood pressure probably has dropped as well. if you stand up very quickly you
may faint. i repetitively instruct all of my clients to stand up very slowly, moving
from a lying to a sitting position, pausing there for ten or twenty seconds, and
then rising slowly from a sitting to a standing position. they are told that at the
first sign of dizziness they must immediately put their head between their knees
so that the head is lower than the heart, or squat/sit down on the floor, i once
had a faster who forgot to obey my frequent warnings. about two weeks into a long
fast, she got up rapidly from the toilet and felt dizzy. the obvious thing to do
was to sit back down on the toilet or lie down on the bath rug on the floor, but
no, she decided that because she was dizzy she should rush back to her bed in the
adjoining room. she made it as far as the bathroom door and fainted, out cold, putting
a deep grove into the drywall with her pretty nose on the way down. we then had to
make an unscheduled visit to a nose specialist, who calmly put a tape-wrapped spoon
inside her bent-over nose and pried it back to dead center. this was not much fun
for either of us; it is well worthwhile preventing such complications.
other common complaints during the fast include coldness,
due to low blood sugar as well as a consequence of weight loss and slowed circulation
due to lessened physical activity. people also dislike inactivity which seems excruciatingly
boring, and some are upset by weight loss itself. coldness is best handled with lots
of clothes, bedding, hot water bottles or hot pads, and warm baths. great oaks school
of health was in oregon, where the endlessly rainy winters are chilly and the concrete
building never seemed to get really warm. i used to dream of moving my fasters to
a tropical climate where i could also get the best, ripest fruits to wean them back
on to food. 
if the fast goes on for more than a week or ten days, many
people complain of back discomfort, usually caused by over-worked kidneys. this passes.
hot baths or hot water bottles provide some relief. drinking more fluids may also
help a bit. nausea is fairly common too, due to toxic discharges from the gall bladder.
drinking lots of water or herbal tea dilutes toxic bile in the stomach and makes
it more tolerable. 
very few fasters sleep well and for some reason they expect
to, certainly fasters hope to, because they think that if they sleep all night they
will better survive one more deadly dull day in a state of relative unconsciousness.
they find out much to their displeasure that very little sleep is required on a fast
because the body is at rest already. many fasters sleep only two to four hours but
doze frequently and require a great deal of rest. being mentally prepared for this
change of habit is the best handling. generalized low-grade aches and pains in the
area of the diseased organs or body parts are common and can often be alleviated
with hot water bottles, warm but not hot bath water and massage. if this type of
discomfort exists, it usually lessens with each passing day until it disappears altogether.
many fasters complain that their vision is blurred, and that
they are unable to concentrate. these are really major inconveniences because then
fasters can"t read or even pay close attention to video-taped movies, and if
they can"t divert themselves some fasters think they will go stir crazy. they
are so addicted to a hectic schedule of doingness, and/or being entertained that
they just can"t stand just being with themselves, forced to confront and deal
with the sensations of their own body, forced to face their own thoughts, to confront
their own emotions, many of which are negative. people who are fasting release a
lot of mental/emotional garbage at the same time as they let go of old physical garbage.
usually the psychological stuff contributed greatly to their illness and just like
the physical garbage and degenerated organs, it all needs to be processed. 
one of the most distressing experiences that happen occasionally
is hair loss. deprived of adequate nutrition, the follicles can not keep growing
hair, and the existing hair dies. however, the follicles themselves do not die and
once the fast has ended and sufficient nutrition is forthcoming, hair will regrow
as well or better than before. 
there are also complaints that occur after the fast has been
broken. post-fast cravings, even after only two weeks of deprivation, are to be expected.
these may take the form of desires for sweet, sour, salt, or a specific food dreamed
of while fasting, like chocolate fudge sundays or just plain toast. food cravings
must be controlled at all costs because if acted upon, each indulgence chips away
the health gains of the previous weeks. a single indulgence can be remedied by a
day of restricting the diet to juice or raw food. after the repair, the person feels
as good as they did when the fast ended. repeated indulgences will require another
extended bout of fasting to repair. it is far better to learn self-control.
the healing crisis and retracing
certain unpleasant somatics that occur while fasting (or
while on a healing diet) may not be dangerous or "bad." two types, the
healing crisis, and retracing, are almost inevitable. a well-educated faster should
welcome these discomforts when they happen. the healing crisis (but not retracing)
also occurs on a healing diet. 
the healing crisis can seem a big surprise to a faster who
has been progressing wonderfully. suddenly, usually after a few days of noticeably
increased well-being, they suddenly experience a set of severe symptoms and feel
just awful. this is not a setback, not something to be upset or disappointed about,
but a healing crisis, actually a positive sign 
healing crises always occur after a period of marked improvement.
as the vital force builds up during the healing process, the body decides it now
has obtained enough energy to throw off some accumulated toxins, and forcefully pushes
them out through a typical and usually previously used route of secondary elimination,
such as the nose, lungs, stomach, intestines, skin, or perhaps produces a flu-like
experience with fever chills, sweat, aches and pains, etc. though unpleasant, this
experience is to be encouraged; the body has merely accelerated its elimination process.
do not attempt to suppress any of these symptoms, don"t even try to moderate
fever, which is the body"s effective way to burn out a virus or bacteria infection,
unless it is a dangerously high fever (over  fahrenheit). fever can be lowered
without drugs by putting the person into a cool/cold bath, or using cold towel wraps
and cold water sponge baths. the good news is that healing crises usually do not
last long, and when they are past you feel better than you did before the crisis.
asthmatics seem to have the worst crises. i have had asthmatics
bring up a quart of obnoxious mucous from their lungs every night for weeks. they
have stayed awake all night for three nights continuously coughing and choking on
the material that was being eliminated. after that clearing-out process they were
able to breath much more freely. likewise i have had people who have had sinusitis
have nothing but non-stop pussy discharge from their sinuses for three weeks. some
of this would run down the throat and cause nausea. all i could say to encourage
the sufferer was that it needed to come out and to please stand aside and let the
body work its magic. these fasters were not grateful until the sinus problem that
had plagued them since childhood disappeared.
the interesting thing about healing crises are that the symptoms
produced retrace earlier complaints; they are almost never something entirely unknown
to the patient. usually they are old, familiar somatics, often complaints that haven"t
bothered the faster for many years. the reason the symptom is familiar but is not
currently a problem is because as the body degenerates it loses vital force; with
less vital force it loses the ability to create such acute detoxification episodes
in non-life-threatening secondary elimination routes. the degenerated body makes
less violent efforts to cleanse, efforts that aren"t as uncomfortable. the negative
side of this is that instead of creating acute discomfort in peripheral systems,
the toxemia goes to more vital organs where it hastens the formation of life-threatening
conditions.
there is a very normal and typical progress for each person"s
fatal illness. their ultimate disease starts out in childhood or adolescence as acute
inflammations of skin-like organs, viral or bacterial infections of the same. then,
as vital force weakens, secondary eliminations are shifted to more vital organs.
allergies or colds stop happening so frequently; the person becomes rheumatic, arthritic
or experience weakness in joints, tendons, ligaments, or to have back pains, or to
have digestive upsets. these new symptoms are more constant but usually less acute.
ultimately, vital organs begin to malfunction, and serious disease develop. but a
hygienist sees the beginning of fatal diseases such as cancer in adolescent infections
and allergies.
retracing is generally seen only on water fasts, not on extended
cleansing diets. the body begins to repair itself by healing conditions in the reverse
order to that which they occurred originally. this means that the body would first
direct healing toward the lungs if the most recently serious illness was an attack
of pneumonia six months previously. in this case you would expect to quickly and
intensely experience a mini-case of pneumonia while the body eliminates residues
in the lungs that were not completely discharged at the time. next the body might
take you through a period of depression that you had experienced five years in the
past. the faster may be profoundly depressed for a few days and come out of it feeling
much better. you could then reexperience sensation-states like those caused by recreational
drugs you had playfully experimented with ten years previously along with the "trippiness"
if it were a hallucinogen, speediness if it was 'speed" or the dopiness if it
was heroin. retracing further, the faster might then experience something similar
to a raging attack of tonsillitis which you vaguely remember having when you were
five years old, but fortunately this time it passes in three days (or maybe six hours),
instead of three weeks. this is retracing. 
please do not be surprised or alarmed if it happens to you
on a fast, and immediately throw out the baby with the bath water thinking that you
are doing the wrong thing because all those old illnesses are coming back to haunt
you. it is the body"s magnificent healing effort working on your behalf, and
for doing it your body deserves lots of "well done", "good body"
thoughts rather than gnashing of teeth and thinking what did i do to deserve this.
the body won"t tell you what you did to deserve this, but it knows and is trying
its darndest to undo it.
the unrelenting boredom of fasting
then there"s the unrelenting boredom of fasting. most
people have been media junkies since they were kids; the only way they believe they
can survive another day of fasting is by diverting their minds with tv. this is far
from ideal because often the emotions of a faster are like an open wound and when
they resonate with the emotions portrayed on most tv shows, the faster gets into
some very unpleasant states that interfere with healing. and the emotions many movies
prompt people to sympathetically generate are powerful ones, often highly negative,
and contrary to healing. especially unhelpful are the adrenaline rushes in action
movies. but if tv is the best a faster can do, it is far better that someone fast
with television programming filling their minds than to not fast at all. i keep a
library of positive vhs tapes for these addicts--comedies, stories of heroic over-comings,
depiction"s of humans at their best. 
boredom is probably the most limiting factor to fasting a
long time. that is because boredom is progressive, it gets worse with each slowly-passing
day. but concurrently, the rate of healing is accelerating with each slowly-passing
day. every day the faster gets through does them considerably more good than the
previous day. however, fasters rarely are motivated enough to overcome boredom for
more than two weeks or so, unless they started the fast to solve a very serious or
life-threatening condition. for this reason, basically well people should not expect
to be able to fast for more than a couple of weeks every six months or year, no matter
how much good a longer fast might do.
exercise while fasting
the issue of how much activity is called for on a fast is
controversial. natural hygienists in the herbert shelton tradition insist that all
fasters absolutely must have complete bed rest, with no books, no tv, no visitors,
no enemas, no exercise, no music, and of course no food, not even a cup of herb tea.
in my many years of conducting people through fasts, i have yet to meet an individual
that could mentally tolerate this degree of nothingness. it is too drastic a withdrawal
from all the stimulation people are used to in the twentieth century. i still don"t
know how shelton managed to make his patients do it, but my guess is that he must
have been a very intimidating guy. shelton was a body builder of some renown in his
day. i bet shelton"s patients kept a few books and magazines under their mattress
and only took them out when he wasn"t looking. if i had tried to enforced this
type of sensory deprivation, i know my patients would have grabbed their clothes
and run, vowing never to fast again. i think it is most important that people fast,
and that they feel so good about the experience that they want to do it again, and
talk all their sick friends into doing the same thing.
in contrast to enforced inactivity, russian researchers who
supervised schizophrenics on  day water fasts insisted that they walk for three
hours every day, without stopping. i would like to have been there to see how they
managed to enforce that. i suspect some patients cheated. i lived with schizophrenics
enough years to know that it is very difficult to get them to do anything that they
don"t want to do, and very few of them are into exercise, especially when fasting.
in my experience both of these approaches to activity during
the fast are extremes. the correct activity level should be arrived at on an individual
basis. i have had clients who walked six miles a day during an extended water fast,
but they were not feeling very sick when they started the fast, and they were also
physically fit. in contrast i have had people on extended fasts who were unable to
walk for exercise, or so weak they were unable to even walk to the bathroom, but
these people were critically ill when they started fasting, and desperately needed
to conserve what little vital force they had for healing. 
most people who are not critically ill need to walk at least
 yards twice a day, with assistance if necessary, if only to move the lymph through
the system. the lymphatic system is a network of ducts and nodes which are distributed
throughout the body, with high concentrations of nodes in the neck, chest, arm pits,
and groin. its job is to carry waste products from the extremities to the center
of the body where they can be eliminated. the blood is circulated through the arteries
and veins in the body by the contractions of the heart, but the lymphatic system
does not have a pump. lymphatic fluid is moved by the contractions of the muscles,
primarily those of the arms and legs. if the faster is too weak to move, massage
and assisted movements are essential.
lymph nodes are also a part of our immune system and produce
white blood cells to help control invading organisms. when the lymph is overloaded
with waste products the ducts and nodes swell, and until the source of the local
irritation is removed, are incapable of handling further debris. if left in this
condition for years they become so hard they feel like rocks under the skin. lumps
in the armpits or the groin are prime sites for the future development of a cancer.
fasting, massage, and poultices will often soften overloaded lymph nodes and coax
them back into operation. 
 the stages of fasting
the best way to understand what happens when we fast is to
break up the process into six stages: preparation for the fast, loss of hunger, acidosis,
normalization, healing, and breaking the fast. 
a person that has consumed the typical american diet most
of their life and whose life is not in immediate danger would be very wise to gently
prepare their body for the fast. two weeks would be a minimum amount of time, and
if the prospective faster wants an easier time of it, they should allow a month or
even two for preliminary housecleaning during this time, eliminate all meat, fish,
dairy products, eggs, coffee, black tea, salt, sugar, alcohol, drugs, cigarettes,
and greasy foods. this de-addiction will make the process of fasting much more pleasant,
and is strongly recommended. however, eliminating all these harmful substances is
withdrawal from addictive substances and will not be easy for most. i have more to
say about this later when i talk about allergies and addictions.
the second stage, psychological hunger, usually is felt as
an intense desire for food. this passes within three or four days of not eating anything.
psychological hunger usually begins with the first missed meal. if the faster seems
to be losing their resolve, i have them drink unlimited quantities of good-tasting
herb teas, (sweetened --only if absolutely necessary--with nutrisweet). salt-free broths
made from meatless instant powder (obtainable at the health food store) can also
fend off the desire to eat until the stage of hunger has passed.
acidosis, the third stage, usually begins a couple of days
after the last meal and lasts about one week. during acidosis the body vigorously
throws off acid waste products. most people starting a fast begin with an overly
acid blood ph from the typical american diet that contains a predominance of acid-forming
foods. switching over to burning fat for fuel triggers the release of even more acidic
substances. acidosis is usually accompanied by fatigue, blurred vision, and possibly
dizziness. the breath smells very bad, the tongue is coated with bad-tasting dryish
mucus, and the urine may be concentrated and foul unless a good deal of water is
taken daily. two to three quarts a day is a reasonable amount.
mild states of acidosis are a common occurrence. while sleeping
after the last meal of the day is digested bodies normally work very hard trying
to detoxify from yesterday"s abuses. so people routinely awaken in a state of
acidosis. their tongue is coated, their breath foul and they feel poorly. they end
their brief overnight fast with breakfast, bringing the detoxification process to
a screeching halt and feel much better. many people think they awaken hungry and
don"t feel well until they eat. they confuse acidosis with hunger when most
have never experienced real hunger in their entire lives. if you typically awaken
in acidosis, you are being given a strong sign by your body that it would like to
continue fasting far beyond breakfast. in fact, it probably would enjoy fasting long
beyond the end of acidosis.
most fasters feel much more comfortable by the end of the
first seven to ten days, when they enter the normalization phase; here the acidic
blood chemistry is gradually corrected. this sets the stage for serious healing of
body tissues and organs. normalization may take one or two more weeks depending on
how badly the body was out of balance. as the blood chemistry steadily approaches
perfection, the faster usually feels an increasing sense of well-being, broken by
short spells of discomfort that are usually healing crises or retracings. 
the next stage, accelerated healing, can take one or many
weeks more, again depending on how badly the body has been damaged. healing proceeds
rapidly after the blood chemistry has been stabilized, the person is usually in a
state of profound rest and the maximum amount of vital force can be directed toward
repair and regeneration of tissues. this is a miraculous time when tumors are metabolized
as food for the body, when arthritic deposits dissolve, when scar tissues tend to
disappear, when damaged organs regain lost function (if they can). seriously ill
people who never fast long enough to get into this stage (usually it takes about
ten days to two weeks of water fasting to seriously begin healing) never find out
what fasting can really do for them.
breaking the fast is equally or more important a stage than
the fast itself. it is the most dangerous time in the entire fast. if you stop fasting
prematurely, that is, before the body has completed detoxification and healing, expect
the body to reject food when you try to make it eat, even if you introduce foods
very gradually. the faster, the spiritual being running the body, may have become
bored and want some action, but the faster"s body hasn"t finished. the
body wants to continue healing. 
by rejection, i mean that food may not digest, may feel like
a stone in your stomach, make you feel terrible. if that happens and if, despite
that clear signal you refuse to return to fasting, you should go on a juice diet,
take as little as possible, sip it slowly (almost chew it) and stay on juice until
you find yourself digesting it easily. then and only then, reintroduce a little solid
raw food like a green salad. 
weaning yourself back on to food should last just as long
as the fast. your first tentative meals should be dilute, raw juices. after several
days of slowly building up to solid raw fruit, small amounts of raw vegetable foods
should be added. if it has been a long fast, say over three weeks, this reintroduction
should be done gingerly over a few weeks. if this stage is poorly managed or ignored
you may become acutely ill, and for someone who started fasting while dangerously
ill, loss of self control and impulsive eating could prove fatal. even for those
fasting to cure non-life-threatening illnesses it is pointless to go through the
effort and discipline of a long fast without carefully establishing a correct diet
after the fast ends, or the effort will have largely been wasted.
foods for monodiet, juice or broth fastingg
zucchini, garlic, onion, green beans, kale, celery, beet greens and root, cabbage,
			carrot, wheat grass juice, alfalfa juice, barley green juice, parsley juice, lemon/lime
			juice, grapefruit juice, apples (not juice, too sweet), diluted orange juice, diluted
			grape juice
less-rigorous-than-water fasts
there are gradations of fasting measures ranging from rigorous
to relatively casual. water fasting is the most rapid and effective one. other methods
have been created by grasping the underlying truth of fasting, namely whenever the
digestive effort can be reduced, by whatever degree, whenever the formation of the
toxins of misdigestion can be reduced or prevented, to that extent the body can divert
energy to the healing process. thus comes about assorted famous and sometimes notorious
monodiet semi-fasts like the grape cure where the faster eats only grapes for a month
or so, or the lemon cure, where the juice of one or more lemons is added to water
and nothing else is consumed for weeks on end. here i should also mention the "lemon
juice/cayenne pepper/maple syrup cure," the various green drink cures using
spirulina, chlorella, barley green or wheat grass, and the famous bieler broths--vegetable
soups made of overcooked green beans or zucchini. 
i do not believe that monodiets work because of some magical
property of a particular food used. they work because they are semi-fasts and may
be extremely useful, especially for those individuals who can not or will not tolerate
a water fast.
the best foods for monodiet fasting are the easiest ones
digest: juices of raw fruits and nonstarchy vegetables with all solids strained out.
strained mineral broths made of long-simmered non-starchy vegetables (the best of
them made of leafy green vegetables) fall in the same category. so if you are highly
partial to the flavor of grapes or lemons or cayenne and (highly diluted) maple syrup,
a long fast on one of these would do you a world of good, just not quite as much
good as the same amount of time spent on water alone. if you select something more
"solid" for a long monodiet fast, like pureed zucchini, it is essential
that you not overeat. dr. bieler gave his fasting patients only one pint of zucchini
soup three or four times a day. the way to evaluate how much to eat is by how much
weight you are losing. when fasting, you must lose weight! and the faster the better.
pure absolute water fasting while not taking any vitamins
or other nutritional supplementation has a very limited maximum duration, perhaps
 days. the key concept here is nutritional reserves. body fat is stored, surplus
energy fuel. but energy alone cannot keep a body going. it needs much more than fuel
to rebuild and repair and maintain its systems. so the body in its wisdom also stores
up vitamins and minerals and other essential substances in and in-between all its
cells. bodies that have been very well nourished for a long time have very large
reserves; poorly nourished ones may have very little set aside for a rainy day. and
it is almost a truism that a sick person has, for quite some time, been a poorly
nourished one. with low nutritional reserves. this fact alone can make it difficult
for a sick person to water fast for enough time to completely heal their damaged
organs and other systems.
obese people have fat reserves sufficient to provide energy
for long periods, but rarely can any body, no matter how complete its nutrition was
for years previously, contain sufficient nutritional reserves to support a water
fast of over six weeks. to water fast the very obese down to normal weight can take
months but to make this possible, rather diverse and concentrated nutrition containing
few calories must be given. it is possible to fast even a very slim a person for
quite a bit longer than a month when their body is receiving easily assimilable vitamins
and minerals and small amounts of sugars or other simple carbohydrates. 
i estimate that fasting on raw juices and mineral broths
will result in healing at  to  percent of the efficiency of water fasting, depending
on the amount of nutrition taken and the amount the juices or broths are diluted.
but juice fasting can permit healing to go on several times longer than water might.
fasting on dilute juice and broth can also save the life
of someone whose organs of elimination are insufficiently strong to withstand the
work load created by water fasting. in this sense, juices can be regarded as similar
to the moderators in a nuclear reactor, slowing the process down so it won"t
destroy the container. on a fast of undiluted juice, the healing power drops considerably,
but a person on this regimen, if not sick, is usually capable of working. 
duration of juice fasts can vary greatly. most of the time
there is no need to continue fasting after the symptoms causing concern have been
eliminated, and this could happen as quickly as one week or take as long as  days
if the person is very obese. fasters also lose their motivation once the complaint
has vanished. but feeling better is no certain indication that the need to fast has
ended. this points up one of the liabilities of juice fasting; the person is already
eating, their digestive system never shut down and consequently, it is much easier
for them to resume eating. the thing to keep in mind is that if the symptoms return,
the fast was not long enough or the diet was not properly reformed after the fast.
during a long fast on water or dilute juice, if the body
has used up all of it"s reserves and/or the body has reached skeletal condition,
and the condition or symptoms being addressed persists the fast should be ended,
the person should go on a raw food healing diet. if three to six months on raw food
don"t solve the complaint then another spell of water or dilute juice fasting
should be attempted. most fasters are incapable of persisting until the body reserves
have been used up because social conditioning is telling them their emaciated-looking
body must be dying when it is actually far from death, but return of true hunger
is the critical indicator that must not be ignored. true hunger is not what most
people think of when they think they are hungry. few americans have ever experienced
true hunger. it is not a rumbling in the stomach or a set of uncomfortable sensations
(caused by the beginning of detoxification) you know will go away after eating. true
hunger is an animal, instinctual feeling in the back of one"s throat (not in
the stomach) that demands you eat something, anything, even grass or shoe leather.
seriously ill people inevitably start the cleansing process
with a pre-existing and serious mineral deficiencies. i say inevitably because they
likely would not have become ill had they been properly nourished. sick fasters may
be wise to take in minerals from thin vegetable broths or vitamin-like supplements
in order to prevent uncomfortable deficiency states. for example calcium or magnesium
deficiencies can make water fasters experience unpleasant symptoms such as hand tremors,
stiff muscles, cramps in the hands, feet, and legs, and difficulty relaxing. i want
to stress here that fasting itself does not create deficiencies. but a person already
deficient in minerals should watch for these symptoms and take steps to remedy the
deficiencies if necessary.
raw food healing diets
next in declining order of healing effectiveness is what
i call a raw food healing diet or cleansing diet. it consists of those very same
watery fruits and nonstarchy vegetables one juices or makes into vegetable broths,
but eaten whole and raw. heating food does two harmful things: it destroys many vitamins,
enzymes and other nutritional elements and it makes many foods much harder to digest.
so no cooked vegetables or fruits are allowed because to maintain health on this
limited regimen it is essential that every possible vitamin and enzyme present in
the food be available for digestion. even though still raw, no starchy or fatty vegetables
or fruits are allowed that contain concentrated calories like potatoes, winter squash,
avocados, sweet potatoes, fresh raw corn, dates, figs, raisins, or bananas. and naturally,
no salad dressings containing vegetable oils or (raw) ground seeds are allowed. nor
are raw grains or other raw concentrated energy sources.
when a person starts this diet they will at first experience
considerable weight loss because it is difficult to extract a large number of calories
from these foods (though i have seen people actually gain weight on a pure melon
diet, so much sugar do these fruits have, and well-chewed watermelon seeds are very
nourishing). eating even large quantities of only raw fruit and raw non-starchy vegetables
results in a slow but steady healing process about  to  percent as rapid as water
fasting.
a raw food cleansing diet has several huge advantages. it
is possible to maintain this regimen and regularly do non-strenuous work for many
months, even a year or more without experiencing massive weight loss and, more important
to some people, without suffering the extremes of low blood sugar, weakness and loss
of ability to concentrate that happen when water fasting. someone on a raw food cleanse
will have periods of lowered energy and strong cravings for more concentrated foods,
but if they have the self-discipline to not break their cleansing process they can
accomplish a great deal of healing while still maintaining more or less normal (though
slower paced) life activities. however, almost no one on this diet is able to sustain
an extremely active life-style involving hard physical labor or competitive sports.
and from the very beginning someone on a raw food cleanse must be willing and able
to lie down and rest any time they feel tired or unable to face their responsibilities.
otherwise they will inevitably succumb to the mental certainty that their feelings
of exhaustion or overwhelm can be immediately solved by eating some concentrated
food to "give them energy." such low-energy states will, however, pass
quickly after a brief nap or rest.
something else gradually happens to a body when on such a
diet. do you recall that i mentioned that after my own long fast i began to get more
"mileage" out of my food. a cleansed, healed body becomes far more efficient
at digestion and assimilation; a body that is kept on a raw food cleansing diet will
initially lose weight rapidly, but eventually weight loss slows to virtually nothing
and then stabilizes. however, long-term raw fooders are usually thin as toothpicks.
once starchy vegetables like potatoes or winter squash, raw
or cooked, or any cereals, raw or cooked, are added to a cleansing diet, the detoxification
and healing virtually ceases and it becomes very easy to maintain or even gain weight,
particularly if larger quantities of more concentrated foods like seeds and nuts
are eaten. though this diet has ceased to be cleansing, few if any toxins from misdigestion
will be produced and health is easy to maintain. 
"raw fooders" are usually people who have healed
themselves of a serious diseases and ever after continue to maintain themselves on
unfired food, almost as a matter of religious belief. they have become convinced
that eating only raw, unfired food is the key to extraordinarily long life and supreme
good health. when raw fooders wish to perform hard physical work or strenuous exercise,
they"ll consume raw nuts and some raw grains such as finely-ground oats soaked
overnight in warm water or deliciously sweet "essene bread," made from
slightly sprouted wheat that is then ground wet, made into cakes, and sun baked at
temperatures below about  degrees fahrenheit. essene bread can be purchased in
some health food stores. however, little or no healing or detoxification can happen
once concentrated energy sources are added to the diet, even raw ones. 
during my days at great oaks school i was a raw fooder for
some years, though i found it very difficult to maintain body heat on raw food during
chilly, rainy oregon winters and eventually struck a personal compromise where i
ate about half my diet raw and the rest fired. i have listed some books by raw fooders
in the bibliography. joe alexander"s is the most fun.
complete recovery of the seriously ill
its a virtual certainty that to fully recover, a seriously
ill person will have to significantly rebuild numerous organs. they have a hard choice:
to accept a life of misery, one that the medical doctors with drugs and surgery may
be able to prolong into an interminable hell on earth, or, spend several years working
on really healing their body, rotating between water fasting, juice or broth fasting,
extended periods on a cleansing raw food diet, and periods of no-cleansing on a more
complete diet that includes moderate amounts of cooked vegetables and small quantities
of cooked cereals. and even after recovery someone who was quite ill may have to
live the rest of their life on a rather restricted regimen.
it is unrealistic to expect one fast to fix everything. the
body will heal as much as it can in the allotted time, but if a dangerous illness
has not been fully remedied by the first intense fast, a raw food diet must be followed
for three to six months until weight has been regained, nutritional reserves have
been rebuilt and it is safe to undertake another extended fast. more than two water
or juice fasts a year of thirty continuous days are not recommended nor should they
be necessary unless the life is in imminent danger and there is no other option.
the story of jake"s catastrophic illness and almost-cure
is a good example of this type of program. jake was from back east. he phoned me
because he had read a health magazine article i had written, his weak voice faintly
describing a desperate condition. he was in a wheelchair unable to walk, unable to
control his legs or arms very well, was unable to control his bladder and required
a catheter. he had poor bowel control, had not the strength to talk much or loudly
and most frightening to him, he was steadily losing weight although he was eating
large amounts of cooked vegetables and grains. jake had wasted away to  pounds
at "" and looked pathetic when i first saw him wheeled off an airplane
at my local airport. 
jake had seen a lot of medical doctors and had variously
been diagnosed as having chronic fatigue syndrome, chronic (whatever that is) meningitis,
and multiple sclerosis. he had been treated by virtually every medical expert and
many famous alternative practitioners, utilizing a host of old and new techniques,
all to no avail. he had even tried intravenous chelation therapy and colonics. it
had also been suggested that he enter a hospital for the treatment of eating disorders
and/or see a psychiatrist. he had tried to gain admittance to a number of holistic
fasting institutions back east, but they all refused him because they considered
the risk was too high to fast a person at such a low body weight. but i had previously
fasted emaciated people like jake, and there was something i liked about his telephone
presence. perhaps this is why i foolishly decided i knew better than the other experts.
people commonly waste away and die while eating large amounts
of food. obviously they are unable to digest or assimilate nutrients or they wouldn"t
be wasting. eating further increases their toxic burden from undigested meals, further
worsening their already failing organs. the real solution is to stop feeding them
altogether so that their digestive functions can heal. in jake"s case, his body"s
nutritional reserves had already become sadly depleted due to poor absorption over
such an extended period, so i could not fast him on water. i immediately put jake
on a rich mineral broth prepared from everything left alive in our garden at the
end of winter--leaves of kale, endive plants, whole huge splitting savoy cabbages,
garlic, huge leeks including their green tops, the whole stew fortified with sea
weed. it did not matter too much what vegetables i used as long as there were lots
of leafy greens containing lots of chlorophyll (where the most concentrated mineral
nutrition is located).
jake was given colonics every day, but had to be carried
to the colonic table because he could not support his own weight. whoever had given
him colonics previously had not accomplished much for i must say that jake had the
most foul smelling discharges that i had ever encountered in administering over ,
colonics over many years. it was as if his body was literally rotting from the inside
out. 
after  days on mineral broth jake, who really did weigh
 pounds when he arrived, was only down to ! when a person already close to skeletal
weight starts fasting, to conserve vital tissue the body goes rapidly into a state
of profound rest so it uses very little energy, thus it loses very little weight
each day. this degree of resting also helps heal abnormal body parts earlier. after
one month on mineral broth jake began to show signs of mineral deficiencies in the
form of a fine tremor of the hands, and cramps in the feet, so i put him on mineral
supplements too. 
jake was in my house for a long time. at the end of the second
month on broth he started two weeks on raw carrot juice with a lot of chlorophyll
added from sources such as algae (spirulina), wheat grass juice, alfalfa, etc.. this
was followed by two more weeks on small quantities of raw fruits and vegetables,
and then followed by two weeks with added steamed vegetables, and finally, he achieved
a diet which included small amounts of grain, cooked legumes and raw nuts, plus the
fruits and vegetables previously mentioned. jake health steadily improved. he gained
control of his bladder, bowels, speech, hands, and legs. he began to exercise in
the living room on a stationary bike, and walked slowly up and down our long driveway,
picking daffodils in the beautiful spring weather. 
sadly, though i could help his body to heal it was next to
impossible to stem the tides of jake"s appetites or to pleasantly withstand
his tantrums when he was denied; he always wanted more in terms of quantity, more
in terms of variety, and at more frequent intervals. though his organs had healed
significantly, his digestive capacity was not nearly as large as he remembered himself
enjoying before he got sick. and never would be. jake was not happy about the dietary
restrictions necessary for him to retain his newly attained health, and unwilling
to stay within the limits of his digestive system"s ability to process foods.
he had gained weight and was back up to  pounds. it was time for him to go home
before i lost my good humor. 
jake left with a lot of "good lucks" and stern
admonitions to stick to his stringent diet and supplement program. it was a big moment
for jake. he had arrived in a wheelchair three months before. now he walked unaided
to the airplane, something he had not been able to do for two years. 
back at home jake had no one courageous enough to set limits
for him. his immediate family and every one of his brow beaten associates were compelled
to give him everything that he wanted. so his appetite and lack of personal discipline
got the better of him. he started eating lots of dates and figs. these had been eliminated
from his diet because he was unable to process foods which such a high sugar content.
he also ate larger and larger quantities of grains, nuts and avocados, although i
had warned him of specific quantity limits on rich foods. most sadly, he returned
to enjoying spaghetti with lots of cheese grated on top. within months of leaving
my care his paralysis and weakness returned, except that unfortunately for him, he
still retained the ability to assimilate food and maintain his body weight. ironically,
the only ultimate benefit of his fasting with me was to permit him to suffer a far
longer existence in a wheelchair without wasting away and escaping into death. 
i would be failing my readers if i did not explain why jake
became ill in the first place. jake had started what grew to become a very successful
chain of spaghetti restaurants with a unique noodles and sauces made to his own formula.
he ate a lot of his own spaghetti over the years, and had been reared in a good italian
family with lots of other kinds of rich food. jake had a reputation for being able
to outeat everybody in terms of quantity and in the amount of time spent eating.
in childhood, this ability had made his italian mother very happy because it showed
appreciation for her great culinary skill. 
secondly, jake the adult was still at his core, jake the
spoiled brat child, with a bad, unregulated temper. he was in the habit of dumping
his temper on other people whether they needed a helping of his angry emotions or
not. a lot of people in his employ and in his extended family tiptoed around jake,
always careful of triggering his wrath. at my place as jake began to get well he
began to use his increased energy and much stronger voice to demonstrate his poor
character. at meal times jake would bang the table with a fork hard enough to leave
dents in the wood table top while yelling for more, complaining loudly about the
lack of rich sauces and other culinary delights he craved. this was a character problem
that jake could not seem to overcome, even with a lot of intervention from the local
minister on his behalf and my counseling. jake was a catholic who went to church
regularly, but acted like a christian only while he was in church. on some level
jake knew that he was not treating others fairly, but he would not change his habitual
responses. his negative thoughts and actions interfered with his digestive capacity
to the extent that his gluttonous eating habits produced illness, a vegetative paralyzing
illness, but not death. to me this seems almost a form of karmic justice.
it is common for people who have been very ill for extended
periods of time to realize what a wonderful gift life is and arrive at a willingness
to do almost anything to have a second chance at doing 'life" right. some succeed
with their second chance and some don"t. if they don"t succeed in changing
their life and relationships, they frequently relapse.
luigi cornaro"s left the world his story of sickness
and rejuvenation. his little book may be the world"s first alternative healing
text. it is a classic example of the value of abstentousness. had jake taken this
story to heart he would have totally recovered. cornaro was a sixteenth century venetian
nobleman. he, like jake the spaghetti baron, was near death at the young age of forty.
(jake was also in his early s when he broke down.) cornaro"s many doctors
were unable to cure him. finally he saw a doctor who understood the principles of
natural healing. this wise physician determined that this illness was caused by a
mismatch between cornaro"s limited digestive capacity and the excessive amount
of food he was eating. so cornaro was put on a diet of only  ounces of solid food
and fourteen ounces of liquid a day. any twelve ounces of any solids he wanted and
any fourteen ounces of liquid. it could be meat and wine, salad or orange juice,
no matter. 
cornaro soon regained his health and he continued to follow
the diet until the age of . his health was so outstanding during this period that
people who were much younger in terms of years were unable to keep up with him. at
 his friends, worried about how thin he was (doesn"t it always seem that it
is your so-called friends who always ruin a natural cure) persuaded him to increase
his daily ration by two ounces a day. his delicate and weak digestive system, which
had operated perfectly for many years, was unable to deal with the additional two
ounces, and he became very ill after a very short period of over eating. 
worse, his recent indulgence had even further damaged the
organs of digestion and to survive cornaro had to cut his daily ration to eight ounces
of solid food and eleven of liquids. on this reduced dietary he again regained his
health and lived to be . cornaro wrote four books on the value of abstinence or
"sober living" as he called it, writing the last and perhaps the most interesting
at  years of age. had my patient jake been able to confine his food intake to the
level of his body"s ability to digest, he might still be walking and enjoying
life. but try as i might i could not make him understand. perhaps he enjoys doing
penance in his wheel chair more than he would enjoy health and life.
tissue losses at death by starvation*
fat
muscles
blood
liver
spleen
pancreas
skin
intestines
kidneys
lungs
testes
heart
brain and spinal cord
nerves
bone
* from keys, ancel, joseph brozek , austin henchel, olaf mickelson
and henry l. taylor, () the biology of human starvation. two vols. minneapolis:
university of minnesota press. 
starvation
it is true that ethical medical doctors use the least-risky
procedure they are allowed to use. but this does not mean there are no risks to allopathic
treatment. the medical doctor justifies taking the risks by saying that the risk/reward
ratio is the best possible. any sick person is already at risk. life comes with only
one guarantee: that none of us gets out of it alive.
compared to the risks of allopathic medicine, fasting is
a far safer method of treating disease. the oft-repeated scare stories medical doctors
and their allies circulate about fasting are not true, and it is important to remember
that none of these people portraying fasting as evil and dangerous have ever fasted
themselves--i"ll put money on that one. or, on the slim possibility that someone
telling fasting horror stories did actually not eat for  hours (probably because
some accident or acute illness prevented them), they had a terrible experience because
they didn"t understand the process, were highly toxic, and were scared to death
the whole time. 
or worse yet they fasted for a short period with an "open
mind"--a very dangerous state in which to approach anything new. i have found
through considerable experience with people professing to have open minds that the
expression "i"m open minded" usually means that someone has already
made up their mind and new data just passes straight through their open mind--in one
ear and out the other. or sometimes, the phrase "open mind" means a person
that does not believe any information has reality and is entirely unable to make
up their mind.
the most commonly leveled criticism of fasting is that in
its efforts to survive self-imposed starvation the body metabolizes vital tissue,
not just fat, and therefore, fasting is damaging, potentially fatally damaging. people
who tell you this will also tell you that fasters have destroyed their heart muscle
or ruined their nervous system permanently. but this kind of damage happen only when
a person starves to death or starves to a point very close to death, not when someone
fasts. 
there is a huge difference between fasting and starvation.
someone starving is usually eating, but eating poorly and inadequately, eating scraps
of whatever is available such as sugar, white flour, rancid grease, shoe leather,
or even dirt. frequently a starving person is forced to exercise a great deal as
they struggle to survive and additionally is highly apprehensive. or someone starving
to death is confined to a small space, may become severely dehydrated too and is
in terror. fear is very damaging to the digestive process, and to the body in general;
fear speeds up the destruction of vital tissue. people starve when trekking vast
distances through wastelands without food to eat, they starved in concentration camps,
buried in mind disasters, they starve during famines and starve while being tortured
in prisons. 
until water fasting goes on past the point where all fatty
tissues and all abnormal deposits have been burned for fuel and recycled for the
nutritional elements they contain, vital muscle tissues and organs are not consumed.
and as long as the body contains sufficient nutritional reserves, vital organs and
essential tissues are rebuilt and maintained. in fact the body has a great deal of
intelligence that we don"t give it credit for. it knows exactly which cells
are essential to survival, which ones are not. the body knows which cells are abnormal
deposits, and it goes to work to metabolize them first. for example, the body recognizes
arthritic deposits, cysts, fibroids, and tumors as offensive parts of the landscape,
and obligingly uses them for foods in preference to anything else. a starving (not
fasting) body also knows precisely in what order of priority body cells should be
metabolized to minimize risk of death or permanent disability.
after a starving body has reached skeletal condition, or
where some small amount of fat remains but nutritional reserves (vitamins and minerals)
are exhausted and there is insufficient nourishment forthcoming, the body begins
to consume nutrient-rich muscle and organ tissue in a last-ditch effort to stay alive.
under these dire circumstances, the least essential muscles and organs from the standpoint
of survival are metabolized first. for example, muscles in the arms and legs would
be consumed early in the process, the heart muscle used only toward the very end.
the very last part of the body to be metabolized when one is starving and as has
come very close to death would be the brain and the nervous system. 
starvation begins where fasting ends, which is when real
hunger begins. if the return of hunger is ignored whenever it takes place, whether
it is in , , or  days depending upon body weight and type of fast, at that
point exactly, not a day before, starvation begins very slowly. usually it takes
a considerable period of time after that before death occurs. it is important to
note that this discussion applies only to the abstention from food, not water. death
takes place very quickly in the absence of water.
the chart on the previous page shows numerically the phenomenal
ability of the body to protect the most essential tissues of the body right up to
the time of death. if a person fasted for  days, the average time it takes for
the return of hunger in a person that is not overweight, and then ignored the return
of hunger, and continued to abstain from food--if the person could avoid forced exercise,
keep warm, and had enough hydration, it could take as much as an additional  to
 days to die of starvation! at death the body would have experienced losses of
 to  percent of its starting body weight. (ancel keys et al, ) a emaciated
person can not afford to lose nearly as much weight as an obese person, and death
under conditions of starvation will occur earlier. in all cases of starvation the
brain, nerves, heart, lungs, kidneys and liver remain largely intact and functional
to the very end. during a fast, it is almost impossible to damage essential organs,
unless of course the person creates the damage by fears about the process, or by
internalizing the fears of others. if those fears are present, the fast should not
be attempted.
weight loss by fasting
loss of weight indicates, almost guarantees, that detoxification
and healing is occurring. i can"t stress this too much. of all the things i
find my patients seem to misunderstand or forget after being told, it is that they
can"t heal in a rapid manner without getting smaller. this reality is especially
hard for the family and friends of someone who is fasting, who will say, "you"re
looking terrible dear, so thin. your skin is hanging on your bones. you"re not
eating enough protein or nutrient food to be healthy and you must eat more or you"re
going to develop serious deficiencies. you don"t have any energy, you must be
getting sicker. you"re doing the wrong thing, obviously. you have less energy
and look worse every day. go and see a doctor before it is too late." to succeed
with friends like this, a faster has to be a mighty self-determined person with a
powerful ability to disagree with others.
medical personnel claim that rapid weight loss often causes
dangerous deficiencies; these deficiencies force the person to overeat and regain
even more weight afterward. this is largely untrue, though there is one true aspect
to it: a fasted, detoxified body becomes a much more efficient digester and assimilator,
extracting a lot more nutrition from the same amount food is used to eat. if, after
extended fasting a person returns to eating the same number of calories as they did
before; they will gain weight even more rapidly than before they stated fasting.
when fasting for weight loss, the only way to keep the weight off is to greatly reform
the diet; to go on, and stay on, a diet made up largely of non-starchy, watery fruits
and vegetables, limited quantities of cooked food, and very limited amounts of highly
concentrated food sources like cereals and cooked legumes. unless, of course, after
fasting, one"s lifestyle involves much very hard physical labor or exercise.
i"ve had a few obese fasters become quite angry with me for this reason; they
hoped to get thin through fasting and after the fast, to resume overeating with complete
irresponsibility as before, without weight gain. 
people also fear weight loss during fasting because they
fear becoming anorexic or bulimic. they won"t! a person who abstains from eating
for the purpose of improving their health, in order to prevent or treat illness,
or even one who fasts for weight loss will not develop an eating disorder. eating
disorders mean eating compulsively because of a distorted body image. anorexics and
bulimics have obsessions with the thinner-is-better school of thought. the anorexic
looks at their emaciated frame in the mirror and thinks they are fat! this is the
distorted perception of a very insecure person badly in need of therapy. a bulimic,
on the other hand stuffs themselves, usually with bad food, and then purges it by
vomiting, or with laxatives. anorexics and bulimics are not accelerating the healing
potential of their bodies; these are life threatening conditions. fasters are genuinely
trying to enhance their survival potential. 
occasionally a neurotic individual with a pre-existing eating
disorder will become obsessed with fasting and colon cleansing as a justification
to legitimize their compulsion. during my career while monitoring hundreds of fasters,
i"ve known two of these. i discourage them from fasting or colon cleansing,
and refuse to assist them, because they carry the practices to absurd extremes, and
contribute to bad press about natural medicine by ending up in the emergency ward
of a hospital with an intravenous feeding tube in their arm. 
cases beyond the remedy of fasting
occasionally, very ill people have a liver that has become
so degenerated it cannot sustain the burden of detoxification. this organ is as vital
to survival as the brain, heart and lungs. we can get along with only one kidney,
we can live with no spleen, with no gallbladder, with only small parts of the stomach
and intestines, but we can not survive without a liver for more than a day or so.
the liver is the most active organ in the body during detoxification. to reach an
understanding of detoxification, it helps to know just what the liver does for us
on an ongoing basis. 
the liver is a powerful chemical filter where blood is refined
and purified. the liver passes this cleansed blood out through the superior vena
cava, directly to the heart. the blood is then pumped into general and systemic circulation,
where it reaches all parts of the body, delivering nutrition and oxygen at a cellular
level. on its return flow, a large proportion of the depleted blood is collected
by the gastric, splenic and superior and inferior mesenteric veins that converge
to form the large portal vein which enters the liver. thus a massive flow of waste
from all the cells of the body is constantly flowing into the liver. the huge hepatic
artery also enters the liver to supply oxygen and nutrients with which to sustain
the liver cells themselves. 
the liver is constantly at work refining the blood. it is
synthesizing, purifying, renovating, washing, filtering, separating, and detoxifying.
it works day and night without stopping. many toxins are broken down by enzymes and
their component parts are efficiently reused in various parts of the body. some impurities
are filtered out and held back from the general circulation. these debris are collected
and stored in the gall bladder, which is a little sack appended to the liver. after
a meal, the contents of the gall bladder (bile) are discharged into the duodenum,
the upper part of the small intestine just beyond the stomach. this bile also contains
digestive enzymes produced by the liver that permit the breakdown of fatty foods
in the small intestine.
sometimes a large flow of bile finds its way into the stomach
by pressure or is sucked into the stomach by vomiting. excessive biliary secretion
and excretion can also result from overeating, which overcrowds the area. sometimes
colonics or massage can also stimulate a massive flow of bile. extremely bitter and
irritating, when bile gets into the stomach the person either vomits or wishes they
could. and after vomiting and experiencing the taste of bile, wishes they hadn"t.
when no food at all enters the system, the blood keeps right
on passing through the liver/filter just as it does when we are eating. when the
liver does not have to take care of toxins generated by the current food intake,
each passage through the liver results in a cleaner blood stream, with the debris
decreasing in quantity, viscosity, and toxicity, until the blood becomes normalized.
during fasting, debris from the gall bladder still pass through the small intestine
and into the large intestine. however, if the bowels do not move the toxins in the
bile are readsorbed into the blood stream and get recirculated in an endless loop.
this toxic recycling makes a faster feel just terrible, like they had a flu or worse!
the bowels rarely move while fasting. during fasting only
enemas or colonics permit elimination from the large intestine. if done effectively
and frequently, enemas will greatly add to the well being and comfort of the faster.
many times when a faster seems to be retracing or experiencing a sudden onset of
acute discomfort or symptoms, these can be almost immediately relieved by an enema
or colonic. 
a person with major liver degeneration inevitably dies, with
or without fasting, with or without traditional medicine. significantly impaired
kidney function can also bring about this same result. mercifully, death while fasting
is usually accomplished relatively free of pain, clear of mind and with dignity.
that often can not be said of death in a hospital. there are much worse experiences
than death. 
fasting is not a cure-all. there are some conditions that
are beyond the ability of the body to heal. ultimately, old age gets us all. 
dr. linda hazzard, one of the greats of natural hygiene,
who practiced osteopathic medicine in the s, had a useful way of categorizing
conditions that respond well to fasting. these she labeled "acute conditions,"
and "chronic degenerative conditions." a third classification, "chronic
conditions with organic damage," does not respond to fasting. acute conditions,
are usually inflammations or infections with irritated tissue, with swelling, redness,
and often copious secretions of mucous and pus, such as colds, flu, a first time
case of pneumonia, inflamed joints as in the early stages of arthritis, etc. these
acute conditions usually remedy in one to three weeks of fasting. acute conditions
are excellent candidates for self-doctoring. chronic degenerative conditions are
more serious and the patient usually requires supervision. these include conditions
such as cancer, aids, chronic arthritis, chronic pneumonia, emphysema and asthma.
chronic degenerative conditions usually respond within a month to three months of
fasting. the fasting should be broken up into two or three sessions if the condition
has not been relieved in one stint of supervised fasting. each successive fast will
produce some improvement and if a light, largely raw-food diet is adhered to between
fasts the patient should not worsen and should be fairly comfortable between fastings.
if there has been major functional damage to an organ as
a result of any of these degenerative conditions, healing will not be complete, or
may be impossible. by organic damage, i mean that a vital part of the body has ceased
to function due to some degenerative process, injury, or surgery--so badly damaged
that the cells that make up the organ can not be replaced. 
i once had a twenty five year old man come to my spa to die
in peace because he had been through enough diagnostic procedures in three hospitals
to know that his liver was beyond repair. he had been working on an apple farm in
between terms at university when he was poisoned several times with insecticide from
an aerial spray on the whole orchard. he absorbed so much insecticide that his liver
incurred massive organic damage.
when he came to me his body had reached the point where it
was incapable of digesting, and because of lack of liver function, it was incapable
of healing while fasting, a condition in which death is a certainty. he was a buddhist,
did not fear death and did not want to be kept alive in agony or in prolonged unconsciousness
by any extraordinary means, nor did he want to die with tubes in every orifice. i
was honored to be a supportive participant in his passing. he died fasting, in peace,
and without pain, with a clear mind that allowed him to consciously prepare for the
experience. he was not in a state of denial or fear, and made no frantic attempts
to escape the inevitable. he went quietly into that still dark night with a tranquil
demeanor and a slight smile.
fortunately, in my many years of practice i had the pleasure
of seeing the majority of the people totally regain their health or at least greatly
improve it by means of the fasting and healing diets. many cancer patients watched
with amazement as their tumors disappeared before their eyes, many arthritics regained
their function, serious skin conditions such as psoriasis disappeared, mental conditions
improved, addictions vanished, fatigue was replaced by energy, and fat dissolved
revealing the hidden sculpture beneath. i will talk more about procedures and the
particular reasons bodies develop specific conditions in later chapters.
social/cultural/psychological obstacles to fasting
numerous attitudes make it difficult to fast or to provide
moral support to friends or loved ones that are fasting. many people harbor fears
of losing weight because they think that if times were really tough, if there was
a famine or they became ill and lost a lot of weight they would have no reserves
and would certainly perish. these people have no idea how much fat can be concealed
on an even skinny body, nor of how slowly a skinny body loses weight while fasting.
substantial fat reserves are helpful as heat-retaining insulation in those rare accidents
when someone is dropped into a cold ocean and must survive until the rescue boat
arrives. being fat might keep a person alive longer who is lost in the wilderness
awaiting rescue with no supplies, no means of procuring food, and no means of keeping
warm. on the other hand, fat people would have a far harder time walking out of the
wilderness. and extensive fat deposits are merely fuel and do not contain extensive
nutritional reserves. an obese person fasting without significant nutritional supplementation
would begin starving long before they became really skinny. on the balance, carrying
excess weight is a far greater liability than any potential prosurvival aspects it
might have.
there are other attitudes associated with weight loss that
make it difficult for people to fast. people hold rather stereotypical notions about
what constitutes an attractive person; usually it involves having some meat on ones
bones. hollywood and hugh hefner have both influenced the masses to think that women
should have hourglass figures with large, upthrust, firm breasts. since breasts are
almost all useless fatty tissue supporting some milk-producing glands that do not
give a breast much volume except when engorged, most women fasters loose a good percentage
of their breast mass. if the fast is extensive, there should also develop an impressive
showing of ribs and hip bones; these are not soft and cuddly. husbands, lovers, parents,
and friends frequently point out that you don"t look good this way and exhort
you to put on weight. most people think pleasantly plump is healthy. 
skinny men, especially those who had lost a lot of weight
during an illness, are pressured by associates to put on weight to prove that they
are healthy. i had a client who was formerly a college varsity football player. before
his illness he had lifted weights and looked like a hunk. his family and friends
liked to see him that way and justifiably so. then he got seriously ill. on a long
extended healing diet he lost a significant amount of weight and seemed down right
skinny, causing all who knew him well and cared about him to tempt him with all kinds
of scrumptious delicacies from the best of kitchens. but this case was like luigi
cornaro, a man who never again could look like a hunk. his "friends" made
an absolutely necessary change in life style and appearance far more difficult than
it was already. my client was torn between a desire to please others, and a desire
to regain and retain his health. this problem a sick person doesn"t need.
if you have the independence to consider following an alternative
medical program in a culture that highly values conformity and agreement, you are
also going to have to defend your own course of self-determined action based on the
best available data that you have. but fasters are usually in fragile emotional condition,
so i advise my clients who are subjected to this kind of pressure to beg their friends
and associates to refrain from saying anything if they can"t support the course
of action you have chosen. after this, if friends or relatives are still incapable
of saying nothing (even non-verbally), it is important to exclude them from your
life until you have accomplished your health goals, have regained some weight and
have returned to eating a maintenance diet, rather than getting skinnier on a healing
one.
the very worst aspect of our culture"s eating programming
is that people have been wrongfully taught that when ill they must eat to keep up
their strength. inherent in this recommendation is an unstated belief that when the
body is weakened by a disease state, the weakness can somehow be overcome with food,
and that the body needs this food to kill the virus, bacteria, or invading yeast,
and uses the protein to heal or rebuild tissue. sadly, the exact opposite is the
case. disease organisms feed and multiply on the toxic waste products of misdigestion,
and the body is unable to digest well when it is weak or ill. 
there"s an old saying about this: 'feed a cold, starve
a fever." most people think this saying means you should eat when you have a
cold. what the saying really means is if you feed a cold then you will soon have
to starve a fever. protein foods especially are not digested by a diseased body,
and as mentioned before, the waste products of protein indigestion are especially
poisonous. that is all the body needs when it is already down, another load of poison
which it can"t eliminate due to weakness and enervation. 
weight loss is usually associated with illness, as it should
be! in times of acute illness an otherwise healthy body loses its appetite for food
because it is prosurvival to stop eating. it is very hard to coax a sick animal to
eat. their bodies, not controlled by a mind full of complex learned responses and
false ideas, automatically know that fasting is nature"s method of healing.
contrary to popular understanding, digestion, assimilation, and elimination require
the expenditure of considerable energy. this fact may contradict the reader"s
experience because everyone has become tired when they have worked a long time without
eating, and then experienced the lift after eating. but an ill body cannot digest
efficiently so instead of providing energy extracted from foods, the body is further
burdened by yet another load of toxic material produced by fermented and putrefied
food. this adds insult to injury in a sick body that is already drowning in its own
garbage.
worse, during illness most available vital force is already
redirected into healing; it is not available for digestion. it is important to allow
a sick body to proceed with healing and not to obstruct the process with unnecessary
digestion or suppress the symptoms (which actually are the healing efforts) with
drugs. if you have an acute illness, and you stop all food intake except for pure
water and herb teas, and perhaps some vegetable broth, or dilute non-sweet juice,
you have relieved your body of an immense effort. instead of digesting, the body
goes to work on catching up on healing. the body can and will almost inevitably heal
itself if the sick person will have faith in it, cooperate with the body"s efforts
by allowing the symptoms of healing to exist, reduce or eliminate the intake of food
to allow the body to marshal its energies, maintain a positive mental attitude and
otherwise stay out of the way. 
many people intensely dread missing even one meal. these
folks usually are and have been so toxic that their bodies had been stashing uneliminated
toxins in their fat for years. they are usually so addicted to caffeine, cigarettes,
alcohol, and so forth, that when they had fasted, even briefly, their bodies were
forced to dip into highly-polluted fat reserves while simultaneously the body begins
withdrawal. people like this who try to fast experience highly unpleasant symptoms
including headache, irritability, inability to think or concentrate, blurred vision,
profound fatigue, aches, etc. most of these symptoms come from low blood sugar, but
combined with the toxins being released from fat and combined with going through
multiple addictive withdrawals, the discomforts are more than most people are willing
to tolerate. fasting on juice is much more realistic for cases like this. it is little
wonder that when a hygienist suggests a fast to improve health, this type of case
asserts positively that fasting is quite impossible, they have tried it, it is absolutely
terrible and know that they can"t do it. 
this rejection is partly due to a cultural expectation (one
reinforced by western medicine) that all unpleasant symptoms should be avoided or
suppressed. to voluntarily experience unpleasant sensations such as those mentioned
above is more than the ordinary timid person will subject themselves to, even in
order to regain health. they will allow surgery, drugs with violent and dangerous
side effects, painful and invasive testing procedures and radiation--all unpleasant
and sometimes extremely uncomfortable. these therapies are accepted because someone
else with authority is doing it to them. and, they have been told that it they don"t
submit they will not ever feel better and probably will die in the near future. also
people think that they have no alternative, that the expert in front of them knows
what is best, so they feel relieved to have been relieved of the responsibility for
their own condition and its treatment.
preventative fasting
during the years it takes for a body to degenerate enough
to prompt a fast, the body has been storing up large quantities of unprocessed toxins
in the cells, tissues, fat deposits, and organs. the body in its wisdom will always
choose to temporarily deposit overwhelming amounts of toxins somewhere harmless rather
than permit the blood supply to become polluted or to use secondary elimination routes.
a body will use times when the liver is less burdened to eliminate these stored toxic
debris. the hygienists" paradigm asserts that the manifestation of symptoms
or illness are all by themselves, absolute, unassailable proof that further storage
of toxic wastes in the cells, tissues, fat deposits, and organs is not possible and
that an effort toward elimination is absolutely necessary. thus the first time a
person fasts a great quantity of toxins will normally be released. being the resident
of a body when this is happening can be quite uncomfortable. for this reason alone,
preventative fasting is a very wise idea. 
before the body becomes critically ill, clean up your reserve
fuel supply (fat deposits) by burning off some accumulated fat that is rich in toxic
deposits and then replace it with clean, non-toxic fat that you will make while eating
sensibly. if you had but fasted prophylactically as a preventative or health-creating
measure before you became seriously ill, the initial detoxification of your body
could have been accomplished far more comfortably, while you were healthy, while
your vital force was high and while your body otherwise more able to deal with detoxification.
each time you fast, even if it is only one day, you allow
your body to go through a partial detox, and each time it becomes easier and more
comfortable than the last time. the body learns how to fast. each time you fast it,
your body slips into a cleansing mode more quickly, and each time you fast you lighten
the load of stored toxins. perhaps you have already eliminated the caffeine your
body had stored, which frequently causes severe headaches on withdrawal, not to mention
fatigue. it certainly helps to have this behind you before you go on to the elimination
of other irritating substances. many people have gone through alcohol or tobacco
withdrawal, and understand that it is very unpleasant, and also that it must be done
in the pursuit of health. why not withdraw from the rest of the irritating and debilitating
substances we take into our system on an ongoing basis, and why not grit your way
through the eliminative process, withdraw, from food addictions such as sugar or
salt, and from foods that you may be allergic to like wheat, dairy products or eggs.
it is very wise to invest in your own insurance plan by systematically
detoxifying while you are still healthy. plan it into your life, when it is convenient,
such as once a week on sunday, or even once a month on a quiet day. take a few days
of vacation, go to a warm, beautiful place and devote part or all of it to cleansing.
treat yourself by taking an annual trip to hawaii, fasting at a hotel on the beach--do
whatever it takes to motivate yourself. and consider this: vacations are enormously
cheaper when you stay out of restaurants.
if you have accustomed your body to  hour fasts, then you
can work on  hour fasts, and over time work up to  hour fasts, all on a continuum.
you may find it becoming increasingly comfortable, perhaps even pleasant, something
you look forward to. fasting a relatively detoxified body feels good, and people
eventually really get into the clean, light, clear headed, perhaps spiritually aware
state that goes along with it. 
by contrast, fasting when you are sick is much more difficult
because your vitality or vital force is very low, you already have no energy, and
probably have unpleasant symptoms that must be dealt with at the same time. there
may be the added stress of being forced into a cleanse because you are too nauseous
to eat. most people let their health go until they are forced into dealing with it;
they are too busy living, so why bother. 
the truth is that our body does age, and over time becomes
less able to deal with insults; the accumulated effect of insults and aging eventually
leads most of us to some serious degenerative illness. normally this begins happening
around age  if not sooner. some of us that were gifted with good genes or what
i call "a good start" may have reached the age of  or  or even  without
serious illness, but those people are few and far between. why not tip the scales
in your favor by preventing or staving off health problems with systematic detoxification
at your own convenience.
climb into the drivers seat and start to take control and
gain confidence in your own ability to deal with your body, your own health, and
your own life. when it gets right down to the bottom line, there is really only one
thing in the world that is really yours, and that is your life. take control and
start managing it. the reward will be a more qualitative life.
chapter four 
colon cleansing
from the hygienic dictionary 
autointoxication. [] the accumulations on the bowel wall become a breeding
ground for unhealthy bacterial life forms. the heavy mucus coating in the colon thickens
and becomes a host for putrefaction. the blood capillaries to the colon begin to
pick up the toxins, poisons and noxious debris as it seeps through the bowel wall.
all tissues and organs of the body are now taking on toxic substances. here is the
beginning of true autointoxication on a physiological level. bernard jensen, tissue
cleansing through bowel management. [] all maladies are due to the lack of certain
food principles, such as mineral salts or vitamins, or to the absence of the normal
defenses of the body, such as the natural protective flora. when this occurs, toxic
bacteria invade the lower alimentary canal, and the poisons thus generated pollute
the bloodstream and gradually deteriorate and destroy every tissue, gland and organ
of the body. sir arbuthnot lane. [] the common cause of gastro-intestinal
indigestion is enervation and overeating when food is not digested, it becomes a
poison. dr. john.h. tilden, impaired health: its cause and cure, . [] a clogging
up of the large intestine by a building up (on) the bowel wall to such an extent
that feces can hardly pass through. autointoxication is a direct result of intestinal
constipation. faulty nutrition is a major underlying factor in constipation. the
frequency or quantity of fecal elimination is not an indication of the lack of constipation
in the bowel. bernard jensen, tissue cleansing through bowel management. 
i am not a true believer in any single healing method or
system. i find much truth in many schools and use a wide variety of techniques. the
word for my inclination is eclectic. 
the most effective medicine in my arsenal is water fasting
followed closely in potency by other, less rigorous detoxifying diets. colon cleansing
ranks next in healing power. in fact it is difficult to separate colon cleansing
from fasting because detoxification programs should always be accompanied by colon
cleansing. further down the scale of efficatiousness comes dietary reform to eliminate
allergic reactions and to present the body with foods it is capable of digesting
without creating toxemia. last, and usually least in effectiveness in my arsenal,
are orthotropic substances (in the form of little pills and capsules) commonly known
as vitamins or food supplements.
interestingly, acceptance of these methods by my clients
runs in exact opposition to their effectiveness. people prefer taking vitamins because
they seem like the allopaths' pills, taking pills demands little or no responsibility
for change. the least popular prescription i can write is a monodiet of water for
several weeks or a month. yet this is my most powerful medicine. 
it is possible to resolve many health complaints without
fasting, simply by cleansing the colon and regaining normal lower bowel function.
colonics take little personal effort and are much easier to get people to accept
than fasting. so i can fully understand how perfectly honest and ethical naturopaths
have developed obsessions with colon cleansing. some healers have loudly and repeatedly
(and wrongly) proclaimed that constipation is the sole cause of disease, and thus,
the only real cure for any illness is colon cleansing. 
even though it is possible to have a lot of successes with
the simple (though unpleasant to administer) technique of colon cleansing, degenerated
lower bowels are the only cause of disease. i prefer to use bowel cleansing as an
adjunct to more complete healing programs. however, old classics of hygiene and even
a few new books strongly make the case for colonics. some of these books are entirely
one-sided, single-cause single-cure approaches, and sound convincing to the layperson.
for this reason, i think i should take a few paragraphs and explain why some otherwise
well-intentioned health professionals have overly-advocated colonics (and other practices
as well).
most diseases cure themselves
if you ask any honest medical doctor how they cure diseases,
they will tell you that most acute disease conditions and a smaller, though significant
percentage (probably a majority) of chronic disease conditions are self-limiting
and will, given time, get better all by themselves. so for most complaints, the honest
allopathic doctor sees their job as giving comfort and easing the severity of the
symptoms until a cure happens.
this same scenario, when viewed from a hygienist's perspective,
is that almost all acute and many chronic conditions are simply the body's attempt
to handle a crisis of toxemia. for two reasons the current crisis will probably go
away by itself. the positive reason is that the toxic overload will be resolved:
the person changes their dietary habits or the stressor that temporarily lowered
their vital force and produced enervation is removed, then digestion improves and
the level of self-generated toxins is reduced. the negative reason for a complaint
to "cure" itself is that the suffering person's vital force drops below
the level that the symptom can be manifested and the complaint goes away because
a new, more serious disease is developing. 
i view this second possibility as highly undesirable because
strong, healthy bodies possessing a high degree of vital force are able to eliminate
toxins rather violently, frequently producing very uncomfortable symptoms that are
not life-threatening. however, as the vital force drops, the body changes its routes
of secondary elimination and begins using more centrally located vital organs and
systems to dispose of toxemia. this degeneration producing less unpleasant symptoms,
but in the long run, damages essential organs and moves the person closer to their
final disease.
a young vigorous body possessing a large degree of vital
force will almost always route surplus toxins through skin tissues and skin-like
mucus membranes, producing repeated bouts of sinusitis, or asthma, or colds, or a
combination of all these. each acute manifestation will "cure" itself by
itself eventually. but eventually the body's vital force can no longer create these
aggressive cleansing phenomena and the toxemia begins to go deeper. when the allopathic
doctor gets a patient complaining of sinusitis, they know they will eventually get
a cure. the "cure" however, might well be a case of arthritis. 
this unfortunate reality tends to make young, idealistic
physicians become rather disillusioned about treating degenerative conditions because
the end result of all their efforts is, in the end, death anyway. the best they can
do is to alleviate suffering and to a degree, prolong life. the worst they can do
is to prolong suffering. 
thus, the physicians main job is to get the patient to be
patient, to wait until the body corrects itself and stops manifesting the undesired
symptom. thus comes the prime rule of all humane medicine: first of all, do no harm!
if the doctor simply refrains from making the body worse, it will probably get better
by itself. but the patient, rarely resigned to quiet suffering, comes in demanding
fast relief, demanding a cure. in fact, if the patient were resigned to quiet suffering
they would not consult a doctor. so if the doctor wants to keep this patient and
make a living they must do something. if that something the doctor must do does little
or no harm and better yet, can also alleviate the symptoms, the doctor is practicing
good medicine and will have a very high cure rate and be financially successful if
they have a good bedside manner. this kind of doctor may be allopathic and/or "natural,"
may use herbs or practice homeopathy. 
the story of dr. jennings, a very successful and famous or
infamous (depending on your viewpoint) physician, who practiced in connecticut in
the early s exemplifies this type of approach. 
dr. jennings had his own unique medicines. their composition
was of his own devising, and were absolutely secret. he had pills and colored bitter
drops of various sorts that were compounded himself in his own pharmacy. dr. jennings'
patients generally recovered and had few or no complications. this must be viewed
in contrast to the practices of his fellow doctors of that era, whose black bags
were full of mercury and arsenic and strychnine, whose practices included obligatory
bleeding. these techniques and medicines "worked" by poisoning the body
or by reducing its blood supply and thus lowering its vital force, ending the body's
ability to manifest the undesirable symptom. if the poor patient survived being victimized
by their own physician, they were tough enough to survive both their disease and
the doctor's cure. typically, the sick had many, lengthy complications, long illnesses,
and many "setbacks" requiring many visits, earning the physician a great
living. 
dr. jennings operated differently. he would prescribe one
or two secret medicines from his black bag and instruct the patient to stay in bed,
get lots of rest, drink lots of water, eat little and lightly, and continue taking
the medicine until they were well. his cure rate was phenomenal. demand they might,
but dr. jennings would never reveal what was in his pills and vials. finally at the
end of his career, to instruct his fellow man, dr. jennings confessed. his pills
were made from flour dough, various bitter but harmless herbal substances, and a
little sugar. his red and green and black tinctures, prescribed five or ten drips
at a time mixed in a glass of water several times daily, were only water and alcohol,
some colorant and something bitter tasting, but harmless. placebos in other words.
upon confessing, dr. jennings had to run for his life. i
believe he ended up retiring on the western frontier, in indiana. some of his former
patients were extremely angry because they had paid good money, top dollar for "real"
medicines, but were given only flour and water. the fact that they got better didn't
seem to count.
 if the physicians curative procedure suppresses the symptom
and/or lowers the vital force with toxic drugs or surgery, (either result will often
as not end the complaint) the allopathic doctor is practicing bad medicine. this
doctor too will have a high cure rate and a good business (if they have an effective
bedside manner) because their drugs really do make the current symptoms vanish very
rapidly. additionally, their practice harmonizes with a common but vicious dramatization
of many people which goes: when a body is malfunctioning, it is a bad body and needs
to be punished. so lets punish it with poisons and if that don't work, lets really
punish it by cutting out the offending part. 
however, if the physician can do something that will do no
harm but raises the vital force and/or lowers the level of toxemia, this doctor will
have a genuine cure rate higher than either of the two techniques. why does raising
the vital force help? because it reduces enervation, improves the digestion, lowers
the creation of new toxins and improves the function of the organs of elimination,
also reducing the toxic overload that is causing the complaint. 
techniques that temporarily and quickly raise the vital force
include homeopathy, chiropractic, vitamin therapy, massage, acupuncture and acupressure
and many more spiritually oriented practices. healers who use these approaches and
have a good bedside manner can have a very good business, they can have an especially-profitable
practice if they do nothing to lower the level of toxemia being currently generated.
their patients do experience prompt relief but must repeatedly take the remedy. this
makes for satisfied customers and a repeat business.
the best approach of all focuses on reducing the self-generated
level of toxemia, cleansing to remove deposits of old toxemia, rebuilding the organs
of elimination and digestion to prevent the formation of new toxemia, and then, to
alleviate the current symptoms and make it easier for the patient to be patient while
their body heals, the healer raises artificially and temporarily the vital force
with vitamins, massage, acupressure, etc. this wise and benevolent physician is going
to have the highest cure rate among those wise patients who will accept the prescription,
but will not make as much money because the patients permanently get better and no
longer need a physician. there's not nearly as much repeat business.
colonics are one of the best types of medicine. they clean
up deposits of old toxemia (though there are sure to be other deposits in the body's
tissues colonics do not touch). colon cleansing reduces the formation of new toxemia
from putrefying fecal matter (but dietary reform is necessary to maximize this benefit).
most noticeable to the patient, a colonic immediately alleviates current symptoms
by almost instantly reducing the current toxic load. a well-done enema or colonic
is such a powerful technique that a single one will often make a severe headache
vanish, make an onsetting cold go away, end a bout of sinusitis, end an asthmatic
attack, reduce the pain of acute arthritic inflammation, reduce or stop an allergic
reaction. enemas are also thrifty: they are self-administered and can prevent most
doctor's visits seeking relief for acute conditions.
diseases of the colon itself, including chronic constipation,
colitis, diverteculitis, hemorrhoids, irritable bowel syndrome, and mucous colitis,
are often cured solely by an intensive series of several dozen colonics given close
together. contrary to popular belief, many people think that if they have dysentery
or other forms of loose stools that a colonic is the last thing they need. surprisingly,
a series of colonics will eliminate many of these conditions as well. people with
chronic diarrhea or loose stools are usually very badly constipated. this may seem
a contradiction in terms but it will be explained shortly.
a century ago there was much less scientific data about the
functioning of the human body. then it was easy for a hygienically-oriented physician
to come to believe that colonics were the single best medicine available. the doctor
practicing nothing but colonics will have a very high rate of cure and a lot of very
satisfied clients. most importantly, this medicine will have done no harm. 
the repugnant bowel
i don't know why, but people of our culture have a deep-seated
reluctance to relate to the colon or it's functions. people don't want to think about
the colon or personally get involved with it by giving themselves enemas or colonics.
they become deeply embarrassed at having someone else do it for them. people are
also shy about farts, and most americans have a hard time not smiling or reacting
in some way when someone in their presence breaks wind, although the polite amongst
us pretend that we didn't notice. comedians usually succeed in getting a laugh out
of an audience when they come up with a fart or make reference to some other bowel
function. people don't react the same way to urinary functions or discharges, although
these also may have an unpleasant odor and originate from the same "private"
area.
when i first mention to clients that they need a minimum
of  colonics or many more enemas than  during a fasting or cleansing program
they are inevitably shocked. to most it seems that no one in their right mind would
recommend such a treatment, and that i must certainly be motivated by greed or some
kind of a psychological quirk. then i routinely show them reproductions of x-rays
of the large intestine showing obvious loss of normal structure and function resulting
from a combination of constipation, the effects of gravity, poor abdominal muscle
tone, emotional stress, and poor diet. in the average colon more than % of the
hastrum (muscles that impel fecal matter through the organ) are dysfunctional due
to loss of tone caused by impaction of fecal matter and/or constriction of the large
intestine secondary to stress (holding muscular tension in the abdominal area) and
straining during bowel movement.
a typical diseased colon
the average person also has a prolapsed (sagging) transverse
colon, and a distorted misplaced ascending and descending colon. i took a course
in colon therapy before purchasing my first colonic machine. the chiropractor teaching
the class required all of his patients scheduled for colonics to take a barium enema
followed by an x-ray of their large intestine prior to having colonics and then make
subsequent x-rays after each series of  colonics. most of his patients experienced
so much immediate relief they voluntarily took at least four complete series, or
 colonics, before their x-rays began to look normal in terms of structure. it also
took about the same number,  colonics, for the patients to notice a significant
improvement in the function of the colon. in reviewing over , x-rays taken at
his clinic prior to starting colonics, the chiropractor had seen only two normal
colon x-rays and these were from farm boys who grew up eating simple foods from the
garden and doing lots of hard work. 
the x-rays showed that it took a minimum of  colon treatments
to bring about a minimal but observable change in the structure of the colon in the
desired direction, and for the patient to begin to notice that bowel function was
improving, plus the fact that they started to feel better. 
a healthy colon
from my point of view the most amazing part of this whole
experience was that the chiropractor did not recommend any dietary changes whatsoever.
his patients were achieving great success from colonics alone. i had thought dietary
changes would be necessary to avoid having the same dismal bowel condition return.
i still think colonics are far more effective if people are on a cleansing diet too.
however, i was delighted to see the potential for helping people through colonics.
for me, the most interesting part of this colonic school
was that i personally was required to have my own barium enema and x-ray. i was privately
certain that mine would look normal, because after all, i had been on a raw food
diet for six years, and done considerable amount of fasting, all of which was reputed
to repair a civilized colon. much to my surprise my colon looked just as mangled
and dysfunctional as everyone else's', only somewhat worse because it had a loop
in the descending colon similar to a cursive letter "e" which doctors call
a volvulus. surgeons like to cut volvululii out because they frequently cause bowel
obstructions. it seemed quite unfair. all those other people with lousy looking colons
had been eating the average american diet their whole life, but i had been so 'pure!'
on further reflection i remembered that i had a tendency
toward constipation all through my childhood and young adulthood, and that during
my two pregnancies the pressure of the fetus on an already constipated bowel had
made it worse resulting in the distorted structure seen in the x-ray. this experience
made it very clear that fasting, cleansing diets, and corrected diet would not reverse
damage already done. proper diet and fasting would however, prevent the condition
of the colon from getting any worse than it already was. 
i then realized that i had just purchased the very tool i
needed to correct my own colon, and i was eager to get home to get started on it.
i had previously thought that i was just going to use this machine for my patients,
because they had been asking for this kind of an adjunct to my services for some
time. i ended up giving myself over a hundred colonics at the rate of three a week
over many months. i then out of curiosity had another barium enema and x-ray to validate
my results. sure enough the picture showed a colon that looked far more 'normal'
with no vulvulus. that little "e" had disappeared.
what is constipation?
most people think they are not constipated because they have
a bowel movement almost every day, accomplished without straining. i have even had
clients tell me that they have a bowel movement once a week, and they are quite certain
that they are not constipated. the most surprising thing to novice fasters is that
repeated enemas or colonics during fasting begins to release many pounds of undeniably
real, old, caked fecal matter and/or huge mucus strings. the first-time faster can
hardly believe these were present. these old fecal deposits do not come out the first
time one has enemas or necessarily the fifth time. and all of them will not be removed
by the tenth enema. but over the course of extended fasting or a long spell of light
raw food eating with repeated daily enemas, amazing changes do begin to occur. it
seems that no one who has eaten a civilized diet has escaped the formation of caked
deposits lining the colon's walls, interfering with its function. this material does
not respond to laxatives or casually administered enemas.
anyone who has not actually seen (and smelled) what comes
out of an "average" apparently healthy person during colonics will really
believe it could happen or can accurately imagine it. often there are dark black
lumpy strings, lumps, or gravel, evil smelling discs shaped like sculpted hemispheres
similar to the pockets lining the wall of the colon itself. these discs are rock-hard
and may come out looking like long black braids. there may also be long tangled strings
of gray/brown mucous, sheets and flakes of mucous, and worse yet, an occasional worm
(tape worm) or many smaller ones. once confronted however, it is not hard to imagine
how these fecal rocks and other obnoxious debris interfere with the proper function
of the colon. they make the colon's wall rigid and interfere with peristalsis thus
leading to further problems with constipation, and interfere with adsorption of nutrients.
our modern diet is by its "de-"nature, very constipating.
in the trenches of the first world war, cheese was given the name 'chokem ass' because
the soldiers eating this as a part of their daily ration developed severe constipation.
eaten by itself or with other whole foods, moderate amounts of cheese may not produce
health problems in people who are capable of digesting dairy products. but cheese
when combined with white flour becomes especially constipating. white bread or most
white-flour crackers contain a lot of gluten, a very sticky wheat protein that makes
the bread bind together and raise well. but white flour is lacking the bran, where
most of the fiber is located. and many other processed foods are missing their fiber.
in an earlier chapter i briefly showed how digestion works
by following food from the mouth to the large intestine. to fully grasp why becoming
constipated is almost a certainty in our civilization a few more details are required.
food leaving the small intestine is called chyme, a semi-liquid mixture of fiber,
undigested bits, indigestible bits, and the remains of digestive enzymes. chyme is
propelled through the large intestine by muscular contractions. the large intestine
operates on what i dub the "chew chew train" principle, where the most
recent meal you ate enters the large intestine as the caboose (the last car of a
train) and helps to push out the train engine (the car at the front that toots),
which in a healthy colon should represent the meal eaten perhaps twelve hours earlier.
the muscles in the colon only contract when they are stretched, so it is the volume
of the fecal matter stretching the large intestine that triggers the muscles to push
the waste material along toward the rectum and anus. 
eating food lacking fiber greatly reduces the volume of the
chyme and slows peristalsis. but moving through fast or slow, the colon still keeps
on doing another of its jobs, which is to transfer the water in the chime back into
the bloodstream, reducing dehydration. so the longer chime remains in the colon,
the dryer and harder and stickier it gets. that's why once arrived at the "end
of the tracks" fecal matter should be evacuated in a timely manner before it
gets to dry and too hard to be moved easily. some constipated people do have a bowel
movement every day but are evacuating the meal eaten many days or even a week previously.
most hygienists believe that when the colon becomes lined
with hardened fecal matter it is permanently and by the very definition of the word
itself, constipated. this type of constipation is not perceived as an uncomfortable
or overly full feeling or a desire to have a bowel movement that won't pass. but
it has insidious effects. usually constipation delays transit time, increasing the
adsorption of toxins generated from misdigestion of food; by coating and locking
up significant portions of colon it also reduces the adsorption of certain minerals
and electrolytes. 
sometimes, extremely constipated people have almost constant
runny bowels because the colon has become so thickly and impenetrably lined with
old fecal matter that it no longer removes much moisture. this condition is often
misinterpreted as diarrhea. the large intestine's most important task is to transfer
water-soluble minerals from digested food to the blood. when a significant part of
the colon's surface becomes coated with impermeable dried rigid fecal matter or mucus
it can no longer assimilate effectively and the body begins to experience partial
mineral starvation in the presence of plenty. it is my observation from dozens of
cases that when the colon has been effectively cleansed the person has a tendency
to gain weight while eating amounts of food that before only maintained body weight,
while people who could not gain weight or who were wasting away despite eating heavily
begin to gain. and problems like soft fingernails, bone loss around teeth or porous
bones tend to improve.
the development of my own constipation
the history of my own constipation, though it especially
relates to a very rustic childhood, is typical of many people. i was also raised
on a very constipating diet which consisted largely of processed cheese and crackers.
mine was accelerated by shyness, amplified by lack of comfortable facilities. 
i spent my early years on the canadian prairies, where everybody
had an outhouse. the fancy modern versions are frequently seen on construction sites.
these are chemical toilets, quiet different than the ones i was raised with because
somebody or something mysteriously comes along, empties them and installs toilet
paper. the ones i'm familiar with quickly developed a bad-smelling steaming mound
in the center--or it was winter when the outhouse was so cold that everything froze
almost before it hit the ground in the hole below. (and my rear end seemed to almost
freeze to the seat!) the toilet paper was usually an out of season issue of eatons
mail order catalogue with crisp glossy paper. perhaps it is a peculiarity of the
north country, but at night there are always monsters lurking along the path to the
outhouse, and darkness comes early and stays late. 
when nature called and it was daylight, and there was no
blizzard outside, the outhouse received a visit from me. if on the other hand, when
it was dark (we had no electricity), and there was a cold wind creating huge banks
of snow, i would 'just skip it,' because the alternative--an indoor chamber pot,
white enamel with a lid--was worse. this potty had to be used more or less publicly
because the bedrooms were shared and there was no indoor bathroom. i was always very
modest about my private parts and private functions, and potty's were only used in
emergencies, and usually with considerable embarrassment. no one ever explained to
me that it was not good for me to retain fecal matter, and i never thought about
it unless my movements became so hard that it was painful to eliminate. 
later in life, i continued this pattern of putting off bowel
movements, even though outhouses and potties were a thing of the past. as a young
adult i could always think of something more interesting to do than sitting on a
pot, besides it was messy and sometimes accompanied by embarrassing sound effects
which were definitely not romantic if i was in the company of a young man. during
two pregnancies the tendency to constipation was aggravated by the weight of the
fetus resting on an already sluggish bowel, and the discomfort of straining to pass
my first hard bowel movement after childbirth with a torn perineum i won't forget.
rapid relief from colon cleansing
during fasting the liver is hard at work processing toxins
released from fat and other body deposits. the liver still dumps its wastes into
the intestines through the bile duct. while eating normally, bile, which contains
highly toxic substances, is passed through the intestines and is eliminated before
too much is reabsorbed. (it is the bile that usually makes the fecal matter so dark
in color.) however, reduction of food bulk reduces or completely eliminates peristalsis,
thus allowing intestinal contents to sit for extended periods. and the toxins in
the bile are readsorbed, forming a continuous loop, further burdening the liver.
the mucus membranes lining the colon constantly secrete lubricants
to ease fecal matter through smoothly. this secretion does not stop during fasting;
in fact, it may increase because intestinal mucus often becomes a secondary route
of elimination. allowed to remain in the bowel, toxic mucus is an irritant while
the toxins in it may be reabsorbed, forming yet another closed loop and further burdening
the liver.
daily enemas or colonics administered during fasting or while
on cleansing diets effectively remove old fecal material stored in the colon and
immediately ease the livers load, immediately relieve discomfort by allowing the
liver's efforts to further detoxify the blood, and speed healing. fasters cleansing
on juice or raw food should administer two or three enemas in short succession every
day for the first three days to get a good start on the cleansing process, and then
every other day or at very minimum, every few days. enemas or colonics should also
be taken whenever symptoms become uncomfortable, regardless of whether you have already
cleaned the colon that day or not. once the faster has experienced the relief from
symptoms that usually comes from an enema they become more than willing to repeat
this mildly unpleasant experience. 
occasionally enemas, by filling the colon and making it press
on the liver, induce discharges of highly toxic bile that may cause temporary nausea.
despite the induced nausea it is still far better to continue with colonics because
of the great relief experienced after the treatment. if nausea exists or persists
during colon cleansing, consider trying slight modifications such as less or no massage
of the colon in the area of the gall bladder (abdominal area close to the bottom
of the right rib cage), and putting slightly less water in the colon when filling
it up. it also helps to make sure that the stomach is empty of any fluid for one
hour prior to the colonic. resume drinking after the colonic sessions is completed.
if you are one of these rare people who 'toss their bile', just keep a plastic bucket
handy and some water to rinse out the mouth after, and carry on as usual.
enemas versus colonics
people frequently wonder what is the difference between a
colonic and an enema. 
first of all enemas are a lot cheaper because you give them
to yourself; an enema bag usually costs about ten dollars, is available at any large
drug store, and is indefinitely reusable. colonics cost anywhere from  to  dollars
a session.
chiropractors and naturopaths who offer this service hire
a colonic technician that may or may not be a skilled operator. it is a good idea
to find a person who has a very agreeable and professional manner, who can make you
feel at ease since relaxation is very important. it is also beneficial to have a
colonic therapist who massages the abdomen and foot reflexes appropriately during
the session. 
enemas and colonics can accomplish exactly the same beneficial
work. but colonics accomplish more improvement in less time than enemas for several
reasons. during a colonic from  to  gallons of water are flushed through the
large intestines, usually in a repetitive series of fill-ups followed by flushing
with a continuous flow of water. this efficiency cannot even be approached with an
enema. but by repeating the enema three times in close succession a satisfactory
cleanse can be achieved. persisted with long enough, enemas will clean the colon
every bit as well as a colonic machine can.
enemas given at home take a lot less time than traveling
to receive a colonics at someone's clinic, and can be done entirely at you own convenience--a
great advantage when fasting because you can save your energy for internal healing.
but colonics are more appropriate for some. there are fasters who are unable to give
themselves an enema either because their arms are too short and their body is too
long and they lack flexibility, or because of a physical handicap or they can't confront
their colon, so they let someone else do it. some don't have the motivation to give
themselves a little discomfort but are comfortable with someone else doing it to
them. some very sick people are too weak to cleanse their own colon, so they should
find someone to assist them with an at-home enema or have someone take them to a
colonic therapist. 
few people these days have any idea how to properly give
themselves an enema. the practice has been discredited by traditional medical doctors
as slightly dangerous, perhaps addictive and a sign of psychological weirdness. yet
northamericans on their civilized, low fiber, poorly combined diets suffer widely
from constipation. one proof of this is the fact that chemical laxatives, with their
own set of dangers and liabilities, occupy many feet of drug store shelf space and
are widely advertised. is the medical profession's disapproval of the enema related
to the fact that once the initial purchase of an enema bag has been made there are
no further expenses for laxatives? or perhaps it might be that once a person discovers
they can cure a headache, stop a cold dead in its tracks with an enema, they aren't
visiting the m.d.s so often. 
the enema has also been wrongly accused of causing a gradual
loss of colon muscle tone, eventually preventing bowel movements without the stimulation
of an enema, leading finally to flaccidity and enlargement of the lower bowel. this
actually can happen; when it does occur it is the result of frequent administration
of small amounts of water (fleet enemas) for the purpose of stimulating a normal
bowel movement. the result is constant stretching of the rectum without sufficient
fluid to enter the descending colon. a completely opposite, highly positive effect
comes from properly administered enemas while cleansing.
the difference between helpful and potentially harmful enemas
lies in the amount of water injected and the frequency of use. using a cup or two
of water to induce a bowel movement may eventually cause dependency, will not strengthen
the colon and may after years of this practice, result in distention and enlargement
of the rectum or sigmoid colon. however, a completely empty average-sized colon has
the capacity of about a gallon of water. when increasingly larger enemas are administered
until the colon is nearly emptied of fecal matter and the injection of close to a
gallon of water is achieved, beneficial exercise and an increase in overall muscle
tone are the results. 
correctly given, enemas (and especially colonics) serve as
strengthening exercises for the colon. this long tubular muscle is repeatedly and
completely filled with water, inducing it to vigorously exercise while evacuating
itself multiple times. the result is a great increase in muscle tone, acceleration
of peristalsis and eventually, after several dozens of repetitions, a considerable
reduction of transit time. well-done enemas work the colon somewhat less effectively
and do not improve muscle tone quite as much as colonics.
injecting an entire gallon of water with an enema bag is
very impractical when a person is eating normally. but on a light cleansing diet
or while fasting the amount of new material passing into the colon is small or negligible.
during the first few days of fasting if two or three enemas are administered each
day in immediate succession the colon is soon completely emptied of recently eaten
food and it becomes progressively easier to introduce larger amounts of water. within
a few days of this regimen, injecting half a gallon or more of water is easy and
painless. 
probably for psychological reasons, some peoples' colons
allow water to be injected one time but then "freeze up" and resist successive
enemas. for this reason better results are often obtained by having one enema, waiting
a half hour, another enema, wait a half hour, and have a final enema. 
a colonic machine in the hands of an expert operator can
administer the equivalent of six or seven big enemas in less than one hour, and do
this without undue discomfort or effort from the person receiving the colonic. however,
the ama has suppressed the use of colonics; they are illegal to administer in many
states. where colonics are legal, the chiropractors now consider this practice messy
and not very profitable compared to manipulations. so it is not easy to find a skilled
and willing colonic technician. 
anyone who plans to give themselves therapeutic enemas while
fasting would be well advised to first seek out a colonic therapist and receive two
or three colonics delivered one day apart while eating lightly and then immediately
begin the fast. three colonics given on three successive days of a light, raw food
diet are sufficient to empty all recently eaten food even from a very constipated,
distended and bloated colon, while acquainting a person with their own bowel. having
an empty colon is actually a pleasant and to most people a thoroughly novel experience.
a few well-delivered colonics can quickly accustom a person to the sensations accompanying
the enema and demonstrate the effect to be achieved by oneself with an enema bag,
something not quickly discoverable any other way.
how to give yourself an enema
enemas have been medically out of favor for a long time.
most people have never had one. so here are simple directions to self-administer
an effective enema series.
the enema bag you select is important. it must hold at least
two quarts and be rapidly refillable. the best american-made brand is made of rubber
with about five feet of rubber hose ending in one of two different white hard plastic
insertion tips. the bag is designed for either enemas or vaginal douches. it hangs
from a detachable plastic "s" hook. when filled to the brim it holds exactly
one-half gallon. the maker of this bag offers another model that costs about a dollar
more and also functions as a hot water bottle. a good comforter it may make, but
the dual purpose construction makes the bag very awkward to rapidly refill. i recommend
the inexpensive model. 
the plastic insertion tips vary somewhat. the straight tubular
tip is intended for enemas; the flared vaginal douche tip can be useful for enemas
too, in that it somewhat restrains unintentional expulsion of the nozzle while filling
the colon. however, its four small holes do not allow a very rapid rate of flow.
to give yourself an enema, completely fill the bag with tepid
water that does not exceed body temperature. the rectum is surprisingly sensitive
to heat and you will flinch at temperatures only a degree or two higher than  fahrenheit.
cooler water is no problem; some find the cold stimulating and invigorating. fasters
having difficulty staying warm should be wary of cold water enemas. these can drop
core body temperature below the point of comfort. 
make sure the flow clamp on the tube is tightly shut and
located a few inches up the tube from the nozzle. hang the filled bag from a clothes
or towel hook, shower nozzle, curtain rod, or other convenient spot about four to
five feet above the bathroom floor or tub bottom. the higher the bag the greater
the water pressure and speed of filling. but too much pressure can also be uncomfortable.
you may have to experiment a bit with this.
various body positions are possible for filling the colon.
none is correct or necessarily more effective than another. experiment and find the
one you prefer. some fill their colon kneeling and bending forward in the bathtub
or shower because there will likely be small dribbles of water leaking from around
the nozzle. usually these leaks do not contain fecal matter. others prefer to use
the bathroom floor. for the bony, a little padding in the form of a folded towel
under knees and elbows may make the process more comfortable. you may kneel and bend
over while placing your elbows or hands on the floor, reach behind yourself and insert
the nozzle. you may also lie on your back or on your side. some think the left side
is preferable because the colon attaches to the rectum on the left side of the body,
ascends up the left side of the abdomen to a line almost as high as the solar plexus,
then transverses the body to the right side where it descends again on the right
almost to the groin. the small intestine attaches to the colon near its lower-right
extremity. in fact these are the correct names given for the parts of the colon:
ascending, descending and transverse colon along with the sigmoid colon or rectum
at the exit end. 
as you become more expert at filling your colon with water
you will begin to become aware of its location by the weight, pressure and sometimes
temperature of the water you're injecting. you will come to know how much of the
colon has been filled by feel. you will also become aware of peristalsis as the water
is evacuated vigorously and discover that sensations from a colon hard at work, though
a bit uncomfortable, are not necessarily pain.
insertion of the nozzle is sometimes eased with a little
lubricant. a bit of soap or ky jelly is commonly used. if the nozzle can be inserted
without lubricant it will have less tendency to slip out. however, do not tear or
damage the anus by avoiding necessary lubrication. after insertion, grip the clamp
with one hand and open it. the flow rate can be controlled with this clamp. keeping
a hand on the clamp also prevents the nozzle from being expelled.
water will begin flowing into the colon. your goal is to
empty the entire bag into the colon before sensations of pressure or urgency to evacuate
the water force you to remove the nozzle and head for the toilet. relaxation of mind
and body helps achieve this. you are very unlikely to achieve a half-gallon fill
up on the first attempt. if painful pressure is experienced try closing the clamp
for a moment to allow the water to begin working its way around the obstacle. or,
next time try hanging the bag lower, reducing its height above the body and thus
lowering the water pressure. or, try opening the clamp only partially. or, try panting
hard, so as to make the abdomen move rapidly in and out, sort of shaking the colon.
this last technique is particularly good to get the water past a blockage of intestinal
gas.
it is especially important for americans, whose culture does
not teach one to be tolerant of discomfort, to keep in mind that pain is the body's
warning that actual damage is being done to tissues. enemas can do no damage and
pose no risk except to that rare individual with weak spots in the colon's wall from
cancers. when an enema is momentarily perceived unpleasantly, the correct name for
the experience is a sensation, not pain. you may have to work at increasing your
tolerance for unpleasant sensations or it will take you a long time to achieve the
goal of totally filling the colon with water. be brave! and relax. a wise philosopher
once said that it is a rough universe in which only the tigers survive--and sometimes
they have a hard time.
eventually it will be time to remove the nozzle and evacuate
the water. either a blockage (usually fecal matter, an air bubble, or a tight 'u'
turn in the colon, usually at either the splenetic, or hepatic flexures located right
below the rib cage) will prevent further inflow (undesirable) or else the bag will
completely empty (good!) or the sensation of bursting will no longer be tolerable.
go sit on the toilet and wait until all the water has passed. then refill the bag
and repeat the process. each time you fill the colon it will allow more water to
enter more easily with less unpleasantness. fasters and cleansers should make at
least three attempts at a complete fill-up each time they do an enema session. 
water and juice fasters will find that after the first few
enemas, it will become very easy to inject the entire half-gallon of water. that
is because there is little or no chime entering the colon. after a few days the entire
colon will seem (this is incorrect) to be empty except when it is filled with water.
this is the point to learn an advanced self-administered enema technique. an average
colon empty of new food will usually hold about one gallon of water. that is average.
a small colon might only hold / gallon, a large one might accept a gallon and a
half, or even more. you'll need to learn to simultaneously refill the bag while injecting
water, so as to achieve a complete irrigation of the whole colon. there are several
possible methods. you might try placing a pitcher or half-gallon mason jar of tepid
water next to the bag and after the bag has emptied the first time, stand up while
holding the tube in the anus, refill the bag and then lie down again and continue
filling. you might have an assistant do this for you. you might try hanging the bag
from the shower head and direct a slow, continuous dribble of lukewarm water from
the shower into the bag while you kneel or lie relaxed in the tub. this way the bag
will never empty and you stop filling only when you feel fullness and pressure all
the way back to the beginning of the ascending colon. of course, hanging from a slowly
running shower head the bag will probably overflow and you will get splashed and
so will the bathroom floor when your wet body moves rapidly from the tub to the toilet.
i've imagined making an enema bag from a two gallon plastic bucket with a small plastic
hose barb glued into a hole drilled in the bottom or lower edge. if i were in the
business of manufacturing enema bags i'd make them hold at least one gallon. 
a word of caution to those folks who have a pattern of overdoing
it, or tend to think that more is better. this is not true when it comes to colon
cleansing. do not make more than three attempts to fill and clean the colon with
an enema bag. usually the colon begins to protest and won't accept any more fill-ups.
when having colonics on a colonic machine it is a good idea to continue until the
water comes back reasonably clear for that session. it is not a good idea for a faster
to have colonics that last more than three-quarters of an hour to an hour maximum,
or it will be too tiring. even non-fasters find colonics tiring. after all, the colon
is basically a big muscle that has become very lazy on a low-fiber diet.
i've personally administered over five thousand colonics,
taught several dozen fasters to self-administer their own and stood by while they
gave themselves one until they were quite expert. in all that experience i've only
seen one person have a seriously bad result. this was a suicidally depressed water
faster that i (mistakenly) allowed to administer their own colonics with my machine.
this person not only took daily colonics, but allowed water to flow through their
colon for as long as two hours at a time. perhaps they were trying to wash out their
mind? after several weeks of this extreme excess, the faster became highly confused
and disoriented due to a severe electrolyte imbalance. they had to be taken off water
fasting immediately and recovered their mental clarity in a few days. the loss of
blood electrolytes happened because during colonics there occurs a sort of low-grade
very slow reverse osmosis.
curing with enemas
it is not wise to continue regular colonics or enemas once
a detoxification program has been completed and you have returned to a maintenance
diet. the body should be allowed its regular functioning.
but because enemas immediately lower the toxic load on the
liver, i do recommend people use them for prevention of an acute illness (you feel
like you are coming down with something), and for the treatment of acute illnesses
such as a cold. i also like to take one if i have been away traveling for extended
periods, eating carelessly. but do not fall into a pattern of bingeing on bad food,
and then trying to get rid of it through colonics or laxative. this is bulimia, the
eating disorder discussed earlier.
the sheltonite capital "n" natural capital "h"
hygienists do not recommend any colon cleansing, ever!. they think that the colon
will spontaneously cleanse itself on a long water fast, but my experience learned
from monitoring hundreds of fasters is that it doesn't really. herbert shelton also
considered colon cleansing enervating and therefore undesirable. colon cleansing
does use the faster's energy but on the balance, colon cleansing saves more work
on the part of an overburdened liver than it uses up.
chapter five 
diet and nutrition
from the hygienic dictionary
food. [] life is a tragedy of nutrition. in food
lies .% of the causes of all diseases and imperfect health of any kind. prof.
arnold ehret, mucusless diet healing system. [] but elimination will never heal
perfectly just so long as you fail to discontinue the supply of inside waste caused
by eating and "wrong" eating. you may clean and continue to clean indefinitely,
but never with complete results up to a perfect cleanliness, as long as the intake
of wrong or even too much right foods, is not stopped. prof. arnold ehret, mucusless
diet healing system. [] cooked food favors bacterial, or organized, ferment
preponderance, because cooking kills the unorganized and organized ferments, and
both are needed to carry on the body's digestion. raw foods--fruits and vegetables--favor
unorganized ferment digestion, because these foods carry vitamins, which are unorganized
ferments--enzymes. dr. john.h. tilden, impaired health: its cause and cure, .
recently, my younger (adult) daughter asked my advice choosing
between a root canal or having a bridge made. this led to a discussion of her eating
habits in general. defending her currently less-than-optimum diet against my gentle
criticism, she threw me a tough riposte. "why," she asked, when i was raised
so perfectly as a child, "when i ate only organic food until i was ten and old
enough to make you send me to public school where i could eat those lousy school
lunches" (her unfeeling, heartless mother home-schooled her), "why even
at that young age, (before she spent her adolescent rebellion eating junk food) why
at that point did i still have a mouthful of cavities?" and she did. at age
ten my daughter needed about ten fillings. 
this beautiful daughter of a practicing naturopath had received
what, at the time, i considered virtually perfect nutrition. she suckled hugely at
her mother's abundant breast until age two. during this time her mother ate a natural
foods diet. after weaning my daughter got only whole grains, a little fresh goat's
milk from my goat, fruits and lots of organic vegetables. i started my spa when my
daughter was about five years old and from that point she was, like it or not, a
raw fooder. and all that raw food was organic and much of it from great oaks school's
huge vegetable garden.
for my daughter to develop cavities on this diet is reminiscent
of woody allen's joke in his movie "sleeper." do you recall this one, made
about ? the plot is a take off on rip van winkle. woody goes into the hospital
for minor surgery. unexpectedly he expires on the operating table and his body is
frozen in hopes that someday he can be revived. one hundred and fifty years later
he is revived.
the priceless scene i always think of takes place in his
hospital room immediately after he comes to consciousness. the doctor in charge of
his case is explaining to woody what has happened. woody refuses to believe he died
and was frozen, asserting that the whole story is a put on. woody insists that the
'doctor' is clearly an actor hired by his friends! it absolutely can't be the year
. 'oh, but it really is ,' insists the doctor. 'and it is no put on by his
friends; all his friends are long dead; woody knows no one at all in  and had
better prepare himself to start a new life.' 
woody still insists it is a put on. "i had a healthfood
store," he says, "and all my friends ate brown rice. they can't be dead!"
and my perfectly nourished daughter couldn't have developed
cavities! but she did. and if she cheated on her perfect diet, bad food could not
have amounted to more than two percent of her total caloric intake from birth to
age ten. i was a responsible mom and i made sure she ate right! now my daughter was
demanding to know why she had tooth decay. fortunately, i now know the answer. the
answer is rather complex, but i can give a simplified explanation.
the confusions about diets and foods
like my daughter, many people of all ages are muddled about
the relationship between health and diet. their confusions have created a profitable
market for health-related information. and equally, their confusions have been created
by books, magazine articles, and tv news features. this avalanche of data is highly
contradictory. in fact, one reason i found it hard to make myself write my own book
is that i wondered if my book too would become just another part of the confusion.
few people are willing to tolerate very much uncertainty.
rather than live with the discomfort of not knowing why, they will create an explanation
or find some answer, any answer, and then ever after, assert its rightness like a
shipwrecked person clings to a floating spar in a storm. this is how i explain the
genesis of many contemporary food religions. 
appropriately new agey and spiritual, macrobiotics teaches
the way to perfect health is to eat like a japanese whole foods vegetarian--the endless
staple being brown rice, some cooked vegetables and seaweeds, meanwhile balancing
the "yin" and "yang" of the foods. and macrobiotics works great
for a lot of people. but not all people. because there's next to nothing raw in the
macrobiotic diet and some people are allergic to rice, or can get allergic to rice
on that diet.
linda clark's diet for a small planet also has hundreds of
thousands of dedicated followers. this system balances the proportions of essential
amino acids at every, single meal and is vegetarian. this diet also works and really
helps some people, but not as well as macrobiotics in my opinion because obsessed
with protein, clark's diet contains too many hard-to-digest soy products and makes
poor food combinations from the point of digestive capacity.
then there are the raw fooders. most of them are raw, organic
fooders who go so far as to eat only unfired, unground cereals that have been soaked
in warm water (at less than  degrees or you'll kill the enzymes) for many hours
to soften the seeds up and start them sprouting. this diet works and really helps
a lot of people. raw organic foodism is especially good for "holy joes,"
a sort of better-than-everyone-else person who enjoys great self-righteousness by
owning this system. but raw fooding does not help all people nor solve all diseases
because raw food irritates the digestive tracts of some people and in northern climates
it is hard to maintain body heat on this diet because it is difficult to consume
enough concentrated vegetable food in a raw state. and some raw fooders eat far too
much fruit. i've seen them lose their teeth because of fruit's low mineral content,
high sugar level and constant fruit acids in their mouths.
then there are vegetarians of various varieties including
vegans (vegetarians that will not eat dairy products and eggs), and then, there are
their exact opposites, atkins dieters focusing on protein and eating lots of meat.
there's the adelle davis school, people eating whole grains, handfuls of vitamins,
lots of dairy and brewers yeast and wheat germ, and even raw liver. then there's
the organic school. these folks will eat anything in any combination, just so long
as it is organically produced, including organically raised beef, chicken, lamb,
eggs, rabbit, wild meats, milk and diary products, natural sea salt in large quantities
and of course, organically grown fruits, vegetables grains and nuts. and what is
"organic?" the word means food raised in compliance with a set of rules
contrived by a certification bureaucracy. when carefully analyzed, the somewhat illogical
rules are not all that different in spirit than the rules of kashsruth or kosher.
and the organic certification bureaucrats aren't all that different than the rabbis
who certify food as being kosher, either.
there are now millions of frightened americans who, following
the advice of mainstream authority, have eliminated red meat from their diets and
greatly reduced what they (mistakenly) understand as high-cholesterol foods. 
all these diets work too--or some--and all demonstrate some
of the truth.
the only area concerning health that contains more confusion
and contradictory data than diet is vitamins. what a rats nest that is!
the fundamental principle
if you are a true believer in any of the above food religions,
i expect that you will find my views unsettling. but what i consider "good diet"
results from my clinical work with thousands of cases. it is what has worked with
those cases. my eclectic views incorporate bits and pieces of all the above. in my
own case, i started out by following the organic school, and i was once a raw food
vegetarian who ate nothing but raw food for six years. i also ate macrobiotic for
about one year until i became violently allergic to rice. 
i have arrived at a point where i understand that each person's
biochemistry is unique and each must work out their own diet to suit their life goals,
life style, genetic predisposition and current state of health. there is no single,
one, all-encompassing, correct diet. but, there is a single, basic, underlying principle
of nutrition that is universally true. in its most simplified form, the basic equation
of human health goes: health = nutrition / calories. the equation falls far short
of explaining the origin of each individuals diseases or how to cure diseases but
health = nutrition / calories does show the general path toward healthful eating
and proper medicine.
all animals have the exact same dietary problem: finding
enough nutrition to build and maintain their bodies within the limits of their digestive
capacity. rarely in nature (except for predatory carnivores) is there any significant
restriction on the number of calories or serious limitation of the amount of low-nutrition
foods available to eat. there's rarely any shortage of natural junk food on earth.
except for domesticated house pets, animals are sensible enough to prefer the most
nutritional fare available and tend to shun empty calories unless they are starving.
but humans are perverse, not sensible. deciding on the basis
of artificially-created flavors, preferring incipid textures, we seem to prefer junk
food and become slaves to our food addictions. for example, in tropical countries
there is a widely grown root crop, called in various places: tapioca, tavioca, manioc,
or yuca. this interesting plant produces the greatest tonnage of edible, digestible,
pleasant-tasting calories per acre compared to any other food crop i know. manioc
might seem the answer to human starvation because it will grow abundantly on tropical
soils so infertile and/or so droughty that no other food crop will succeed there.
manioc will do this because it needs virtually nothing from the soil to construct
itself with. and consequently, manioc puts next to nothing nourishing into its edible
parts. the bland-tasting root is virtually pure starch, a simple carbohydrate not
much different than pure corn starch. plants construct starches from carbon dioxide
gas obtained the air and hydrogen obtained from water. there is no shortage ever
of carbon from co in the air and rarely a shortage of hydrogen from water. when
the highly digestible starch in manioc is chewed, digestive enzymes readily convert
it into sugar. nutritionally there is virtually no difference between eating manioc
and eating white sugar. both are entirely empty calories.
if you made a scale from ideal to worst regarding the ratio
of nutrition to calories, white sugar, manioc and most fats are at the extreme undesirable
end. frankly i don't know which single food might lie at the extreme positive end
of the scale. close to perfect might be certain leafy green vegetables that can be
eaten raw. when they are grown on extremely fertile soil, some greens develop 
or more percent completely digestible balanced protein with ideal ratios of all the
essential amino acids, lots of vitamins, tons of minerals, all sorts of enzymes and
other nutritional elements--and very few calories. you could continually fill your
stomach to bursting with raw leafy greens and still have a hard time sustaining your
body weight if that was all you ate. maybe popeye the sailorman was right about eating
spinach.
for the moment, lets ignore individual genetic inabilities
to digest specific foods and also ignore the effects stress and enervation can have
on our ability to extract nutrition out of the food we are eating. without those
factors to consider, it is correct to say that, to the extent one's diet contains
the maximum potential amount of nutrition relative to the number of calories you
are eating, to that extent a person will be healthy. to the extent the diet is degraded
from that ideal, to that extent, disease will develop. think about it!
lessons from nutritional anthropology
the next logical pair of questions are: how healthy could
good nutrition make people be, and, how much deviation from ideal nutrition could
we allow ourselves before serious disease appears? luckily, earlier in this century
we could observe living answers to those questions (before the evidence disappeared).
the answers are: we could be amazingly healthy, and, if we wish to enjoy excellent
health we can afford to cut ourselves surprisingly little slack. 
prior to the second world war there were several dozen sizable
groups of extraordinarily healthy humans remaining on earth. today, their descendants
are still in the same remote places, are speaking the same languages and possess
more or less the same cultures. only today they're watching satellite tv. wearing
jeans, drinking colas--and their superior health has evaporated. 
during the early part of this century, at the same era vitamins
and other basic aspects of nutrition were being discovered, a few farsighted medical
explorers sought out these hard-to-reach places with their legendarily healthy peoples
to see what caused the legendary well-being they'd heard of. enough evidence was
collected and analyzed to derive some very valid principles.
first lets dismiss some apparently logical but incorrect
explanations for the unusually good health of these isolated peoples. it wasn't racial,
genetic superiority. there were extraordinarily healthy blacks, browns, orientals,
amerinds, caucasians. it wasn't living at high altitude; some lived at sea level.
it wasn't temperate climates, some lived in the tropics, some in the tropics at sea
level, a type of location generally thought to be quite unhealthful. it wasn't a
small collection of genetically superior individuals, because when these peoples
left their isolated locale and moved to the city, they rapidly began to lose their
health. and it wasn't genetics because when a young couple from the isolated healthy
village moved to town, their children born in town were as unhealthy as all the other
kids.
and what do i mean by genuinely healthy? well, imagine a
remote village or a mountain valley or a far island settlement very difficult to
get to, where there lived a thousand or perhaps ten thousand people. rarely fewer,
rarely more. among that small population there were no medical doctors and no dentists,
no drugs, no vaccinations, no antibiotics. usually the isolation carried with it
illiteracy and precluded contact with or awareness of modern science, so there was
little or no notion of public hygiene. and this was before the era of antibiotics.
yet these unprotected, undoctored, unvaccinated peoples did not suffer and die from
bacterial infections; and the women did not have to give birth to  children to
get . to survive to breeding age--almost all the children made it through the gauntlet
of childhood diseases. there was also virtually no degenerative disease like heart
attacks, hardening of the arteries, senility, cancer, arthritis. there were few if
any birth defects. in fact, there probably weren't any aspirin in the entire place.
oh, and there was very little mortality during childbirth, as little or less than
we have today with all our hospitals. and the people uniformly had virtually perfect
teeth and kept them all till death, but did not have toothbrushes nor any notion
of dental hygiene. nor did they have dentists or physicians. (price, )
and in those fortunate places the most common causes of death
were accident (trauma) and old age. the typical life span was long into the s and
in some places quite a bit longer. one fabled place, hunza, was renowned for having
an extraordinarily high percentage of vigorous and active people over  years old.
i hope i've made you curious. "how could this be?"
you're asking. well, here's why. first, everyone of those groups lived in places
so entirely remote, so inaccessible that they were of necessity, virtually self-sufficient.
they hardly traded at all with the outside world, and certainly they did not trade
for bulky, hard-to-transport bulk foodstuffs. virtually everything they ate was produced
by themselves. if they were an agricultural people, naturally, everything they ate
was natural: organic, whole, unsprayed and fertilized with what ever local materials
seemed to produce enhanced plant growth. and, if they were agricultural, they lived
on a soil body that possessed highly superior natural fertility. if not an agricultural
people they lived by the sea and made a large portion of their diets sea foods. if
their soil had not been extraordinarily fertile, these groups would not have enjoyed
superior health and would have conformed to the currently widely-believed notion
that before the modern era, people's lives were brutish, unhealthful, and short.
what is common between meat-eating eskimos, isolated highland
swiss living on rye bread, milk and cheese; isolated scottish island celts with a
dietary of oat porridge, kale and sea foods; highland central africans (malawi) eating
sorghum, millet tropical root crops and all sorts of garden vegetables, plus a little
meat and dairy; fijians living on small islands in the humid tropics at sea level
eating sea foods and garden vegetables. what they had in common was that their foods
were all were at the extreme positive end of the health = nutrition / calories scale.
the agriculturists were on very fertile soil that grew extraordinarily nutrient-rich
food, the sea food gatherers were obtaining their tucker from the place where all
the fertility that ever was in the soil had washed out of the land had been transported--sea
foods are also extraordinarily nutrient rich.
the group with the very best soil and consequently, the best
health of all were, by lucky accident, the hunza. i say "lucky" and "accident"
because the hunza and their resource base unknowingly developed an agricultural system
that produced the most nutritious food that is possible to grow. the hunza lived
on what has been called super food. there are a lot of interesting books about the
hunza, some deserving of careful study. (wrench, ; rodale, )
finding your ideal dietary
anyone that is genuinely interested in having the best possible
health should make their own study of the titles listed in the bibliography in the
back of this book. after you do, award yourself a bs nutrition. i draw certain conclusions
from this body of data. i think they help a person sort out the massive confusion
that exists today about proper diet.
first principle: homo sapiens clearly can posses extreme
health while eating very different dietary regimens. there is no one right diet for
humans. 
before the industrial era almost everyone on earth ate what
was produced locally. their dietary choices were pretty much restricted to those
foods that were well adapted and productive in their region. some places grew rye,
others wheat, others millet, others rice. some places supported cows, others goats,
others had few on no domesticated animals. some places produced a lot of fruits and
vegetables. others, did not. whatever the local dietary, during thousands of years
of eating that dietary natural selection prevailed; most babies that were allergic
to or not able to thrive on the available dietary, died quickly. probably of childhood
bacterial infections. the result of this weeding out process was a population closely
adapted to the available dietary of a particular locale. 
this has interesting implications for americans, most of
whose ancestors immigrated from somewhere else; many of our ancestors also "hybridized"
or crossed with immigrants from elsewhere. trying to discover what dietary substances
your particular genetic endowment is adapted to can be difficult and confusing. if
both your parents were italian and they were more or less pure italian going way
back, you might start out trying to eat wheat, olives, garlic, fava beans, grapes,
figs, cow dairy. if pure german, try rye bread, cow dairy, apples, cabbage family
vegetables. if scottish, try oats, mutton, fish, sheep dairy and cabbage family vegetables.
if jewish, try goat dairy, wheat, olives and citrus. and certainly all the above
ethnic derivations will thrive on many kinds of vegetables. afro-americans, especially
dark-complexioned ones little mixed with europeans, might do well to avoid wheat
and instead, try sorghum, millet or tropical root crops like sweet potatoes, yams
and taro.
making it even more difficult for an individual to discover
their optimum diet is the existence of genetic-based allergies and worse, developed
allergies. later in this chapter i will explain how a body can develop an allergy
to a food that is probably irreversible. a weakened organ can also prevent digestion
of a food or food group.
one more thing about adaptation to dietaries. pre-industrial
humans could only be extraordinarily healthy on the dietary they were adapted to
if and only if that dietary also was extraordinarily high in nutrients. few places
on earth have naturally rich soil. food grown on poor soil is poor in nutrition;
that grown on rich soil is high in nutrition. people do not realize that the charts
and tables in the backs of health books like adelle davis's lets cook it right, are
not really true. they are statistics. it is vital to keep in mind the old saying,
"there are lies, there are damned lies, and then there are statistics. the best
way to lie is with statistics." 
statistical tables of the nutrient content of foods were
developed by averaging numerous samples of food from various soils and regions. these
tables basically lie because they do not show the range of possibility between the
different samples. a chart may state authoritatively that  grams of broccoli contains
so many milligrams of calcium. what it does not say is that some broccoli samples
contain only half that amount or even less, while other broccoli contains two or
three times that amount. since calcium is a vital nutrient hard to come by in digestible
form, the high calcium broccoli is far better food than the low calcium sample. but
both samples of broccoli appear and taste more or less alike. both could even be
organically grown. yet one sample has a very positive ratio of nutrition to calories,
the other is lousy food. (schuphan, ) here's another example i hope will really
dent the certainties the linda clarkites. potatoes can range in protein from eight
to eleven percent, depending on the soil that produced them and if they were or were
not irrigated. grown dry (very low yielding) on semiarid soils, potatoes can be a
high-protein staff of life. heavily irrigated and fertilized so as to produce bulk
yield instead of nutrition, they'll produce two or three times the tonnage, but at
 percent protein instead of  percent. not only does the protein content drop just
as much as yield is boosted, the amino acid ratios change markedly, the content of
scarce nutritional minerals drops massively, and the caloric content increases. in
short, subsisting on irrigated commercially-grown potatoes, or on those grown on
relatively infertile soils receiving abundant rainfall will make you fat and sick.
they're a lot like manioc.
here's another. wheat can range from  to  percent protein.
before the industrial era ruined most wheat by turning it into white flour, wheat-eating
peoples from regions where the cereal naturally contains abundant protein tended
to be tall, healthy and long-lived. wheat-eating humans from regions that produce
low protein grain tended to be small, sickly and short-lived. (mccarrison, ,
, ; albrecht, )
even cows have to pay attention to where their grass is coming
from. some green grass is over  percent protein and contains lots of calcium, phosphorus
and magnesium to build strong bodies. other equally or even better looking green
grass contains only six or seven percent protein and contains little calcium, phosphorus
or magnesium. cows forced to eat only this poor type of grass can literally starve
to death with full bellies. and they have a hard time breeding successfully. the
reason for the difference: different soil fertility profiles. (albrecht, )
when people ate local, those living on fertile soils or getting
a significant portion of their diet from the sea and who because of physical isolation
from industrial foods did not make a practice of eating empty calories tended to
live a long time and be very healthy. but those unfortunates on poor soils or with
unwise cultural life-styles tended to be short-lived, diseased, small, weak, have
bad teeth, and etc. the lesson here is that homo sapiens can adapt to many different
dietaries, but like any other animal, the one thing we can't adapt to is a dietary
deficient in nutrition. 
so here's another "statistic" to reconsider. most
people believe that due to modern medical wonders, we live longer than we used to.
actually, that depends. compared to badly nourished populations of a century ago,
yes! we do. chemical medicine keeps sickly, poorly nourished people going a lot longer
(though one wonders about the quality of their dreary existences.) i hypothesize
that before the time most farmers purchased and baked with white flour and sold their
whole, unground wheat, many rural americans (the ones on good soil, not all parts
of north america have rich soil) eating from their own self-sufficient farms, lived
as long or even longer than we do today. you also have to wonder who benefits from
promulgating this mistaken belief about longevity. who gets rich when we are sick?
and what huge economic interests are getting rich helping make us sick?
the human comedy
i know most of my readers have been heavily indoctrinated about food and think they
			already know the truth about dietetics. i also know that so much information (and
			misinformation) is coming out about diet that most of my readers are massively confused
			about the subject. these are two powerful reasons many readers will look with disbelief
			at what this chapter has to say and take no action on my data, even to prove me wrong.
			let me warn you. there is a deep-seated human tendency to
			put off taking responsibilities, beautifully demonstrated by this old joke.
			a  year old boy was discovered masturbating by his father,
			who said, "son, you shouldn't do that! if you keep it up you'll eventually go
			blind!" ` "but father, came the boy's quick reply. "it feels good.
			how about if i don't quit until i need to wear glasses?"
the organic versus chemical feud
now, regrettably, and at great personal risk to my reputation,
i must try to puncture the very favorite belief of food religionists, the doctrine
that organically grown food is as nutritious as food can possibly be, like woody
allen's brown-rice-eating friends, people think if you eat organic foods, you will
inevitably live a very long time and be very healthy. actually, the organic vs. chemical
feud is in many ways false. many (not all) samples of organically grown food are
as low or lower in nutrition as foods raised with chemical fertilizers. conversely,
wisely using chemical fertilizers (not pesticides) can greatly increase the nutritional
value of food. judiciously used organic fertilizing substances can also do that as
well or better. and in either case, using chemical fertilizers or so-called organic
fertilizers, to maximize nutrition the humus content of the soil must be maintained.
but, raising soil organic matter levels too high can result in a massive reduction
in the nutritional content of the food being grown--a very frequent mistake on the
part of organic devotees. in other words, growing nutrition is a science, and is
not a matter of religion.
the food i fed to my daughter in childhood, though organic
according to rodale and the certification bureaucrats, though providing this organic
food to my family and clients gave me a feeling of self-righteousness, was not grown
with an understanding of the nutritional consequences of electing to use one particular
organic fertilizing substance over another. so we and a lot of regional organic market
gardeners near us that we bought from, were raising food that was far from ideally
nutritious. at least though, our food was free of pesticide residues. 
the real dichotomy in food is not "chemical" fertilizer
versus "organic," it is between industrial food and quality food. what
i mean by industrial food is that which is raised with the intention of maximizing
profit or yield. there is no contradiction between raising food that the "rabbis"
running organic certification bureaucracies would deem perfectly "kosher"
and raising that same food to make the most possible money or the biggest harvest.
when a farmer grows for money, they want to produce the largest number of bushels,
crates, tons, bales per acre. their criteria for success is primarily unit volume.
many gardeners think the same way. to maximize bulk yield they build soil fertility
in a certain direction (organically or chemically) and choose varieties that produce
greater bulk. however, nature is ironic in this respect. the most nutritious food
is always lower yielding. the very soil management practices that maximize production
simultaneously reduce nutrition.
the real problem we are having about our health is not that
there are residues of pesticides in our food. the real problem is that there are
only residues of nutrition left in our foods. until our culture comes to understand
this and realizes that the health costs of accepting less than optimum food far exceeds
the profits made by growing bulk, it will not be possible to frequently find the
ultimate of food quality in the marketplace, organically grown or not. it will not
be possible to find food that is labeled or identified according to its real nutritional
value. the best i can say about organic food these days is that it probably is no
less nutritious than chemically-grown food while at least it is free of pesticide
residues. 
the poor start
for this reason it makes sense to take vitamins and food
supplements, to be discussed in the next chapter. and because our food supply, organic
or "conventional," is far from optimum, if a person wants to be and remain
healthy and have a life span that approaches their genetic potential (and that potential,
it seems, approaches or exceeds a century), it is essential that empty calories are
rigorously avoided. 
an accurate and quick-to-respond indicator of how well we
are doing in terms of getting enough nutrition is the state of our teeth. one famous
dentally-oriented nutritional doctor, melvin page, suggested that as long as overall
nutrition was at least  percent of perfection, the body chemistry could support
healthy teeth and gums until death. by healthy here page means free of cavities,
no bone loss around the teeth (no wobblers), no long-in-the-teeth mouths from receding
gums, no gum diseases at all. but when empty calories or devitalized foods or misdigestion
cuts our nutrient intake we begin experiencing tooth decay, gum disease and bone
loss in the jaw. how are your teeth?
i suppose you could say that i have a food religion, but
mine is to eat so that the equation nutrition = health / calories is strongly in
my favor.
back to my daughter's teeth. yes, i innocently fed her less
than ideally nutritious food, but at that time i couldn't buy ideal food even had
i known what i wanted, nor did i have any scientific idea of how to produce ideal
food, nor actually, could i have done so on the impoverished, leached-out clay soil
at great oaks school even had i known how. the organic doctrine says that you can
build a garden of 'eatin with large quantities of compost until any old clay pit
or gravel heap produces highly nutritious food. this idea is not really true. sadly,
what is true about organic matter in soil is that when it is increased very much
above the natural level one finds in untilled soil in the climate you're working
with, the nutritional content of the food begins to drop markedly. i know this assertion
is shocking and perhaps threatening to those who believe in the organic system; i
am sorry. 
but there is another reason my daughter's teeth were not
perfect, probably could not have been perfect no matter what we fed her, and why
she will probably have at least some health problems as she ages no matter how perfectly
she may choose to eat from here on. my daughters had what dr. g.t. wrench called
"a poor start." not as poor as it could have been by any means, but certainly
less than ideal.
you see, the father has very little to do with the health
of the child, unless he happens to carry some particularly undesirable gene. it is
the mother who has the job of constructing the fetus out of prepartum nourishment
and her own body's nutritional reserves. the female body knows from trillenia of
instinctual experience that adequate nutrition from the current food supply during
pregnancy can not always be assured, so the female body stores up very large quantities
of minerals and vitamins and enzymes against that very possibility. when forming
a fetus these reserves are drawn down and depleted. it is virtually impossible during
the pregnancy itself for a mother to extract sufficient nutrition from current food
to build a totally healthy fetus, no matter how nourishing the food she is eating
may be. thus a mother-to-be needs to be spending her entire childhood and her adolescence
(and have adequate time between babies), building and rebuilding her reserves. 
a mother-to-be also started out at her own birth with a vitally
important stock of nutritional reserves, reserves put there during her own fetal
development. if that "start" was less than ideal, the mother-to-be (as
fetus) got "pinched" and nutritionally shortchanged in certain, predictable
ways. even minor mineral fetal deficiencies degrade the bone structure: the fetus
knows it needs nutritional reserves more than it needs to have a full-sized jaw bone
or a wide pelvic girdle, and when deprived of maximum fetal nourishment, these non-vital
bones become somewhat smaller. permanently. if mineral deficiencies continue into
infancy and childhood, these same bones continue to be shortchanged, and the child
ends up with a very narrow face, a jaw bone far too small to hold all the teeth,
and in women, a small oven that may have trouble baking babies. more importantly,
those nutrient reserves earmarked especially for making babies are also deficient.
so a deficient mother not only shows certain structural evidence of physiological
degeneration, but she makes deficient babies. a deficient female baby at birth is
unlikely to completely overcome her bad start before she herself has children.
so with females, the quality of a whole lifetime's nutrition,
and the life-nutrition of her mother (and of her mother's mother as well) has a great
deal to do with the outcome of a pregnancy. the sins of the mother can really be
visited unto the third and fourth generation.
this reality was powerfully demonstrated in the s by
a medical doctor, francis pottenger. he was not gifted with a good bedside manner.
rather than struggling with an unsuccessful clinical practice, dr. pottenger decided
to make his living running a medical testing laboratory in pasadena, california.
dr. pottenger earned his daily bread performing a rather simple task, assaying the
potency of adrenal hormone extracts. at that time, adrenaline, a useful drug to temporarily
rescue people close to death, was extracted from the adrenal glands of animals. however,
the potency of these crude extracts varied greatly. being a very powerful drug, it
was essential to measure exactly how strong your extract was so its dosage could
be controlled. 
quantitative organic chemistry was rather crude in those
days. instead of assaying in a test tube, dr. pottenger kept several big cages full
of cats that he had adrenalectomized. without their own adrenals, the cats could
not live more than a short time by finding out how much extract was required to keep
the cats from failing, he could measure the strength of the particular batch. 
dr. pottenger's cats were economically valuable so he made
every effort to keep them healthy, something that proved to be disappointingly difficult.
he kept his cats clean, in airy, bright quarters, fed them to the very best of his
ability on pasteurized whole milk, slaughterhouse meat and organs (cats in the wild
eat organ meats first and there are valuable vitamins and other substances in organ
meats that don't exist in muscle tissue). the meat was carefully cooked to eliminate
any parasites, and the diet was supplemented with cod liver oil. however, try as
he might, pottenger's cats were sickly, lived short and had to be frequently replaced.
usually they bred poorly and died young of bacterial infections, there being no antibiotics
in the s. i imagine dr. pottenger was constantly visiting the animal shelter
and perhaps even paid quarters out the back door to a steady stream of young boys
who brought him cats in burlap sacks from who knows where, no questions asked.
dr. pottenger's assays must have been accurate, for his business
grew and grew. eventually he needed more cats than he had cages to house, so he built
a big, roofed, on-the-ground pen outdoors. because he was overworked, he was less
careful about the feeding of these extra animals. they got the same pasteurized milk
and cod-liver oil, but he did not bother to cook their slaughterhouse meat. then,
a small miracle happened. this poorly cared for cage of cats fed on uncooked meat
became much healthier than the others, suffering far fewer bacterial infections or
other health problems. then another miracle happened. dr. pottenger began to meditate
on the first miracle.
it occurred to him that cats in the wild did not cook their
food; perhaps cats had a digestive system that couldn't process or assimilate much
out of cooked food. perhaps the problem he had been having was not because the cats
were without adrenal glands but because they were without sustenance, suffering a
sort of slow starvation in the midst of plenty. so dr. pottenger set up some cat
feeding experiments.
there were four possible combinations of his regimen: raw
meat and unpasteurized milk; raw meat and pasteurized milk; cooked meat and raw milk;
cooked meat and pasteurized milk, this last one being what he had been feeding all
along. so he divided his cats into four groups and fed each group differently. the
first results of pottenger's experiments were revealed quickly though the most valuable
results took longer to see. the cats on raw meat and raw milk did best. the ones
on raw meat and pasteurized milk did okay but not as well. the ones on cooked meat
and raw milk did even less well and those on all cooked food continued to do as poorly
as ever. 
clearly, cats can't digest cooked food; all animals do better
fed on what they can digest. a lot of people have taken pottenger's data and mistakenly
concluded that humans also should eat only raw food. this idea is debatable. however,
the most important result of the cat experiments took years to reveal itself and
is not paid much attention to, probably because its implications are very depressing.
dr. pottenger continued his experiments for several generations. it was the transgenerational
changes that showed the most valuable lesson. over several generations, the cats
on all raw foods began to alter their appearance. their faces got wider, their pelvic
girdles broader, bones solider, teeth better. they began to breed very successfully.
after quite a few generations, the healthiest group, the
one on all raw foods, seemed to have improved as much as it could. so dr. pottenger
took some of these cats and began feeding them only cooked food to study the process
of nutritional degeneration. after three "de"generations on cooked fodder
the group had deteriorated so much that the animals could barely breed. their faces
had become narrow, their teeth crooked, their pelvic girdles narrow, their bones
and body structure very small, and their dispositions poor. mothers wouldn't nurse
their young and sometimes became cannibalistic. they no longer lived very long.
before the degenerating group completely lost the ability
to breed, pottenger began to again feed them all raw food. it took four generations
on a perfect, raw food diet before some perfect appearing individuals showed up in
the group. it takes longer to repair the damage than it does to cause it and it takes
generations of unflagging persistence.
i think much the same process has happened to humans in this
century. with the invention of the roller mill and the consequent degradation of
our daily bread to white flour; with the birth of industrial farming and the generalized
lowering of the nutritional content of all of our crops; our overall ratio of nutrition
to calories worsened. then it worsened again because we began to have industrial
food manufacturing and national brand prepared food marketing systems; we began subsisting
on devitalized, processed foods. the result has been an even greater worsening of
our ratio of nutrition to calories. 
and just like pottenger's cats, we civilized humans in so-called
advanced countries are losing the ability to breed, our willingness (or the energy)
to mother our young; we're losing our good humor in the same way pottenger's degenerated
cats became bad tempered. as a group we feel so poorly that we desperately need to
feel better fast, and what better way to do that than with drugs. is it any wonder
that the united states, the country furthest down the road of industrial food degeneration,
spends  percent of its gross domestic product on medical services. any wonder that
so many babies are born by cesarean, any wonder that so many of our children have
crooked teeth needing an orthodontist? the most depressing aspect of this comes into
view when considering that pottenger's cats took four generations on perfect food
to repair most of the nutritional damage.
in the specific case of my daughter, i know somethings about
the nutritional history of her maternal ancestors. my daughter's grandmother grew
up on a saskatchewan farm. though they certainly grew their own rich wheat on virgin
semi-arid prairie soil, i'm sure the family bought white flour at the store for daily
use. still, there was a garden and a cow producing raw milk and free-range fertile
eggs and chicken and other animals. there probably were lots of canned vegetables
in winter, canned but still highly nutritious because of the fertility of their prairie
garden. my mother consequently had perfect teeth until the great depression forced
her to live for too many years on lard and white bread. 
during this time of severe malnutrition she had her three
babies. the first one got the best of her nutritional reserves. the second, born
after the worst of the malnutrition, was very small and weak and had a hard time
growing up. fortunately for me, for a few years before i (the last child) was born,
the worst of the economic times had past and the family had been living on a farm.
there were vegetables and fresh raw milk and fruit. my mother had two good years
to rebuild her nutritional reserves. but "grannybell" did not managed to
replace enough. shortly after i was born my mother lost every one of her teeth all
at once. the bone just disappeared around them. 
thus, i was born deficient. and my childhood and adolescent
nutrition was poor too: soda crackers, pasteurized processed artificial cheese, evaporated
milk from cans, hotdogs and canned beans, hotdogs and cabbage. it wasn't until i
was pregnant with my first baby that i started to straighten up my diet. i continued
eating very well after my first daughter, so my youngest daughter had another three
years of good diet to draw on. thus both my own daughters got a somewhat better start
than i had had.
my teeth were not as good as my mother's had been before
those years of malnutrition took them all. instead of perfect straight undecayed
teeth like a healthy farm girl should have, mine were somewhat crowded, with numerous
cavities. my jaw bone had not received enough minerals to develop to its full size.
my pelvic girdle also was smaller than my mother's was. i had had a poor start. 
my daughters did better. the older one (the first child typically
gets the best of the nutritional reserves) has such a wide jaw that there are small
spaces between her teeth. my second daughter has only one crooked tooth, she has
wider, more solid hips, stronger bones and a broader face than i do. if my younger
daughter will but from this point in her life, eat perfectly and choose her food
wisely to responsibly avoid empty calories and maximize her ratio of nutrition to
calories, her daughter (if she gives us granddaughters as her older sister already
has done) may exhibit the perfect physiology that her genes carry.
along the lines of helping you avoid empty calories i will
give you some information about various common foods that most people don't know
and that most books about food and health don't tell, or misunderstand. 
butter, margarine and fats in general. 
recently, enormous propaganda has been generated against
eating butter. its been smeared in the health magazines as a saturated animal fat,
one containing that evil substance, cholesterol. many people are now avoiding it
and instead, using margarine.
composition of oils
saturated
monosaturated
unsaturated
butter
coconut oil
cottonseed oil
olive oil
palm oil
soybean oil
sunflower oil
safflower oil
sesame oil
peanut oil
corn oil
this is a major and serious misunderstanding. first of all,
margarine is almost indigestible, chemically very much like shortening--an artificially
saturated or hydrogenated vegetable fat. hydrogenated fats can't be properly broken
down by the body's digestive enzymes, adding to the body's toxic load. margarine,
being a chemically-treated vegetable oil with artificial yellow color and artificial
flavorings to make it seem like butter, also releases free radicals in the body that
accelerate aging. so, to avoid the dangers of eating cholesterol-containing butter,
people eat something far worse for them!
there are severe inconsistencies with the entire "cholesterol-is-evil"
theory. ethnic groups like the danes, who eat enormous quantities of cholesterol-containing
foods, have little circulatory disease. actually, the liver itself produces cholesterol;
it's presence in the blood is an important part of the body chemistry. cholesterol
only becomes a problem because of deranged body chemistry due to the kind of overall
malnutrition americans usually experience on their junk food diets. avoiding cholesterol
in foods does little good, but eating a low-fat, low-sugar, complex-carbohydrate
(whole foods) diet high in minerals does lower blood cholesterol enormously. 
actually, high quality fresh (not rancid) butter in moderate
quantities is about the finest fat a person could eat. but high quality butter is
almost unobtainable. first of all, it has to be raw, made from unpasteurized cream.
second, butter can contain very high levels of fat-soluble vitamins, but doesn't
have to. vitamin-rich butter's color is naturally bright yellow, almost orange. this
color does not come from a test tube. pale yellow butter as is found in the commercial
trade was probably almost white before it was artificially tinted. butter from grass-pastured
cows naturally changes from yellow-orange to white and back again through the year
as the seasons change. spring grass, growing in the most intense sunlight of the
year contains very high levels of chlorophyll and vitamins. cows eating this grass
put high levels of vitamins a and d into their cream, evidenced by the orange color
of vitamin a. by july, natural butter has degraded to medium-yellow in color. by
august, it is pale yellow. industrial dairy cows fed exclusively on hay or artificial,
processed feeds (lacking in these vitamins), produce butterfat that is almost white.
i prefer to obtain my butter from a neighbor who has several
dairy cows grazing on fertile bottom land pasture. we always freeze a year's supply
in late spring when butter is at its best. interestingly, that is also the time of
year when my neighbor gets the most production from her cows and is most willing
to part with  pounds of extra butter. 
in general, fats are poor foods that should be avoided. their
ratio of nutrition to calories is absolutely the worst of all food types, except
perhaps for pure white sugar, which is all calories and absolutely no nutrition (this
is also true for other forms of sugar. honey, too, contains almost no nutrition.).
gram for gram, fats contain many more calories than do sugars or starches. yet gram
for gram, fats contain virtually no nutrition except for small quantities of essential
fatty acids.
the perverse reason people like to eat fats is that they
are very hard to digest and greatly slow the digestive action of the stomach. another
way of saying that is that they have a very high satiety value. fats make a person
feel full for a long time because their presence in the stomach makes it churn and
churn and churn. fats coat proteins and starches and delay their digestion, often
causing them to begin fermenting (starches) or putrefying (proteins) in the digestive
tract.
the best fats contain high levels of monosaturated vegetable
oils that have never been exposed to heat or chemicals--like virgin olive oil. use
small quantities of olive oil for salad dressing. monosaturated fats also have far
less tendency to go rancid than any other type. vegetable oils with high proportions
of unsaturated fats, the kind that all the authorities push because they contain
no cholesterol, go rancid rapidly upon very brief exposure to air. the danger here
is that rancidity in vegetable oil is virtually unnoticeable. rancid animal fat on
the other hand, smells "off." eating rancid oil is a sure-fire way to accelerate
aging, invite degenerative conditions in general, and enhance the likelihood of cancer.
i recommend that you use only high-quality virgin olive oil, the only generally-available
fat that is largely monosaturated. (pearson and shaw, )
when you buy vegetable oil, even olive oil, get small bottles
so you use them up before the oil has much time being exposed to air (as you use
the oil air fills the bottle) or, if you buy olive oil in a large can to save money,
immediately upon opening it, transfer the oil to pint jars filled to the very brim
to exclude virtually all air, and seal the jars securely. in either case, keep now-opened,
in-use small bottles of oil in the refrigerator because rancidity is simply the combination
of oil with oxygen from the air and this chemical reaction is accelerated at warmer
temperatures and slowed greatly at cold ones.
chemical reactions typically double in speed with every 
degrees c. increase in temperature. so oil goes rancid about six times faster at
normal room temperature than it does in the fridge. if you'll think about the implications
of this data you'll see there are two powerful reasons not to fry food. one, the
food is coated with oil and gains in satiety value at the expense of becoming relatively
indigestible and productive of toxemia. secondly, if frying occurs at  degrees
centigrade and normal room temperature is  degrees centigrade, then oil goes rancid
 to the th power faster in the frying pan, or about , times faster. heating
oil for only ten minutes in a hot skillet induces as much rancidity as about  weeks
of sitting open and exposed to air at room temperature. think about that the next
time you're tempted to eat something from a fast food restaurant where the hot fat
in the deep fryer has been reacting with oxygen all day, or even for several days.
back to butter, where we started. if you must have something
traditionally northern european on your bread, you are far better off to use butter,
not margarine. however, mediterranean peoples traditionally dip their bread in high-quality
extra-virgin olive oil that smells and tastes like olives. its delicious, why not
try it. but best yet, put low-sugar fruit preserves on your toast or develop a taste
for dry toast. probably the finest use for butter is melted over steamed vegetables.
this way only small quantities are needed and the fat goes on something that is otherwise
very easy to digest so its presence will not produce as many toxins in the digestive
tract.
milk, meat, and other protein foods
speaking of butter, how about milk? the dairy lobby is very
powerful in north america. its political clout and campaign contributions have the
governments of both the united states and especially that of canada eating out of
its hand (literally), providing the dairy industry with price supports. because of
these price supports, in canada cheese costs half again more than it does in the
united states. the dairy lobby is also very cozy with the medical profession so licensed
nutritionists constantly bombard us with "drink milk" and "cheese
is good for you" propaganda. 
and people naturally like dairy foods. they taste good and
are fat-rich with a high satiety value. dairy makes you feel full for a long time.
dairy is also high in protein; protein is hard to digest and this too keeps one feeling
full for a long time. but many people, especially those from cultures who traditionally
(genetically) didn't have dairy cows, particularly africans, asians and jews, just
do not produce the enzymes necessary to digest cows milk. some individuals belonging
to these groups can digest goats milk. some can't digest any kind except human breast
milk. and some can digest fermented milk products like yogurt and kiefer. whenever
one eats a protein food that is not fully digestible, it putrefies in the digestive
tract, with all the bad consequences previously described.
but no one, absolutely no one can fully digest pasteurized
cows milk, which is what most people use because they have been made to fear cow-transmitted
diseases and/or they are forced to use pasteurized dairy products by health authorities.
i suspect drinking pasteurized milk or eating cheese made from pasteurized milk is
one of the reasons so many people develop allergic reactions to milk. yet many states
do not allow unpasteurized dairy to be sold, even privately between neighbors. to
explain all this, i first have to explain a bit more about protein digestion in general
and then talk about allergies and how they can be created.
proteins are long, complex molecules, intricate chains whose
individual links are amino acids. proteins are the very stuff of life. all living
protoplasm, animal or plant, is largely composed of proteins. there are virtually
an infinite number of different proteins but all are composed of the same few dozen
amino acids hooked together in highly variable patterns. amino acids themselves are
highly complex organic molecules too. the human body custom-assembles all its proteins
from amino acids derived from digesting protein foods, and can also manufacture small
quantities of certain of its own amino acids to order, but there are eight amino
acids it cannot make and these are for that reason called essential amino acids.
essential amino acids must be contained in the food we eat. .
few proteins are water soluble. when we eat proteins the
digestive apparatus must first break them down into their water-soluble components,
amino acids, so these can pass into the blood and then be reassembled into the various
proteins the body uses. the body has an interesting mechanism to digest proteins;
it uses enzymes. an enzyme is like the key for a lock. it is a complex molecule that
latches to a protein molecule and then breaks it apart into amino acids. then the
enzyme finds yet another protein molecule to free. enzymes are efficient, reusable
many many times. 
enzymes that digest proteins are effective only in the very
acid environment of the stomach, are manufactured by the pancreas and are released
when protein foods are present. the stomach then releases hydrochloric acid and churns
away like a washing machine, mixing the enzymes and the acid with the proteins until
everything has digested. 
so far so good. that's how its supposed to be. but. dr. henry
bieler, who wrote food is your best medicine, came up with the finest metaphor i
know of to explain how protein digestion goes wrong. he compared all proteins to
the white of an egg (which is actually a form of protein). when raw and liquid, the
long chains of albumen (egg white) proteins are in their natural form. however, cook
the egg and the egg white both solidifies and becomes smaller. what has happened
is that the protein chains have shriveled and literally tied themselves into knots.
once this happens, pancreatic enzymes no longer fit and cannot separate all the amino
acids. cooked proteins may churn and churn and churn in the presence of acid and
pancreatic enzymes but they will not digest completely. part becomes water soluble;
part does not.
but, indigestible protein is still subject to an undesirable
form of consumption in the gut. various bacteria make their home in our airless,
warm intestines. some of these live on protein. in the process of consuming undigested
proteins, they release highly toxic substances. they poison us. 
what is true of the white of an egg is also true of flesh
foods and dairy. raw meat and raw fish are actually easily digestible foods and if
not wrongly combined will not produce toxemia in a person that still has a strong
pancreas. however, eating raw meat and fish can be a dicey proposition, both for
reasons of cultural sensibility (people think it is disgusting) and because there
may be living parasites in uncooked flesh that can attack, sicken and even kill people.
it has been argued that a healthy stomach containing its proper degree of acidity
provides an impenetrable barrier to parasites. perhaps. but how many of us are that
healthy these days? cooked flesh and fish seems more delicious to our refined, civilized
sensibilities, but are a poor food. 
in my household we have no moral objection to eating meat.
we do have an ethical objection in that meat eating does not contribute to our health.
but still, we do eat it. a few times a year, for traditional celebrations we may
invite the children over and cook a turkey. a few times for thanksgiving when the
children were going through their holier-than-thou vegetarian stage, i purchased
the largest, thickest porterhouse steak i could find at the natural meat store and
ate it medium-rare, with relish. it was delicious. it made me feel full for hours
and hours and hours. i stayed flat on the couch and groggily worked on digesting
it all evening. after that i'd had enough of meat to last for six months. 
when milk is pasteurized, the proteins in it are also altered
in structure. not so severely as egg white is altered by cooking because pasteurization
happens at a lower temperature. but altered none the less. and made less digestible.
pasteurizing also makes milk calcium far less assimilable. that's ironic because
so many people are drinking milk because they fear they need more calcium to avoid
osteoporosis and to give their children good teeth. what pasteurized milk actually
does to their children is make them calcium deficient and makes the children toxic,
provoking many colds, ear infections, sinusitis, inflammations of the tonsils and
lung infections, and, induces an allergy to milk in the children. 
the development of allergies
there are three ways a body can become allergic. () it can
have a genetic predisposition for a specific allergy to start with. () it can be
repeatedly exposed to an irritating substance such as pollen when, at the same time,
the body's mechanism for dealing with irritations is weakened. generally weak adrenals
causes this because the adrenal's job is to produce hormones that reduce inflammation.
once the irritating substance succeeds at producing a significant inflammation, a
secondary reaction may be set up, called an allergy. once established, an allergy
is very hard to get rid of.
() in a way very similar to the second, but instead of being
irritated by an external substance, it is irritated by repeatedly failing to properly,
fully digest something. pasteurized milk for example, basically impossible to completely
digest even in its low-fat form, often sets up an allergy that applies to other forms
of cows milk, even raw, unpasteurized cows milk or yogurt. eating too much white
flour can eventually set off a wheat allergy. my husband developed a severe allergy
to barley after drinking too much home-brewed beer; he also became highly intolerant
to alcohol. now he has allergic reactions to both alcohol and barley. and gets far
sicker from drinking beer (two separate allergies) than from wheat beer, hard liquor
or wine (only one allergy). 
eating too much of any single food, or repeatedly eating
too much of an otherwise very good food at one time, can eventually overwhelm the
body's ability to digest it fully. then, the finest whole food products may set up
an allergic reaction. worse, this allergic reaction itself subsequently prevents
proper digestion even when only moderate quantities are eaten. 
an allergy may not be recognized as an allergy because it
may not manifest as the instant skin rash or stuffy nose or swollen glands or sticky
eyes. that people usually think of when they think "allergic reaction."
food allergies can cause many kinds of symptoms, from sinusitis to psychosis, from
asthma to arthritis, from hyperactivity to depression, insomnia to narcolepsy--and
commonly the symptoms don't manifest immediately after eating. frequently, allergic
reactions are so low grade as to be unnoticeable and may not produce an observable
condition until many years of their grinding down the vital force has passed. when
the condition finally appears it is hard to associate it with some food that has
been consumed for years, apparently with impunity.
thus it is that many north americans have developed allergies
to wheat, dairy, soy products (because many soy foods are very hard to digest), corn
and eggs. these are such common, widespread, frequently found allergies that anyone
considering a dietary cause of their complaints might just cut all these foods out
of the diet for a few weeks just to see what happens. and individuals may be allergic
to anything from broccoli to bacon, strawberries to bean sprouts. unraveling food
allergies sometimes requires the deductions of a sherlock holmes.
however, food allergies are very easy to cure if you can
get the suffered to take the medicine. inevitably, allergic reactions vanish in about
five days of abstinence. anyone with sufficient self-discipline to water fast for
five days can cure themselves of all food allergies at one step. then, by a controlled,
gradual reintroduction of foods, they can discover which individual items cause trouble.
see coca's pulse test in the appendix where you'll find step-by-step instructions
for allergy testing that are less rigorous, not requiring a preliminary fast.
flour, and other matters relating to seeds
one of the largest degradations to human health was caused
by the roller mill. this apparently profitable machine permitted the miller to efficiently
separate wheat flour into three components: bran, germ and endosperm. since bread
made without bran and germ is lighter and appears more "upper class" it
became instantly popular. flour without germ and bran also had an industrial application--it
could be stored virtually forever without being infested by insects because white
flour does not contain enough nutrition to support life. most health conscious people
are aware that white flour products won't support healthful human life either. 
essentially, white flour's effect on humans is another demonstration
of health = nutrition / calories. when the bran and germ are discarded, remaining
are the calories and much of the protein, lacking are many vitamins and minerals
and other vital nutritional substances. 
whole wheat bread has been called the staff of life. in ages
past, healthy cultures have made bread the predominant staple in their diet. does
that mean you can just go to the bakery and buy whole grain bread, or go to the healthfood
store and buy organically grown whole wheat flour, bake your own, and be as healthy
as the ancients? sorry, the answer is almost certainly no. there are pitfalls, many
of them, waiting for the unwary.
white flour has one other advantage over whole wheat flour.
it not only remains free of insect infestation, it doesn't become stale (meaning
rancid). in the wheat germ (where the embryo resides) there is considerable oil,
containing among other things, about the best natural source of vitamin e. this oil
is highly unsaturated and once the seed is ground the oil goes rancid in a matter
of days. whole wheat flour kept on the unrefrigerated shelf of the store is almost
certainly rancid. a lot of its other vitamin content has been oxidized too. if the
wheat flour had flowed directly from the grinder into an airtight sack and from there
directly to the freezer, if it had been flash frozen and kept extremely cold, it
might have a storage life of some months. of course that was not the case. maybe
you're lucky and your healthfood store is one of the very few that has its own small-scale
flour mill and grinds daily. probably not. 
how about your baker's whole wheat bread? where does the
baker get flour? from the wholesaler's or distributor's warehouse! in fifty pound
kraftpaper sacks! how much time had elapsed from milling to wholesaler to baker to
baking? the answer has to be in the order of magnitude of weeks. and it might be
months. was the flour stored frozen? or airtight? of course not.
if you want bread made from freshly ground flour you are
almost certainly have to grind and bake it yourself. is it worth the trouble? you
bet. once you've tasted real bread you'll instantly see by comparison what stale,
rancid whole wheat flour tastes like. freshly ground flour makes bread that can be
the staff of life and can enormously upgrade your health--if the wheat you use is
any good.
but before we talk about wheat quality, a more few words
of warning. if you think wheat goes rancid rapidly, rye is even worse. rye flour
goes bad so fast that when you buy it in the store it usually is the rye equivalent
of white wheat flour. the germ has been removed. the bag may not say so. but it probably
has. if you are going to make rye breads, even more reason to grind your own. corn
meal from the grocery store has usually been degerminated too. if it hasn't been,
the oil in the seed's germ has probably gone rancid. 
grinding flour at home is easy these days. there is an abundance
of at-home milling products and no shortage of hype about them. you'll find staunch
advocates of stone mills. these produce the finest-textured flour, but are costly.
the sales pitch is that stones grind at low temperature and do not damage the oils
(remember the development of rancidity is a function of temperature) or the vitamins,
which are also destroyed at high temperature. this assertion is half true. if you
are going to store your flour it is far better to grind it cool. however, if you
are, as we do, going to immediately bake your flour, what difference does it make
if it gets a little warm before baking. that only accelerates the action of the yeast.
on the negative side, stone mills grind slowly and are very
fussy about which grains they will grind. if the cereal is a bit moist or if the
seed being ground is a little bit oily, the mill becomes instantly blocked. 
steel burr mills grind fast and coarsely and are inexpensive.
coarse flour makes heavy bread. the metal grinding faces tend to wear out and have
to be replaced occasionally--if they can be replaced. breads on the heavy side are
still delicious; for many years i made bread with an inexpensive steel burr mill
attachment that came with my juicer. 
some steel burr mills will also grind oily seed like sesame
and sunflower. however, oily seeds can be ground far more easily half-a-cup at a
time in a little inexpensive electric spice/coffee mill, the sort with a single fast-spinning
propeller.
i currently think the best compromise are hammermills. the
grain dribbles into a chamber full of fast-spinning teeth that literally pound the
grain into powder. since air flows through with the grain the flour is not heated
very much. this type of mill is small, very fast, intermediate in price between steel
mills and stone mill, lasts a long time, but when grinding, sounds like a boeing
 about to take off. it is essential to wear hearing protectors when using it.
awareness of bread quality is growing. one excellent new
u.s. business, called great harvest bakery is a fast-growing national franchise chain.
they bake and sell only whole grain breads; all their wheat flour is freshly ground
daily on the premises in the back. unfortunately, as of the writing of this book,
they do not grind their rye flour but bring it in sacks. i can't recommend their
rye breads. the founder of great harvest is a knowledgeable buyer who fully understands
my next topic, which is that wheat is not wheat. 
there are great differences between hard bread wheats; being
organically grown is no cure all for making good or nutritious bread. great harvest
understands this and uses top quality grain that is also organic. 
when i first stated making my own bread from my own at-home-ground
flour i was puzzled by variations in the dough. sometimes the bread rose well and
was spongy after baking like i wanted it to be. sometimes it kneaded stickily and
ended up flat and crumbly like a cake. since i had done everything the same way except
that i may have bought my wheat berries from different healthfood stores, i began
to investigate the subject of wheat quality.
the element in the cereal that forms the rubbery sponge in
risen bread so it doesn't crumble and rises high without collapsing, is gluten. the
word glue derives from gluten. the gluten content of various wheats varies. bread
bakers use "hard wheat" because of its high gluten content. gluten is a
protein and gluten comprises most of the protein in bread wheat; the protein content
and the gluten content are almost identical. 
try this. ask your healthfood store buyer or owner what the
protein content is of the hard red wheat seeds they're selling. you'll almost certainly
get a puzzled look and your answer will almost certainly be, "we have organic
and conventional." demand that the store buyer ask this question of their distributor/wholesaler
and then report back to you. if the distributor deigns to answer, the answer will
be the same--i sell organic or conventional hard red wheat. period. when i got these
non-answers i looked further and discovered that hard bread wheats run from about
 percent protein to about  percent and this difference has everything to do with
the soil fertility (and to an extent the amount of rainfall during the season), and
almost nothing to do with organic or conventional. 
this difference also has everything to do with how your dough
behaves and how your bread comes out. and how well your bread nourishes you. thirteen
percent wheat will not make a decent loaf--fourteen percent is generally considered
# quality and comprises the bulk of cheap bread grain. when you hear in the financial
news that a bushel of wheat is selling for a certain price, they mean #. bakers
compete for higher protein lots and pay far higher prices for more protein. 
we prefer our bread about % rye, but rye contains no gluten
at all. mix any rye flour into fourteen percent wheat flour and the dough becomes
very heavy, won't rise, and after baking, crumbles. so i kept looking for better
grain and finally discovered a knowledgeable lady that sold flour mills and who also
was a serious baker herself. she had located a source of quality wheat with an assayed
protein content and sold it by the  pound sack. when i asked her if her wheat was
organic she said it was either sixteen or seventeen percent protein depending on
whether you wanted hard red spring wheat or hard white spring wheat. organic or conventional?
i persisted. no, she said. high protein! 
so, i said to myself, since protein content is a function
of soil fertility and since my body needs protein, i figured i am better off eating
the best quality wheat, pesticide/herbicide residues (if there are any) be damned.
think about it! the difference between seventeen percent and fourteen percent protein
is about  percent. that percentage difference is the key threshold of nutritional
deficiency that makes teeth fall out. we can't afford to accept % degradations
in our nutritional quality in something that we eat every day and that forms the
very basis of our dietary. 
please understand here that i am not saying that high protein
wheats can't be grown organically. they certainly can. the founder of great harvest
bakery performs a valuable service locating and securing high-protein lots of organically
grown wheats for his outlets. but often as not organic products are no more nourishing
than those grown with chemicals. until the buyers at organic whole food wholesalers
get better educated about grain, obtaining one's personal milling stock from them
will be a dicey proposition.
sometimes organic cereal can be far worse than conventional.
to make a cereal organic is a negative definition; if it hasn't had chemicals, then
its organic. grain is one of the few foods that will still produce economic yields
of low quality seed on extremely infertile soil or when half-smothered in weeds because
herbicides weren't used for reasons of ideological purity. vegetables will hardly
produce anything under those conditions; carelessly grown fruits and vegetables are
inevitably small, misshapen, unmarketable. but seed cleaning equipment can remove
the contamination of weed seeds in cereal grains (at a cost.)
the price the farmer receives for organic cereal grain is
much higher, so it is possible to accept rather low yields or expend more money for
cleaning out high levels of weed seeds from the field-run harvest, and still make
a good profit. a lousy organic cereal crop like this might even make a higher profit
because the farmer has been spared the expense of fertilization, of rotation, of
weed control. i remember once i bought a sack of organic whole oats that were the
smallest, most shriveled, bitterest oats i've ever tried to eat. we ended up throwing
out that tiny, light (lacking density) seed in favor of using the "conventional"
whole oats that were plump, heavy and sweet. 
wheat is not the only cereal that is damaged by industrial
milling. so are oats. most consumers have never seen whole oats; they look very much
like wheat berries. but rolled oats become rancid and stale on the shelf much like
wheat flour on the shelf.
another pitfall about using whole grains is that to be nutritious
they must still be fresh enough to sprout vigorously. a seed is a package of food
surrounding an embryo. the living embryo is waiting for the right conditions (temperature
and moisture) to begin sprouting. sprouting means the embryo begins eating up stored
food and making a plant out of it. all foods are damaged by exposure to oxygen, so
to protect the embryo's food supply, the seed is surrounded by a virtually airtight
seed coat that permits only enough oxygen to enter for the embryo's respiration (yes,
seed breaths slowly). often the embryo is located at the edge of the seed and has
its own air intake port. when the seed coat is removed or damaged, the innards are
exposed to air and begin deteriorating rapidly. in the case of oats, especially rapidly,
because oats are the only grass-based cereal that contains large quantities of oil--five
percent oil, more or less. that's why oats "stick to your ribs." rolled
oats become stale and lose their flavor (and nutritional content) and perhaps become
rancid very rapidly. so we make porridge from whole oat groats that we coarsely grind
to grits (steel-cut oats) in an electric seed/spice mill just before cooking. 
it is not easy to cook oat grits. they take a lot longer
than rolled oats and if not done exactly to the recipe i'm about to give you, will
almost inevitably stick to the pot badly and may also froth over and mess the stove.
here's how to cook them. coarsely grind (like corn meal) your whole oats until you
have one cup of oat grits. bring exactly four cups of water (no salt) to a very hard
boil at your highest heat. you may add a handful of raisins. light or turn on a second,
small-sized burner on the stove and set it as low as possible. into the fast boiling
water, slowly pour the ground oats, stirring continuously. take about  seconds
to pour it all or you'll make clumps. keep on the high heat until the water again
boils vigorously. suddenly, the mixture will begin rising in the pot and will try
to pour all over the stove. this means it is all at boiling temperature again. quickly
move the pot to the low burner; that instantly stops the frothing. then cover. let
the porridge cook for  minutes, stirring once or twice to prevent sticking. then,
keeping it covered, turn off the heat. they can be eaten at this point but i think
it is better to let the oats finish soaking on the stove for at least two to four
hours. then reheat in a double boiler, or warm in a microwave. 
we usually start a pot of oats at bedtime for the next morning.
see why people prefer the convenience of using rolled oats? but once you've eaten
oats made right, you'll never prefer the flavor of rolled oats again. and if the
human body has any natural method of assaying nutritional content, it is flavor.
nutritionally, millet is almost the same story as oats. millet
seed is protected by a very hard hull. cooking unhulled millet is almost impossible.
after hours of boiling the small round seeds will still be hard and the hulls remain
entirely indigestible. worse, the half-round hulls (they split eventually) stick
in your teeth. but prehulled millet, sitting in the sack for weeks and months, loses
a lot of nutrition and tastes very second-rate compared to freshly-hulled millet.
it is possible to buy unhulled millet, usually by special order from the health food
distributor--if you'll take a whole sack. millet can be hulled at home in small batches.
here's how we figured out how to do it. there probably are better ways.
using a cheap steel-burr flour mill, set the burrs just far
enough apart that the seed is ground to grits, but not flour. this pops the hulls
loose. an old mill with worn-out burrs works great for this job. then you have to
get some hand seed cleaning screens just large enough to pass the grits but not pass
the hulls (most of them). window screen or other hardware cloths won't work. seed
cleaning screens come in increments of / inch; we use a /" round screen.
other batches of millet might work better with a screen one step larger or smaller.
it will take you a little ingenuity to find hand-held screens. they're used by seed
companies and farmers to clean small batches of seed for inspection and are usually
about one square foot in size with a quality wooden frame. larger frames made of
the same screening material are used in big seed cleaning machines. (the hulls could
also be winnowed out by repeatedly pouring the grit/hulls mixture back and forth
between two buckets in a gentle breeze.)
after you've screened out most of the hulls, the rest will
rinse out, floating off as you wash the grain prior to cooking. we never hull more
than enough millet for two or three meals and keep the uncooked (unwashed) millet
in the freezer in an airtight jar. it is interesting how people will accept poor
nutrition and its consequent sickness as the price of convenience. 
if you eat much buckwheat you should also figure out how
to hull (sometimes called groating) it yourself. someone should write a thorough
book on the home milling of cereals. and perhaps sell the equipment by mail. probably
would be a good little homestead business.
something else you need to keep in mind about seed. even
though the embryo's food supply is protected by the seed coat, it still slowly deteriorates,
steadily oxidizing and losing nutritional value. eventually old seed looses the ability
to sprout. the decline in germination ability matches a decline in nutritional quality.
any seed you are going to use for eating should possess the ability to sprout, strongly
and rapidly. (after you've comparatively sprouted a few grain samples, you'll know
what i mean by this.) fortunately, cereal grains usually sprout well for quite a
few years after harvest if they have been stored cool and dry. eating dead or near-dead
seeds will help move you closer to the same condition yourself.
finally, one more warning about buying store bread. salt-free
bread tastes "funny" to most people. it bakes fine, salt is not necessary
to the leavening process, but no bakery could stay in business without salting their
bread. the standard level of salt is two percent by weight. that is quite a lot!
two percent equals one teaspoonful per pound. i'll have more to say about the evils
of salt later on.
i imagine some of my readers are feeling a little overwhelmed
by all these warnings and "bewares ofs," and intricacies. they are used
to taking no responsibility for securing their own food supply quality and have come
to expect the "system" to protect them. i believe it is not because of
lack of government intervention, but because of government intervention itself, our
food system is very perverse. until our mass consciousness changes, if you wish to
make yourself and your family truly healthy, you are going to have to take charge
and become quite a discriminating shopper. unconscious consumers are on a rapid road
to the total unconsciousness of death.
and again, let me remind you here that this one small book
cannot contain everything you should know. the bibliography at the end of should
become your guide to earning your post-graduate education in nutritional health.
freshness of fruits and vegetables 
most people do not realize the crucial importance of freshness
when it comes to produce. in the same way that seeds gradually die, fruits and vegetables
go through a similar process as their nutritional content gradually oxidizes or is
broken down by the vegetables own enzymes, but vegetables lose nutrition hundreds
of times more rapidly than cereals. produce was recently part of a living plant.
it was connected to the vascular system of a plant and with few exceptions, is not
intended by nature to remain intact after being cut. a lettuce or a zucchini was
entirely alive at the moment of harvest, but from that point, its cells begin to
die. even if it is not yet attacked by bacteria, molds and fungi, its own internal
enzymes have begun breaking down its own substances.
vegetables, especially leafy vegetables, are far more critical
in this respect than most ripe fruits. all, however, deteriorate much like radioactive
material; they have a sort of half-life. the mineral content is stable, but in respect
to the vitamins and enzymes and other complex organic components, each time period
or "half life" results in the loss of half the nutrition. suppose a lettuce
has a half life of  hours, two days after harvest only  percent of the original
nutrition remains. after two more days, half the remaining half is gone and only
 percent is left. after two more days half of that  percent is lost. thus six
days after harvest and a lettuce contains only bout  percent of its original nutrition.
a two day half-life is only hypothetical. those types of produce i classify as very
perishable probably do have a half-life of from  to  hours. moderately perishable
produce has a half life of about  hours; durable types of produce have half lives
of  hours or longer.
vegetable storage potential
very perishable
moderately perishable
durable
lettuce
zucchini
apple
spinach
eggplant
squash
chinese cabbage
sweet peppers
oranges
kale
broccoli
cabbage
endive
cauliflower
carrot
peaches
apricots
lemons
parsley
beets
the half life of produce can be lengthened by lowering its
temperature. for that reason, sophisticated produce growers usually use hydrocooling.
this process dumps a just-cut vegetable into icy water within minutes of being harvested,
lowering core temperature to a few degrees above freezing almost immediately. when
cut vegetables are crated up at field temperatures, and stacks of those crates are
put in a cooler, it can take the inside of the stack  hours, or longer, to become
chilled. home gardeners should also practice hydrocooling. fill your sink with cold
water and wash/soak your harvest until it is thoroughly chilled before draining and
refrigerating it. or, harvest your garden early in the morning when temperatures
are lowest.
still, when you buy produce in the store it may have been
sitting at room temperature for hours or possibly days. 
the bottom line here: fresh is equally as important as unsprayed
or organically grown!
the real truth about salt and sugar 
first, let me remind certain food religionists: salt is salt
is salt is salt and sugar is sugar is sugar. there are no good forms of salt and
no good forms of sugar. salt from a mine and salt from the sea both have the same
harmful effect; white sugar, natural brown sugar, honey, molasses, corn syrup, maple
syrup, whatever sweet have you. all are sugars and all have the similar harmful effects.
i know of no harmless salt substitute that really tastes salty. nutrisweet is basically
harmless to most people and can be used as a very satisfactory replacement for sugars.
(a few people are unable to tolerate nutrisweet, causing the anti-chemicalists to
circulate much anti-nutrisweet propaganda, but you should carefully consider this
thought before dismissing nutrisweet--there is almost no food substance that some
people are not allergic to or unable to digest. the fact that nutrisweet is made
in a chemical vat and the fact that some cannot handle nutrisweet does not make it
"of the devil."
and its not all black and white with the other items either.
sea salt does have certain redeeming qualities not found in mined salt and under
certain very special conditions, eating small quantities of salt may be acceptable.
similarly, some forms of sugar are not quite as harmful as other forms, though all
are harmful. 
the primary health problem caused by table salt is not that
it contributes to high blood pressure in people with poor kidneys, though it does
that. it is not that eating salt ruins the kidneys; salt probably does not do that.
the real problem with salt is that sodium chloride is an adrenal stimulant, triggering
the release of adrenal hormones, especially natural steroids that resist inflammation.
when these hormones are at high levels in the blood, the person often feels very
good, has a sense of well-being. thus salt is a drug! and like many drugs of its
type, salt is a habituating drug. however, we are so used to whipping our adrenals
with salt that we don't notice it. what we do notice is that we think we like the
taste of salted food and consider that food tastes flat without it. but take away
a person's salt shaker and they become very uncomfortable. that's because the addict
isn't getting their regular dose. 
what's wrong with repetitive adrenal whipping is that adrenal
fortitude is variable; many people's adrenals eventually fail to respond to the prod
of salt and the body begins to suffer from a lack of adrenal hormones. often those
inheriting weak adrenals manifest semi-failure in childhood. the consequence is that
ordinary, irritating substances begin causing severe irritation. the person becomes
allergic to pollen, dust, foods, animal danders, etc. we see asthma, hay fever, sinusitis,
etc. though one can then discover specific allergens and try to remove them from
the environment or diet, often this case can be solved far more easily by complete
withdrawal from all salt. this rests the adrenals and they may recover their full
function; almost certainly their function will improve. the asthma, allergies and
etc., gradually vanish.
most of us don't need to eat salt as a nutrient. there's
enough sodium in one dill pickle to run a human body for a year. there's enough natural
sodium in many types of vegetables to supply normal needs without using table salt.
perhaps athletes or other hard working people in the tropics eating deficient food
grown on leached-out depleted soils, people that sweat buckets day after day may
need a little extra sodium. perhaps. not having practiced in the humid tropics myself,
i have no definitive answer about this. 
unfortunately, the average american is entirely addicted
to salt and thinks food tastes lousy without it. to please the average consumer,
almost all prepared foods contain far too much salt for someone suffering from exhausted
adrenals. interestingly, canadians do not like their foods nearly as salty as americans,
and prepared foods like soups and the like in cans and packages that look just like
the ones in american supermarkets (though with french on the back panel) have to
be reformulated for our northern neighbors. i've observed that canadians are generally
healthier than americans in many respects.
we would all be far better off consuming no salt at all.
those with allergies or asthma should completely eliminate it for a month or two
and discover if that simple step doesn't pretty much cure them. the trouble is that
bakery bread is routinely two percent salt by weight. cheese is equally salted or
even more so. canned and frozen prepared food products are all heavily salted. restaurant
meals are always highly salted in the kitchen. if you want to avoid salt you almost
have to prepare everything yourself, bake your own bread, abstain from cheese (though
there are unsalted cheeses but even i don't like the flavor of these), and abstain
from restaurants. my family has managed to eliminate all salt from our own kitchen
except for that in cheese, and we eat cheese rather moderately.
sugar is a high-caloric non-food with enormous liabilities.
first, from the viewpoint of the universal formula for health, no form of non-artificial
sweetener carries enough nutrients with it to justify the number of calories it contains,
not even malt extract. white refined sugar contains absolutely no nutrients at all;
the "good" or "natural" sweets also carry so little nutrition
as to be next to useless. sweets are so far over on the bad end of the health = nutrition
/ calories scale that for this reason alone they should be avoided. 
however, healthy people can usually afford a small amount
of sin; why not make it sweets? in small quantity, sugars are probably the easiest
indiscretion to digest and the least damaging to the organ systems. although, speaking
of sin, as edgar guest, the peoples' poet, once so wisely quipped, (and my husband
agrees) "candy is dandy, but liquor is quicker." sugar is a powerful drug!
people who abuse sweets set up a cycle of addiction that can be very hard to break.
it starts when the body tries to regulate blood sugar. kicked up to high levels by
eating sugar, the pancreas releases insulin. but that is not the end of the chain
reaction. insulin regulates blood sugar levels but also raises brain levels of an
amino acid called tryptophan. tryptophan is the raw material the brain uses to manufacture
a neurotransmitter called serotonin. and serotonin plays a huge role in regulating
mood. higher brain levels of serotonin create a feeling of well-being. eating sugar
gives a person a chemical jolt of happiness. heavy hits of high-glycemic index starch
foods are also rapidly converted to sugar. so don't give your kids sweets! or huge
servings of starch to mellow them out. it is wise not to start out life a happiness
addict with a severe weight problem.
now that the chemistry of sugar addiction is understood,
there currently is a movement afoot to cast the obese as helpless victims of serotonin
imbalances and to "treat" them with the same kinds of serotonin-increasing
happy drugs (like prozac) that are becoming so popular with the psychiatric set.
this promises to be a multiple billion dollar business that will capture all the
money currently flowing into other dieting systems and bring it right back to the
ama/drug company/fda nexus. the pitch is that when serotonin levels are upped, the
desire to eat drops and so is weight. this approach is popular with the obese because
it requires no personal responsibility other than taking a pill that really does
make them feel happy. however, the same benefit can be had by strict adherence to
a low-fat, low-carbohydrate diet. eventually, the brain chemistry rebalances itself
and serotonin levels stabilize.
glycemic index
(compared to glucose, which is )
grains
fruits
vegetables
all bran
apples
baked beans
brown rice
bananas
beets
buckwheat
cherries
black-eyed peas
cornflakes
grapefruit
carrots
oatmeal
grapes
chic peas
shred. wheat
orange juice
parsnips
muesli
peach
potato chips
white rice
orange
baked potato
white spagetti
pear
sweet potato
whole wheat spagetti
plum
yams
sweet corn
raisins
peas
nuts
baked goods
sugars
peanuts
pastry
fructose
sponge cake
glucose
meats
white bread
honey
sausage
w/w bread
maltose
fish sticks
whole rye bread
sucrose
dairy products
yogurt
whole milk
skim milk
remember, the pancreas has another major service to perform
for the body: secreting digestive enzymes to aid in the digestion of proteins. when
the diet contains either too much protein or too much sugar and/or high-glycemic
index starch foods, the overworked pancreas begins to be less and less efficient
at maintaining both of these functions. 
sometimes a stressed-out pancreas gets overactive and does
too good a job lowering the blood sugar, producing hypoglycemia. hypoglycemia is
generally accompanied by unpleasant symptoms such as fatigue, dizziness, blurred
vision, irritability, confusion, headache, etc. this condition is typically alleviated
by yet another hit of sugar which builds an addiction not only to sugar, but to food
in general. if the hypoglycemic then keeps on eating sugar to relieve the symptoms
of sugar ingestion, eventually the pancreas becomes exhausted, producing an insulin
deficiency, called diabetes. medical doctors treat diabetes with insulin supplements
either oral or intramuscular plus a careful diet with very low and measured amounts
of sugar and starch for the remainder of the persons inevitably shortened and far
less pleasant life. however, sometimes diabetes can be controlled with diet alone,
though medical doctors have not had nearly as much success with this approach as
talented naturopaths. sometimes, long fasting can regenerate a pancreas. it is far
better to avoid creating this disease!
the dietary management of hypoglycemia requires that not
only refined but also unrefined sugars and starches with a high glycemic index be
removed from the diet. (the glycemic index measures the ease with which the starch
is converted into glucose in the body, and estimates the amount of insulin needed
to balance it out.) this means no sugar, no honey, no white flour, no whole grains
sweetened with honey, no sweet fruits such as watermelons, bananas, raisins, dates
or figs. potatoes are too readily converted into sugar. jerusalem artichokes are
a good substitute. 
people with hypoglycemia can often control their symptoms
with frequent small meals containing vegetable protein every two hours. when a non-sweet
fruit is eaten such as an apple, it should be eaten with some almonds or other nut
or seed that slows the absorption of fruit sugar. hypoglycemics can improve their
condition with vitamins and food supplements. see the next chapter.
allergies to foods and environmental irritants are frequently
triggered by low blood sugar. mental conditions are also triggered by low blood sugar
levels, frequently contributing to or causing a cycle of acting out behavior accompanied
by destruction of property and interpersonal violence, as well as psychosis and bouts
of depression. it is not possible to easily deal with the resulting behavior problems
unless the hypoglycemia is controlled. unfortunately most institutions such as mental
hospitals and jails serve large amounts of sugar and starch and usually caffeinated
beverages, with a high availability of soda pop, candy, and cigarettes at concessions.
if the diet were drastically improved, the drugs given to control behavior in mental
hospitals would be much more effective at a lower dose, or unnecessary.
the insulin-cycle overworked pancreas may eventually not
be able to secrete enough enzymes to allow for the efficient digestion of foods high
in protein. as stated earlier, poor protein digestion leads to a highly toxic condition
from putrefied protein in the intestines. this condition is alleviated by eliminating
animal proteins from the diet and taking digestive aids such as pancreatin pills
with meals to assist in the digestion of vegetable proteins.
food combining and "healthfood junkfood." 
this brings us to a topic i call healthfood junkfood. many
people improve their diet, eliminating meat and chemicalized food in favor of whole
grains and organically grown foods, but they then proceed to make these otherwise
good foods into virtual junkfood by preparing them incorrectly. in my travels, i've
noticed this same thing happens everywhere on earth. what should be health-producing
dietaries are ruined by frying, salting and sugaring. 
healthfood junkfoods include organically grown potato chips
deep fried in cold pressed organic unsaturated canola oil (made rancid by frying)
sprinkled with natural sea salt; organically grown oat and nut granola roasted with
cold-pressed unsaturated oil (made rancid by roasting) hideously sweetened with honey;
carrot cake made with rancid whole wheat flour, cold pressed unsaturated oil (made
rancid by baking), honey, and cream cheese (salted); whole wheat cookies (stale,
rancid flour) sweetened with honey, made with vegetable oil baked at high heat (rancid);
whole wheat pizza vegetarian style with lots of soy cheese; whole wheat pizza vegan
style with lots of real raw milk cheese; organically grown corn chips deep fried
in cold pressed vegetable oil with or without natural sea salt, yogurts made from
powdered milk without an active culture of beneficial bacteria and covered with highly
sugared fruits, etc. these foods may well represent an improvement over the average
american diet, but they still are not healthy foods, and should never be used in
a diet for a sick person. nor are they worthy of a person attempting to maximize
health. 
the problem with healthfood junkfoods is not their major
ingredients, but how they were combined and processed and adulterated. remember,
fats, animal or vegetable, subjected to high heat become indigestible and toxic and
make anything they're cooked with indigestible; salt is a toxic drug; cheese, hard
enough to digest as it is, when raised to high temperatures as it is when making
pizza, becomes virtually indigestible and cheese inevitably contains a lot of butterfat
which, though saturated animal fat, when raised to high temperatures, still becomes
slightly rancid. and all these foods represent indigestible combinations.
my clients almost never believe me when i first explain the
idea of food combining. they think if it goes in one end, comes out the other, and
they don't feel any unpleasant symptoms in between, then it was digested. but bad
food combinations have a cumulative degenerative effect over a long period of time.
when the symptoms arrive the victim never associates the food combination with the
symptom because it seems to them that they've always been eating the food.
mainstream nutritionists have brainwashed the public into
thinking that we should have a representative serving from each of the "four
basic food groups" at each and every meal, plus a beverage and a desert. or,
as my husband steve is fond of quipping, a "balanced meal" has four colors
on every plate: something red, something green, something white and something yellow.
but the balanced meal is a gastronomic catastrophe that can only be processed by
the very young with high digestive vitality, the exceptionally vital of any age,
people with cast iron stomachs which usually refers to their good heredity, and those
who are very physically active. 
few seem to realize that each type of food requires specific
and different digestive enzymes in the mouth, stomach, and intestine. carbohydrates,
fats, proteins--each requires differing acid or alkaline environments in order to
be digested. proteins require an acid environment. starch digestion requires an alkaline
environment. when foods in complex combinations are presented to the stomach all
together, like a meal with meat, potatoes, gravy, vegetables, bread, butter, a glass
of milk, plus a starchy sweet desert, followed by coffee or tea, the stomach, pancreas,
liver and small intestine are overwhelmed, resulting in the fermentation of the sugars
and starches, and the putrefaction of the proteins, and poor digestion of the whole.
it is little wonder that most people feel so tired after a large meal and need several
cups of strong coffee to be able to even get up from the table. they have just presented
their digestive tract with an immensely difficult and for some an impossible task.
for the most efficient digestion, the body should be presented
with one simple food at a time, the one bowl concept, easily achieved by adherence
to the old saying, "one food at a meal is the ideal." an example of this
approach would be eating fruits for breakfast, a plain cereal grain for lunch, and
vegetables for supper. if you can't eat quite that simply, then proper food combining
rules should be followed to minimize digestive difficulty, maximize the adsorption
of nutrients from your food, and reduce or eliminate the formation of toxemia, and
of course foul gas. 
in general, fruit should be eaten alone unless you happen
to be hypoglycemic or diabetic in which case fruit should be eaten with small quantities
of a vegetable protein such as nuts, or yogurt and/or cheese if able to digest dairy.
starches should be eaten with vegetables, which means that a well combined meal would
include a grain such as rice, millet, buckwheat, amaranth, quinoa, corn, wheat, rye,
oats, spelt, potatoes, or starchy winter squash combined with raw or cooked vegetables.
protein foods such as meat, eggs, beans, lentils, tofu, split peas, should be combined
with vegetables, raw or cooked. but protein should never be combined with starches.
the most popular north american snacks and meals always have a starch/protein combination,
for example: meat and potatoes, hamburger in a bun, hot dog with bun, burrito with
meat or cheese, meat sandwiches, etc. it is little wonder that intestinal gas is
accepted as normal, and that over time these hard to digest combinations eventually
cause health problems that demand attention.
another sure fire way to ruin any food, including the very
best available is to eat in the presence of negative emotions generated by yourself
or others. negative emotions include fear, anger, frustration, envy, resentment,
etc. the digestive tract is immediately responsive to stress and or negative thoughts.
it becomes paralyzed in negative emotional states; any foods eaten are poorly digested,
causing toxemia. 
it is natural for a person who has lost a loved one or suffered
a great loss of any kind to lose their appetite for a period of time. this reaction
is pro-survival, because while grieving, the body is griped by powerful negative
emotions. there are people who, under stress or when experiencing a loss, eat ravenously
in an attempt to comfort themselves. if this goes on for long the person can expect
to create a serious illness of some kind. 
individual sensitivity to this type of overeating is dependent
upon genetics and personality and who is generating the negative emotions. self generated
negative emotions are very difficult to avoid. if you are unable to change your own
emotional tone or that of others around you, then it is important to eat very lightly,
eat only easily digested foods such as raw fruits and vegetables, raw juices, steamed
vegetables, and small servings of whole grains, nuts and seeds.
diets to heal the critically ill 
a critically ill person is someone who could expire at any
moment; therapeutic interventions are racing against death. can the body repair itself
enough before some essential function ceases altogether? if there already exists
too much damage to vital organs the person will die. if there remains sufficient
organ function to support life, enough vital force to power those functions, and
a will to live, the body may heal itself if helped by the correct therapeutic approach.
but the therapy does not do the healing; the body does that by itself--if it can.
this reality is also true of allopathic medicine.
i believe fasting is the therapy that almost invariably gives
a critically ill person their very best chance of recovery. if a patient dies while
fasting they almost certainly would have died anyway, and if death comes while fasting,
it will be more comfortable, with less pain, and with more mental clarity.
critically ill people may have, among other things, any of
the following diagnoses: advanced cancer, advanced aids, heart failure, very high
blood pressure, kidney failure, advanced liver disease, advanced emphysema, pneumonia
or other catastrophic infections, especially those that seem unresponsive to antibiotics,
strokes, emboli, sclerotic vessels as found in arteriosclerosis, severe nerve degeneration
interfering with nerve transmission to vital organs.
treating the critically ill does not have to be an all or
nothing, ideological choice between holistic medicine and ama style medicine. it
is important for the critically ill and their families to know that if they use standard
medical treatment such as drugs or surgery, these measures can and should be combined
with natural healing methods. it is always desirable to quit all addicting substances,
start a whole foods diet, (as light as possible), and add meganutrition (supplements)
to the medical doctor's treatments. few medical doctors are so arrogantly partisan
as to assert that natural measures will do any harm as long as the md is still allowed
to prescribe as they please.
holistic support will not only lessen the side effects of
the medical treatments but will speed up healing and often reduce the required dose
of prescribed drugs. i have had several clients with cancer who chose to have surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy, but stayed on a raw food diet and took high doses of
supplements throughout the treatment. these people amazed the attending physician
by feeling good with little if any fatigue, no hair loss, or flu symptoms. the same
can be true of other conditions.
food in the order of digestive difficulty 
individual digestive weaknesses and allergies are not taken
into account in this list.
hard to digest: meat, fish, chicken, eggs (if cooked), all legumes including
	soy products, peanuts and peanut butter, beans, split peas, lentils, chick peas,
	dairy products such as cheese, milk, butter milk, nuts and seeds and their butters.
intermediate: all grains--quinoa, amaranth, millet, spelt, rye, wheat,
	oats, barley. 
fairly easy: brussels sprouts, green beans, green peas, broccoli, cauliflower,
	raw cultured milk products, asparagus, cabbage, sprouts especially bean sprouts,
	kale, other leafy greens. 
very easy: fruits, vegetable juices, fruit juices, broth (clear). 
no effort: herb tea, water.
ethyl always comes to my mind when i think of how much
healing power can still be left in a dying body. she (accompanied by her husband
for support) came to great oaks school with terminal cancer, heart failure, advanced
diabetes, extreme weakness, and complete inability to digest. any food ingested just
came back up immediately. ethyl had large tumors taking over the breast, sticking
out from her skull, and protruding from her body in general. the largest was the
one in the left breast which was the size of a big man's fist. 
she did have one crucial thing going for her, ethyl was a
feisty irish red head who still had a will to live, and a reason to do so. she and
her husband, who had just retired, had dreamed their whole life of touring the us
and canada in their own rv the minute he retired. the time had finally arrived but
ethyl was too ill to support her own weight (only  pounds) and to top it off was
blind from diabetic retinopathy. the doctors had done everything they could to her,
and now judged her too weak to withstand any more surgery (she had already had her
right breast removed). radiation or chemotherapy were also considered impossible
due to heart failure. they sent ethyl home to die, giving her a few days to a month
at most. 
any sensible hygienist trying to stay out of jail would have
refused to take on this type of case because it was a cancer case where death was
likely. treatment of this highly lucrative disease is considered the ama's exclusive
franchise, even when the medical doctors have given up after having done everything
to a body the family can pay for or owe for. whenever a person dies under the care
of any person who is not a licensed m.d. there must be an autopsy and a criminal
investigation in search of negligence. if the person dies under the care of an m.d.
the sheriff's assumption is that the doctor most assuredly did everything he could
and should have done and death was inevitable. by accepting ethyl i had a reasonable
likelihood of ending up in trouble; but being foolish, brave and (stupidly) feeling
relatively immune to such consequences (i was under  at the time), it seemed important
to try to help her. so, undaunted by the task, regardless of the outcome, i proceeded
logically, one step at a time. today, with more experience and a modest net worth
i wouldn't want to have to defend in a lawsuit, and at age . possessing no spare
five to ten years to give to the state to "pay" for my bravery, i would
probably refuse such a case. fortunately i have not been confronted with this problem
lately.
since ethyl was unable to digest anything given by mouth,
she was fed rectally with wheat grass juice implants three times a day. she was carried
to the colonic table for a daily colonic. wheat grass and clay poultices were applied
to her tumors three times a day. she received an acupressure massage and reflexology
treatments during the day, plus a lot of tender loving care. this program continued
for a month during which the tumors were being reabsorbed by the body, including
the large, extremely hard tumor sticking out the flesh of the right breast. 
ethyl complained of severe pain as the large tumor in her
breast shrank. while it had been getting larger and pressing ever harder on all the
nerves, she had little or no sensation, but as it shrank, the nerves were reactivated.
most people think that a growing tumor would cause more pain than a shrinking one.
often the opposite is true. pain can be a good sign that the body is winning, an
indicator to proceed. 
by the second month, ethyl, gradually gaining strength, was
able to take wheat grass and carrot juice orally, and gradually eased into raw foods,
mostly sprouts and leafy greens such as sunflower and buckwheat greens grown in trays.
she started to walk with assistance up and down the halls, no longer experiencing
the intense pain formerly caused by a failing heart, and most surprising of all,
her eyesight returned, at first seeing only outlines, and then details. 
the third month ethyl enlarged her food intake to include
raw foods as well as the carrot and wheat grass juice and sprouts, plus vitamin and
mineral supplements to help support her immune system and the healing process. all
the tumors had been reabsorbed by her body and were no longer visible, her heart
was able to support normal activity such as walking, and nonstrenuous household chores,
and her diabetes had corrected itself to the point that she no longer required insulin
and was able to control her blood sugar with diet. 
her husband was then instructed in her maintenance and they
went home to continue the program. the last i heard from them they had made two lengthy
trips around the us in their rv and were enjoying their retirement together after
all. 
my treatment worked because the most important factor in
the healing of the critically ill person is not give them more nourishment than their
body is able to process. the moment the digestive capacity of the sick person is
exceeded, the condition will be exacerbated and in a critically illness, the person
is likely to die. if the body still has sufficient organ integrity and vital force
to heal itself, it will do so only if given the least possible nourishment that will
support life--provided no essential organs are hopelessly damaged. if the liver and
kidneys are functional, and the person has done some previous dietary improvement
and/or cleansing, success is likely, especially if the person wants to live. 
a person in critical condition does not have time to ease
into fasting by first spending a month or two on a raw foods diet. this means that
the person who is taking care of the critically ill person must be experienced enough
to adjust the intensity of the body's healing efforts and accurately assess the ability
of the person to process toxic waste products clamoring for removal so the ailing
body is not drowned in it's own poisons. it is often necessary to use clear vegetable
broth, vegetable and wheat grass juices, and fruits juices, or whole sprouts to slow
down the cleansing gradient and sometimes, to resupply the tissue's exhausted nutritional
reserves.
i wish all cases of critical illness had such a positive
outcome as ethyl's, but unfortunately they don't. i had marge on the same program
at the same time. she also had cancerous tumors all over her body and had similarly
been sent home to die. in some ways marge's body was a more likely candidate for
survival than ethyl's. marge did not have heart failure or diabetes and was still
able on arrival to at least take small amount of water orally and walk to the bathroom.
put on a similar program, her tumors also shrunk and were reabsorbed and she too
went home. 
but marge did not really have a strong reason to live. although
her husband was by her side throughout the treatment program, marge was deeply upset
because she was estranged from one of her sons who she had not seen for over  years.
when she went home from great oaks, the son finally consented to see his mother,
went to the effort of trying to work things out with her, and finally confessed that
under it all he still loved her. 
at that point marge died in peace. she had accomplished the
last thing she wanted to take care of and her will to live did not extend beyond
that point. had she died several months earlier as predicted by the medical profession,
marge would have been unable to resolve this relationship. this was what marge's
life was pivoting on at the end. i was glad to assist her in doing what she needed
to do. her husband and other family members found it difficult to understand, and
they were hurt that marge did not wish to continue her life with them.
diet for the chronically ill. 
the chronically ill person has a long-term degenerative condition
that is not immediately life threatening. this condition usually causes more-or-less
continuous symptoms that are painful, perhaps unsightly, and ultimately will be disabling
or eventually capable of causing death. to qualify as "chronic" the symptoms
must have been present a minimum of six months, with no relief in sight. people with
these conditions have usually sought medical assistance, frequently have had surgery,
and have taken and probably are taking numerous prescription drugs.
some examples of chronic conditions are: arthritis, rheumatism,
diabetes, early onset of cancer and aids, asthma, colitis, diverticulitis, irritable
bowel syndrome, some mental disorders, arterial deposit diseases, most of the itises
(inflammations).
before fasting, the chronically ill often do have time to
prepare the way with limited dietary reform, and frequently begin to feel relief
quite quickly. before actually fasting they should limit their diet to raw foods
and eliminate all toxic foods like alcohol, coffee, tea, salt, sugar and recreational
drugs for two months if they have been following a typical american diet. 
if the chronically ill had been following a vegetarian diet,
perhaps a diet including with eggs and dairy, if they had been using no addicting
substances, then one month on raw foods is sufficient preparation for fasting. if
the person had water or juice fasted for at least a week or two within the last two
years, and followed a healthy diet since that time, one or two weeks on raw foods
should be a sufficient runway.
during preparation for a fast, i never recommend that a chronically
ill person quit taking prescription medicines because doing so can seriously disrupt
their homeostasis. however, if their symptoms lessen or vanish during the pre-fasting
clean up, the person might try tapering off medications.
the length and type of fast chosen to resolve a chronic illness
depends largely on available time, finances, availability of support people, work
responsibilities, and mental toughness. if you are one of those fortunate people
'rich' enough to give their health first priority, long water fasting is ideal. if
on the other hand you can't afford to stop working, have no one to take care of you
and assist with some household chores, and/or you are not mentally tough enough to
deal with self-denial, compromise is necessary. 
ideally the chronically ill person would fast for an extended
period under supervision until their symptoms were gone or greatly improved, with
a fall-back plan to repeat the whole process again in three to six months if necessary.
if you are not able to do that, the next best program is to fast for a short period,
like one or two weeks, with a plan to repeat the process as often as possible until
you are healed.
i have had clients with potentially life-threatening conditions
such as obesity with incipient heart failure, or who came to me with cancer, that
were unable to stop work for financial reasons, or who could not afford a residential
fasting program, or who felt confident in their own ability to deal with detoxification
in their own home. these people have fasted successfully at home, coming to see me
once a week. almost inevitably, successful at-home fasters had already done a lot
of research on self healing, believed in it, and had the personal discipline to carry
it out properly, including breaking the fast properly without overeating.
foods to heal chronic illness
sprouts
baby greens
salad
juices
fruit
alfalfa
sunflower
lettuce
beet
grapefruit
radish
buckwheat
celery
celery
lemon
bean
zucchini
zucchini
lime
lime
clover
kale
kale
orange
orange
fenugreek
endive
radish
parsley
apple
wheat
tomato
tomato
raspberries
cabbage
cabbage
cabbage
blueberries
carrot
carrot
grapes
spinach
apple
peaches
parsley
grapefruit
apricots
sweet pepper
lemon
strawberry
fruits should be watery and lower in sugar. some examples
of poor fruit choices would be pineapple, ripe mango, bananas, dates, raisins, figs.
fruits should not be combined with vegetables.
vegetables should not be starchy, packed-full of energy.
poor vegetable choices would be potato, parsnip, turnip, corn, sweet potato, yam,
beet, winter squash. sprouts and baby greens are vegetables and may be included in
salads.
juices should not be extremely sweet. apple, orange, beet
and carrot juice should be diluted with % water. fruit juices should not be mixed
with vegetable juices or with vegetables at the same meal.
salads should include no fruit. salad dressings should be
lemon or lime juice, very small quantities of olive oil, and herbs. no salt, soy
sauce nor black pepper. cayenne can be okay for some. 
i have also helped chronically ill people that were not mentally
prepared to water fast, but were able to face the long-term self-control and deprivation
of a raw food cleansing diet that included careful food combining. these people also
regained their health, but it took them a year at minimum, and once well they had
to remain on a diet tailor-made to their digestive capacity for the rest of their
life, usually along with food supplements.
jim was such a case. he was  years old, very obese, had
dangerously high blood pressure poorly controlled with medication, and was going
into congestive heart failure. he was on digitalis and several other heart medications
plus diuretics, but in no way was his condition under control. he had severe edema
in the feet and legs with pitting, and fluid retention in the abdominal region caused
a huge paunch that was solid to the touch not soft and squishy like fatty tissue.
jim had dreamed of having his own homestead with an organic
garden, now he had these things but was too sick to enjoy them or work in his garden
without severe heart pain and shortness of breath. jim had retired early in order
to enjoy many years without the stresses of work, and he was alarmed to realize that
he was unlikely to survive a year. 
the day jim came to see me the first time i would have classified
his condition as critically ill because his life was in immediate danger; but he
responded so quickly to his detox program that he was very soon out of danger and
would be more accurately described as a chronically ill person. jim was not prepared
to water fast. he was attached to having his food and he was aware that at his extreme
weight he was going to have stay on a dietary program for a long, long time. he also
wanted to choose a gradient that he could manage by himself at home with little assistance
from his wife. he had been on a typical american diet with meat, coffee, etc., so
that in spite of his dangerous condition it did not seem wise to me to add the heavy
eliminatory burden of a water fast to a body that was already overwhelmed with fluids
and waste products. 
jim immediately went on a raw food cleansing diet, with no
concentrated foods like nuts, seeds, or avocados, and with one day each week fasting
on vegetable juice and broth. he did enemas daily even though it wasn't his favorite
thing. in one month he had lost  pounds, his eyes had started to sparkle, and his
complexion was rosy. the swelling had disappeared from his feet and legs, and he
had to buy new pants. 
starting the second month he gradually withdrew from prescription
medications. from the beginning i had put jim on a program of nutritional supplements
including protomorphogens (see chapter on vitamins and food supplements) to help
the body repair it's heart and the kidneys. in only four months he had returned his
body to glowing health, and looked great for his age, though he was still overweight.
at the end of one year he had returned to a normal weight for his height, and only
cheated on the diet a couple of times when attending a social event, and then it
was only a baked potato with no dressing. 
he was probably going to have many qualitative years working
his garden and living out his dreams. the local intensive care ward lost a lot of
money when they failed to get jim.
diet for the acutely ill
the acutely ill person experiences occasional attacks of
distressing symptoms, usually after indiscretions in living or emotional upsets.
they have a cold, or a flu, or sinusitis, or a first bout of pneumonia, or a spring
allergy attack. the intense symptoms knock them flat and force them to bed for a
few days or a week. if they are sick more often than that, they are moving toward
the chronically ill category. 
people who are acutely ill should stop eating to whatever
extent that they are able until the symptoms are gone. during an acute illness, the
appetites is probably pretty dull anyway, so why not give a brief fast on water or
fruit juice a try. 
most acute conditions are short in duration, usually not
lasting more than a week. allergy attacks, some types of flu, and a first bout of
pneumonia may well last for three weeks or a month. the general rule is to eat as
little as possible until the symptoms have passed, self-administer colon cleansing,
even if you have a horror of such things, and take vitamin supplements, including
megadoses of vitamin c, bioflavinoids, and zinc. (see the chapter on vitamins.) those
having a little experience with natural medicine make teas of echinacea, fenugreek
seeds and red clover and quit eating. eating as little as possible can mean only
water and herb teas, only vegetable broth, only vegetable juice or non-sweet fruit
juice, even only cleansing raw foods. if you eat more than this you have not relieved
your system of enough digestive effort. 
after your symptoms are gone it is very important to change
your life-style and improve your diet so that you aren't so toxic and don't have
to experience an acute illness several times a year when your body is forced to try
an energetic detox. 
diet for a healthy person
i doubt that it is possible to be totally healthy in the
twentieth century. doctors alsleben and shute in their book how to survive the new
health catastrophes state that in-depth laboratory testing of the population at large
demonstrated four universally present pathological conditions: heavy metal poisoning,
arteriosclerosis, sub-clinical infections, and vitamin/mineral deficiencies. those
of us who consider ourselves healthy, including young people, are not really healthy,
and at the very least would benefit from nutritional supplementation. in fact the
odds against most people receiving adequate vitamin and mineral nutrition without
supplements are very poor as demonstrated by the following chart.
problem nutrients in america
nutrient
percent receiving less than the rda
magnesium
calcium
iron
vitamin a
a genuinely healthy person almost never becomes acutely ill,
and does not have any disturbing or distracting symptoms; nothing interferes with
or handicaps their daily life or work. a healthy person has good energy most of the
time, a positive state of mind, restful sleep, good digestion and elimination. 
healthy people do not have to live simon-pure lives to remain
that way. healthy people can afford % dietary indiscretions by calorie count--eating
or drinking those things that they know are not good for them but that are fun to
eat or are "recreational foods or beverages." such "sinning"
could mean a restaurant bash twice a month, having a pizza, french bread, beer or
wine in moderation, ice cream, cookies, cake, turkey for festive occasions, etc.
the key concept of responsible sinning is keeping within that ten percent limit.
a diet for a healthy person that wants to remain healthy
should not exceed the digestive capacity of the individual, either in terms of quantity
or quality. all foods that can not be efficiently digested should be removed from
the regular diet and relegated to the "sin" category, including those you
are allergic to and those for which you have inadequate digestive enzymes. i have
encountered very few people that can efficiently digest cooked meat, chicken, or
fish, but some can, and some can with the assistance of digestive enzyme supplements.
in order to digest meats, the stomach must be sufficiently acid, there must be enough
pepsin, pancreatin, and bile, etc., and the meat should be eaten on the extremely
rare side (not pork), in small quantities (not more than five or six ounces), and
not combined with anything except nonstarchy vegetables. if you must include meat
in your dietary, it should represent a very small percentage of your total caloric
intake, be eaten infrequently, with the bulk of the calories coming from complex
carbohydrates such grains, legumes and nuts, as well as large quantities of vegetables
and fruits. 
the healthy person that wants to stay that way for many,
years is advised to fast one day a week, to give the organs of elimination a chance
to catch up on their internal housecleaning. if water fasting seems impossible, try
a day of juicing it; if that is too rigorous, try a day on raw foods. a similar technique,
though less beneficial than even a one day each week on raw foods, is delaying breaking
your overnight fast for as long as possible each day. try giving up breakfast altogether
or postponing breaking your overnight fast, because from the time you stop eating
at the end of one day to the time you start eating the next is actually a brief,
detoxifying fast. 
eggs, milk, cheese and yogurt can be assimilated by some
healthy people with or without digestive aids. it is possible to take lactase to
break down the milk sugars for example; sometimes aids such as hydrochloric acid,
pepsin, and pancreatin help. if you can buy it or are willing to make it raw milk
yogurt containing lactobacillus bulgaris or acidophilus may be digested more readily,
especially if it prepared from healthy cows or goats fed on unsprayed food, and served
very fresh. eggs should come from chickens that run around outside, eating weeds,
and scratching bugs. the yokes of those eggs will be intense orange, not yellow.
few people these days have ever eaten a real egg. surprisingly, for those of you
who fear cholesterol, the healthy way to eat eggs is use just the raw yolk from fertile
eggs. it is enjoyed by many people in a smoothie--fresh fruit blended up with water
or milk. eggs contain lecithin, a nutrient that naturally prevents the body from
forming harmful fatty deposits in the arteries.
sea weeds are a wonderful source of minerals and should be
eaten in soups and salads. other invaluable fortifying foods are algae of all kinds
(such as chlorella and spirulina), lecithin, brewers yeast, and fresh bakers yeast.
many people have had very unpleasant experiences trying to eat living bakers yeast
and so use brewers yeast instead. but brewers yeast is cooked and the proteins it
contains are not nearly as assimilable as those in raw yeast. raw yeast is so powerful,
it feels like pep pills! 
it takes a special technique to eat raw yeast because in
the stomach and intestines the yeast does the job it is supposed to do: convert sugars
into alcohol and carbon dioxide gas. the entire digestive tract then bloats with
gas and the person will feel very uncomfortable for some time. however, raw yeast
is a marvelous source of b vitamins and proteins and can make someone feel very energetic--if
they know how to use it. the secret is to eat live yeast very first thing in the
morning on an empty stomach and then, not eat anything at all for about two hours,
giving the stomach acids and enzymes time to kill the yeasts and digest them before
adding sugars from another meal. some like to eat yeast in fresh cake form, buying
it from a bakery. others prefer dry granular baker's yeast blended with water into
a sort of "shake." this is not a bad place to put your raw egg yoke either.
if you need it sweetened to drink it, use an artificial or herbal sweetener like
nutrisweet or stevia. live yeast cannot consume milk sugars very well. so if you
can handle dairy, try one or two tablespoons of granulated live yeast, an egg yoke
and a little raw milk or yogurt, well whizzed.
wheat germ is also a great, rich food, but is usually rancid
unless it is taken out of the refrigerated display; unless it is refrigerated, in
a dated package and fresh, don't eat it. herb teas and roasted grain beverages are
healthy beverages, along with mineral and distilled water avoiding where possible
chlorinated and fluoridated water.
diet is not enough
those isolated, long-lived peoples discovered by weston a.
price had to do hard physical labor to eat, had to walk briskly up and down steep
terrain to get anywhere. but today, few north americans output very much physical
energy in process of daily life or work. not only cars, but all of our modern conveniences
make it possible to live without ever breaking into a sweat. we pay for this ease;
it costs us a significant degree of health. 
exercise has many benefits when combined with excellent nutrition.
it creates an overall feeling of well-being that can not be created by diet alone.
exercising temporarily makes the heart beat faster, increasing blood circulation
throughout the body right out to the tips of your fingers and toes. this short-term
elevated flow of blood flow brings increased supplies of oxygen and nutrients to
all parts of the body, facilitating healing and repair. without revving up your engine
every day many of the body's systems never get the sludge burned out of them and
never perform optimally. 
exercise also changes the metabolic rate so your body burns
more calories--not only while you are exercising, but also for a  hour period following
exercise. this maintains a healthful body weight into old age, or helps to lose weight.
most people find that exercise in moderation does not increase appetite, so that
it is possible to consistently burn more calories in a day, and gradually reduce
weight if that is desirable. it is necessary to burn , calories to lose a pound
of weight. most forms of exercise allow you to burn  to  calories per hour
at a moderate pace which would be achieved by doubling the resting pulse. without
even considering the weight-loss benefit of achieving a raised metabolism, an hour
of daily exercise continued for a week or two dependent upon the type of exercise
and pace should lead to one pound of weight loss if the caloric intake is held constant.
the flip side of having a higher metabolism is rarely appreciated
but is extremely important. recall the basic equation of health: health = nutrition
/ calories. exercise permits a person to eat somewhat more while not gaining weight.
if the food is nutrient rich, the body has a chance to extract more vitamins, more
minerals, more amino acids. the person who remains slender by rigidly reducing their
food intake to near starvation levels may lack vital, health-building nutrition.
and only exercise moves lymphatic fluid. the blood is pumped
through the body by the heart, but the lymphatic system, lacking a heart, requires
muscular contractions to move from the extremities of the body to the central cavity.
the lymphatic system picks up cellular waste products and conducts these toxins to
disposal. frequently, people with rheumatic aches and pains or other generalized
muscular discomforts physicians like to give latin diagnostic names to can give up
taking pain pills if they will but begin exercising regularly. only when they begin
moving their lymph can they begin to detoxify properly.
there is another benefit from exercise which is not to be
ignored, and that is that it gives the person a chemical sense of well being. it
actually will help to emotionally boost up people who are chronically depressed and
make them smile. after a good workout, especially one done outside, everything seems
brighter, more positive; whatever was bothering you somehow just doesn't seem like
that big of a deal now. i am not making pro-exercise propaganda. this is not a figment
of the imagination. an exercising body really does make antidepressant neurochemicals
called endorphins, but only after about  minutes to an hour of aerobic workout.
endorphins are powerful, with painkilling and euphoric effects
equal to or greater than heroin, but without any undesirable side effects. if chemists
could learn to cheaply synthesize endorphins i'm sure that millions of people would
want to become addicted to them. because i make such a point of getting in my workout
every day, my husband has accused me of being an endorphin junkie, and he is right!
i admit it, i'm really hooked on the feeling of well being i consistently get from
any sustained exercise. i defend my addiction staunchly because it is the healthiest
addiction i know of. 
i have also been accused of carrying exercise to extremes,
and i admit to that also. for a few years i trained for ironman triathlons. i now
think doing ironman distances is immoderate and except for a few remarkable individuals
with "iron" constitutions, training that hard can only lead to a form of
exhaustion that is not health promoting. i have become much more sensible in my "old"
age, and in recent years have limited my participation to the olympic distance triathlons.
i was on the canadian team at the world championship in , and intend to do it
again in . i do not find the olympic distance exhausting, in fact i think it
is great fun and truly exhilarating. i get to see all these wonderful age group competitors
from all over the world who look and feel fantastic. it does my soul good to see
a group of people aging so gracefully, not buying into the popular notion that old
age is inevitably disabling, depressing, and ugly. sport brings a degree of balance
to my life after spending so much time in the presence of the sick. i plan to maintain
my athletic activities into old age, barring accident or other unforeseen obstacles
to fitness.
to maintain basic fitness it does not matter so much what
form of exercise is chosen, as long as it is not damaging to the skeletal system
or connective tissues. many people are unable to run due to foot, knee, hip, or back
problems, but almost everyone can walk. walking outside is better than inside on
a treadmill, and walking hills is better than walking on flat ground. exercise machines
such as stationary bikes, cross country ski machines, and stair steppers work well
for a lot of people who live in the city, especially in the winter, or for those
who hate exercise. whatever you choose to do, it is important to at least double
the resting pulse for  minutes no less than four days a week. this is the absolute
minimum required to maintain the health and function of the cardiovascular-pulmonary
system. if your resting pulse is , you must walk, jog, ski, bike, swim or what
have you, fast enough to keep the pulse at  beats per minute for at least  minutes.
i have a strong preference to exercising outside in isolated
places where there is only me and the forest, or only me and the river. running along
logging roads in the hilly back country, or swimming in the green unpolluted water
of a forest river is a spiritual experience for me. it is a time to meditate, to
commune with nature, and to clear my mind and create new solutions. the repetitive
action of running or walking or swimming, along with the regular deep breathing in
clean air, with no distractions except what nature provides is truly health promoting.
sharing these activities with friends or family can also be great fun and some of
the best in social interactions. it is one of my favorite ways of visiting with people.
i don't expect other people to be as enthusiastic about exercise as i am, but i do
hope that everyone will make an effort to be minimally fit as an ongoing part of
their health program into old age.
diet for a long, long life
some people not only want to be healthy, but they want to
live in good health long past the normal life span projected by statistical tables
for homo sapiens. dr. roy walford, a well-respected medical research gerontologist
who has been actively studying longevity for many years, is one of those. he has
scientifically demonstrated with accepted studies that a qualitative life span up
to at least  years of age is reasonably attainable by the average person if they
start working on it no later than about  years of age, though earlier is much better.
walford's principles of extending life are very simple. all
you have to do is restrict your caloric intake to about , per day, and water
fast two days a week. or alternatively, reduce your caloric intake to , per day
and fast only one day a week on water. and make sure that every single bit of food
you do eat is packed with nutrition, every single calorie, without exception. you
continue this program for the rest of your life along with moderate daily exercise
and high but reasonable dosages of vitamins, minerals, and also take a few exotic
food supplements. the supplement program is not particularly expensive nor extreme,
walford's supplement program is more moderate than the life extension program i recommend
for all middle-aged and older people. the best foods for this type of program is
a largely raw food diet (%) with a predominance of sprouts and baby greens, some
cooked vegetables, and raw nuts and seeds. and make sure you get  minutes of cardiovascular
exercise every other day.
while dr. walford's focus is on caloric reduction while maintaining
sufficient nutrition, most other life extensionists focus on increasing the nutrition
side of the equation for health without bothering to reduce caloric intake. this
approach is much easier because essentially, it involves gobbling nutritional supplements
by the handfuls without requiring self-discipline, though it can get quite expensive.
i'll have more to say about this approach in the next chapter, which is about vitamins.
in this book i can't explain all the aspects of prolongation
of life through conscious life-style choice. those who are interested are referred
to the bibliography. 
chapter six 
vitamins and other food supplements
from the hygienic dictionary
vitamins. [] the staple foods may not contain the
same nutritive substances as in former times. . . . chemical fertilizers, by increasing
the abundance of the crops without replacing all the exhausted elements of the soil,
may have indirectly contributed to change the nutritive value of cereal grains and
of vegetables. . . . hygienists have not paid sufficient attention to the genesis
of diseases. their studies of conditions of life and diet, and of their effects on
the physiological and mental state of modern man are superficial, incomplete, and
of too short duration. they have, thus, contributed to the weakening of our body
and our soul. alexis carrel, man the unknown.
i have already explained the hygienist's view of why people
get sick. the sequence of causation goes: enervation, toxemia, alternative elimination,
disease. however, there is one more link in this chain, a precursor to enervation
that, for good and understandable reasons, seemed unknown to the earlier hygienists.
that precursor is long term sub-clinical malnutrition. lack of nutrition effects
virtually everybody today. almost all of us are overfed but undernourished.
i have already explained that one particular head of broccoli
does not necessarily equal another head of broccoli; the nutritional composition
of apparently identical foods can be highly variable. not only do different samples
of the same type of food differ wildly in protein content, amino acid ratios and
mineral content, their vitamin and vitamin-like substances also vary according to
soil fertility and the variety grown. 
these days, food crop varieties are bred for yield and other
commercial considerations, such as shipability, storage life, and ease of processing.
in pre-industrial times when each family propagated its own unique open-pollinated
varieties, a natural selection process for healthy outcomes prevailed. if the family's
particular, unique varieties carried genes for highly nutritious food, and if the
family's land was fertile enough to allow those genes to manifest, and if the family
kept up its land's fertility by wise management, their children tended to survive
the gauntlet of childhood illness and lived to propagate the family's varieties and
continue the family name. thus, over time, human food cultivars were selected for
their nutritional content. 
but not any longer! these days, farming technology with its
focus on bulk yield and profit, degrades the nutritional content of our entire food
supply. even commercial organically grown food is no better in this respect.
sub-clinical, life-long, vitamin and mineral deficiencies
contribute to the onset of disease; the malnourished body becomes increasingly enervated,
beginning the process of disease. vitamin supplements can increase the body's vital
force, reversing to a degree the natural tendency towards degeneration. in fact,
some medical gerontologists theorize that by using vitamins it might be possible
to restore human life span to its genetically programmed  years without doing
anything else about increasing nutrition from our degraded foods or paying much attention
to dietary indiscretions. knowing what i do about toxemia's effects i doubt vitamins
can allow us to totally ignore what we eat, though supplements can certainly help.
more than degraded nutritional content of food prompts a
thinking person to use food supplements. our bodies and spirits are constantly assaulted
and insulted by modern life in ways our genetics never intended us to deal with.
today the entire environment is mildly toxic. air is polluted; water is polluted;
our food supply contains traces of highly poisonous artificial molecules that our
bodies have no natural ability to process and eliminate. our cities and work places
are full of loud, shocking noises that trigger frequent adrenaline rushes and other
stress adaptations. our work places are full of psychological stresses that humans
never had to deal with before. 
historically, humans who were not enslaved have been in control
of determining their own hour to hour, day to day activities, living on their own
largely self-sufficient farms. the idea of working for another, at regular hours,
without personal liberty, ignoring or suppressing one's own agenda and inclinations
over an entire lifetime is quite new and not at all healthy. it takes continual subconscious
applications of mental and psychic energies to protect ourselves against the stresses
of modern life, energies that we don't know we're expending. this is also highly
enervating. thus to remain healthy we may need nutrition at levels far higher than
might be possible through eating food; even ideal food might not contain enough vitamins
to sustain us against the strains and stresses of this century.
and think about dr. pottenger's cats. our bodies are at the
poorer end of a century-long process of mass degeneration that started with white
flour from the roller mill. compared to my older clients i have noticed that my younger
patients seem to possess less vital force on the average, show evidence of poorer
skeletal development, have poorer teeth, less energy, have far more difficulty breeding
and coping with their family life, and are far more likely to develop degenerative
conditions early. most of my younger patients had a poor start because they were
raised on highly refined, devitalized, deficient foods, and grew up without much
exercise. their parents had somewhat better food. some of their grandparents may
have even grown up on raw milk and a vegetable garden, and actually had to walk,
not owning cars when they were young. their great grandparents had a high likelihood
of enjoying decent nutrition and a healthful life-style. 
unfortunately, most of my patients like the idea of taking
vitamins too much for their own good. the ama medical model has conditioned people
to swallow something for every little discomfort, and taking a pill is also by far
the easiest thing to do because a pill requires no life-style changes, nor self-discipline,
nor personal responsibility. but vitamins are much more frugal than drugs. compared
to prescriptions, even the most exotic life extension supplements are much less expensive.
i am saddened when my clients tell me they can't afford supplements. when their md
prescribes a medicine that costs many times more they never have trouble finding
the money. 
i am also saddened that people are so willing to take supplements,
because i can usually do a lot more to genuinely help their bodies heal with dietary
modification and detoxification. of all the tools at my disposal that help people
heal, last in the race comes supplements.
one of the best aspects of using vitamins as though they
were healing agents is that food supplements almost never have harmful side effects,
even when they are taken in what might seem enormous overdoses. if someone with a
health condition reads or hears about some vitamin being curative, goes out and buys
some and takes it, they will at very least have followed the basic principle of good
medicine: first of all do no harm. at worst, if the supplements did nothing for them
at all, they are practicing the same kind of benevolent medicine that dr. jennings
did almost two centuries ago. not only that, but having done something to treat their
symptoms, they have become patients facilitating their own patience, giving their
body a chance to correct its problem. they well may get better, but not because of
the action of the particular vitamin they took. or, luckily, the vitamin or vitamins
they take may have been just what was needed, raising their body's vital force and
accelerating the body's ability to solve its problem.
one reason vitamin therapies frequently do not work as well
as they might is that, having been intimidated by ama propaganda that has created
largely false fears in the public mind about harmful effects of vitamin overdoses,
the person may not take enough of the right vitamin. the minimum daily requirements
of vitamins and minerals as outlined in nutrition texts are only sufficient to prevent
the most obvious forms of deficiency diseases. if a person takes supplements at or
near the minimum daily requirement (the dose recommended by the fda as being 'generally
recognized as safe') they should not expect to see any therapeutic effect unless
they have scurvy, beri beri, rickets, goiter, or pellagra.
in these days of vitamin-fortified bread and iodized salt,
and even vitamin c fortified soft drinks, you almost never see the kind of life-threatening
deficiency states people first learned to recognize, such as scurvy. sailors on long
sea voyages used to develop a debilitating form of vitamin c deficiency that could
kill. scurvy could be quickly cured by as little as one lime a day. for this reason
the british government legislated the carrying of limes on long voyages and today
that is why british sailors are still called limeys. a lime has less than  milligrams
of vitamin c. but to make a cold clear up faster with vitamin c a mere  mg does
absolutely nothing! to begin to dent an infection with vitamin c takes , milligrams
a day, and to make a life threatening infection like pneumonia go away faster might
require , to , milligrams of vitamin c daily, administered intravenously.
in terms of supplying that much c with limes, that's  to  of them daily--clearly
impossible.
similarly, pellagra can be cured with a few milligrams of
vitamin b, but schizophrenia can sometimes be cured with , milligrams,
roughly a thousand times as much as the mdr.
there are many many common diseases that the medical profession
does not see as being caused by vitamin deficiencies. senility and many mental disorders
fall in this category. many old people live on extremely deficient diets comprised
largely of devitalized starches, sugars, and fats, partly because many do not have
good enough teeth to chew vegetables and other high roughage foods, and they do not
have the energy it takes to prepare more nourishing foods. virtually all old people
have deficiency diseases. as vital force inevitably declines with age, the quantity
and quality of digestive enzymes decreases, then the ability to breakdown and extract
soluble nutrients from food is diminished, frequently leading to serious deficiencies.
these deficiencies are inevitably misdiagnosed as disease and as aging.
suppose a body needs  milligrams a day of niacin to not
develop pellagra, but to be fully healthy, needs  milligrams daily. if that body
receives  milligrams per day from a vitamin pill, to the medical doctor it could
not possibly be deficient in this vitamin. however, over time, the insidious sub-clinical
deficiency may degrade some other system and produce a different disease, such as
colitis. but the medical doctor sees no relationship. let me give you an actual example.
medical researchers studying vitamin b or pantothenic acid noticed that it
could, in what seemed to be megadoses (compared to the minimum daily requirement)
largely reverse certain degenerative effects of aging. these researchers were measuring
endurance in rats as it decreased through the aging process. how they made this measurement
may appear to some readers to be heartless, but the best way to gauge the endurance
of a rat is to toss it into a five gallon bucket of cold water and see how long it
swims before it drowns. under these conditions, the researcher can be absolutely
confident that the rat does its very best to stay alive.
young healthy rats can swim for  minutes in  fahrenheit
water before drowning. old rats can only last about  minutes. and old rats swim
differently, less efficiently, with their lower bodies more or less vertical, sort
of dog paddling. but when old rats were fed pantothenic acid at a very high dose
for a few weeks before the test, they swam  minutes too. and swam more efficiently,
like the young rats did. more interestingly, their coats changed color (the gray
went away) and improved in texture; they began to appear like young rats. and the
rats on megadoses of b lived lot longer-- to  percent longer than rats
not on large doses of b. does that mean "megadoses" of b
have an unknown drug-like effect? or does that mean the real nutritional requirement
for b is a lot higher than most people think? i believe the second choice
is correct. to give you an idea of how much b the old rats were given in human
terms, the fda says the minimum daily requirement for b is about  milligrams
but if humans took as much b as the rats, they would take about  milligrams
per day. incidentally, i figure i am as worthy as any lab rat and take over  milligrams
daily.
my point is that there is a big difference between preventing
a gross vitamin deficiency disease, and using vitamins to create optimum functioning.
any sick person or anyone with a health complaint needs to improve their overall
functioning in any way that won't be harmful over the long term. vitamin therapy
can be an amazingly effective adjunct to dietary reform and detoxification. 
some of the earlier natural hygienists were opposed to using
vitamins. however, these doctors lived in an era when the food supply was better,
when mass human degeneration had not proceeded as far as it has today. from their
perspective, it was possible to obtain all the nutrition one needed from food. in
our time this is unlikely unless a person knowingly and intelligently produces virtually
all their own food on a highly fertile soil body whose fertility is maintained and
adjusted with a conscious intent to maximize the nutritive content of the food. unfortunately,
ignorance of the degraded nature of industrial food seems to extend to otherwise
admirable natural healing methods such as macrobiotics and homeopathy because these
disciplines also downplay any need for food supplementation. 
vitamins for young persons and children
young healthy people from weaning through their thirties
should also take nutritional supplements even though young people usually feel so
good that they find it impossible to conceive that anything could harm them or that
they ever could become seriously sick or actually die. i know this is true because
i remember my own youth and besides, why else would young people so glibly ride motorcycles
or, after only a few months of brainwashing, charge up a hill into the barrel of
a machine gun. or have unsafe sex in this age of multiple venereal diseases. until
they get a little sense, vitamin supplements help to counteract their inevitable
and unpreventable use of recreational foods. vitamins are the cheapest long life
and health insurance plan now available. parents are generally very surprised at
the thought that even their children need nutritional supplements; very few healthy
children receive them. a few are given extra vitamin c when acutely ill, when they
have colds or communicable diseases such as chicken pox.
young people require a low dose supplement compared to those
of us middle-aged or older, but it should be a broad formula with the full range
of vitamins and minerals. some of the best products i have found over  years of
research and experimentation with young people are douglas cooper's "basic formula"
(low dose and excellent for children) and "super t formula" (double the
dose of basic formula, therefore better for adolescents and young adults), also from
douglas cooper company; bronson's "vitamin and mineral formula for active men
and women" and bronson's "insurance formula." "vitamin  plus;"
and "formula " from now natural foods are also good and less costly. 
healthy very small children who will swallow pills can take
these same products at half the recommended dose. if they won't swallow pills the
pills can be blended into a fruit smoothie or finely crushed and then stirred into
apple sauce. there are also "children's chewable multi-vitamins + iron"
(- years old) from douglas cooper that contains no minerals except iron, bronson's
"chewable vitamins" (make sure it is the one for small children, bronson
makes several types of chewables) and a liquid vitamin product from bronson called
multivitamin drops for infants . these will be a little more costly than cutting
pills in half.
there is also an extraordinarily high quality multivitamin/mineral
formula for children called "children's formula life extension mix" from
prolongevity, ltd. (the life extension foundation), it is in tablet form, and slightly
more expensive.
i hope that my book will be around for several generations.
the businesses whose vitamin products i recommend will not likely exist in twenty
years. even sooner than that the product names and details of the formulations will
almost certainly be altered. so, for future readers discovering this book in a library
or dusty shelve of a used book store, if i, at my current level of understanding,
were manufacturing a childrens and young adults vitamin formula myself, this is what
it would contain. any commercial formulation within  percent of these figures plus
or minus would probably be fine as long as the vitamins in the pills were of high
quality.
vitamin c
 mg
 mg
vitamin e
 iu
 mg
vitamin a
 iu
b- niacinamide
 mg
vitamin d
 iu
 mg
magnesium
 mg
 mg
calcium
 mg
 mcg
selenium
 mcg
chromium
 mcg
manganese
 mcg
biotin
 mg
zinc
 mg
iodine (as kelp)
 mg
 mg
bioflavinoids
 mg
vitamins for an older healthy person
someone who is beyond  to  years of age should still
feel good almost all of the time. that is how life should be. but enjoying well-being
does not mean that no dietary supplementation is called for. the onset of middle
age is the appropriate time to begin working on continuing to feel well for as long
as possible. just like a car, if you take very good care of it from the beginning,
it is likely to run smoothly for many years into the future. if on the other hand
you drive it hard and fast with a lot of deferred maintenance you will probably have
to trade it in on a new one after a very few years. most people in their s and
older who are struggling with many uncomfortable symptoms and low energy lament,
'if i'd only known i was going to live so long i would have taken better care of
myself.' but at that point it is too late for the old donkey; time for a trade in.
gerontologists refer to combating the aging process as "squaring
the curve." we arrive at the peak of our physical function at about age eighteen.
how high that peak level is depends on a person's genetic endowment, the quality
of the start they received through their mother's nutritional reserves, and the quality
of their childhood nutrition and life experience. from that peak our function begins
to drop. the rate of drop is not uniform, but is a cascade where each bit of deterioration
creates more deterioration, accelerating the rate of deterioration. if various aging
experiences were graphed, they would make curves like those on the chart on this
page.
because deterioration starts out so slowly, people usually
do not begin to notice there has been any decline until they reach their late s.
a few fortunate ones don't notice it until their s. a few (usually) dishonest ones
claim no losses into their s but they are almost inevitably lying, either to you
or to themselves, or both. though it might be wisest to begin combating the aging
process at age , practically speaking, no one is going to start spending substantial
money on food supplements until they actually notice significant lost function. for
non-athletes this point usually comes when function has dropped to about  percent
of what it was in our youth. if they're lucky what people usually notice with the
beginnings of middle age is an increasing inability for their bodies to tolerate
insults such as a night on the town or a big meal. or they may begin to get colds
that just won't seem to go away. or they may begin coming home after work so tired
that they can hardly stay awake and begin falling asleep in their lazy boy recliner
in front of the tv even before prime time. if they're not so lucky they'll begin
suffering the initial twinges of a non-life-threatening chronic condition like arthritis.
the thinnest line demonstrates the worst possible life from
a purely physical point of view, where a person started out life with significantly
lowered function, lost quite a bit more and then hung on to life for many years without
the mercy of death.
if one can postpone the deterioration of aging, they extend
and hopefully square the curve (retard loss of function until later and then have
the loss occur more rapidly). someone whose lifetime function resembled a "square
curve"(the thickest, topmost line) would experience little or no deterioration
until the very end and then would lose function precipitously. at this point we do
not know how to eliminate the deterioration but we do know how to slow it down, living
longer and feeling better, at least to a point close to the very end.
vitamin supplements can actually slow or even to a degree,
reverse, the aging process. however, to accomplish that task, they have to be taken
in amounts far greater than so-called minimum daily requirements, using vitamins
as though they were drugs, a therapeutic approach to changing body chemistry profiles
and making them resemble a younger body. for example, research gerontologists like
walford reason that if pantothenic acid (vitamin b, in fairly substantial
(but quite safe) doses can extend the life and improve the function of old rats,
there is every indication that it will do a similar job on humans. medical researchers
and research gerontologists have noticed that many other vitamin and vitamin-like
substances have similar effects on laboratory animals. 
some will object that what helps rats and mice is in no way
proven to cause the same result on humans. i agree. proven with full scientific rigor,
no. in fact, at present, the contention is unprovable. demonstrable as having a high
likelihood's of being so, yes! so likely so as to be almost incontrovertible, yes!
but provable to the most open-minded, scientific sort--probably not for a long time.
however, the life extension foundation is working hard to find some quantifiable
method of gauging the aging process in humans without waiting for the inarguable
indicator, death. once this is accomplished and solidly recognized, probably no rational
person will be able to doubt that human life span can be increased.
experiments work far better with short-lived laboratory animals
for another reason; we can not control the food and supplement intakes of humans
as we can with caged mice. in fact, there are special types of laboratory mice that
have been bred to have uniformly short life spans, especially to accelerate this
kind of research. with mice we can state accurately that compared to a control group,
feeding such and such a dose of such and such a supplement extended the life-span
or functional performance by such and such a percent. 
a lot of these very same medical gerontologists nourish their
own bodies as thoroughly as the laboratory animals they are studying, taking broad
mixes of food supplements at doses proportional to those that extend the life spans
of their research animals. this approach to using supplementation is at the other
end of the scale compared to using supplements to prevent gross deficiencies. in
the life extension approach, vitamins and vitamin-like substances are used as a therapy
against the aging process itself. 
will it work? well, some of these human guinea pigs have
been on heavy vitamin supplementation for over thirty years (as of ) and none
seem to be suffering any damage. will they live longer? it is impossible to say with
full scientific rigor? to know if life extension works, we would have to first determine
"live longer than what?" after all, we don't know how long any person might
have lived without life extending vitamin supplements. though it can't be "proven,"
it makes perfect sense to me to spend far less money on an intensive life extension
vitamin program than i would certainly lose as a result of age-related sickness.
besides, i've already observed from personal use and from
results in my clinical practice that life extension vitamin programs do work. whether
i and my clients will ultimately live longer or not, the people who i have put on
these programs, including myself and my husband, usually report that for several
years after starting they find themselves feeling progressively younger, gradually
returning to an overall state of greater well-being they knew five or ten or fifteen
years ago. they have more energy, feel clearer mentally, have fewer unwanted somatic
symptoms. 
sometimes the improvements seem rather miraculous. after
a few months on the program one ninety year old man, an independent-minded oregonian
farmer, reported that he began awakening with an erection every morning; unfortunately,
his  year old cranky and somewhat estranged wife, who would not take vitamins,
did not appreciate this youthfulness. a few months later (he had a small farm) he
planted a holly orchard. most of you won't appreciate what this means without a bit
of explanation, but in oregon, holly is grown as a high-priced and highly profitable
ornamental for the clusters of leaves and berries. but a slow-growing holly orchard
takes  years to began making a profit! 
a few older clients of mine reported that they noticed nothing
from the life extension program, but these are unique people who have developed the
ability to dominate their bodies with their minds and routinely pay their bodies
absolutely no attention, driving them relentlessly to do their will. usually they
use their energies to accomplish good, christian works. eventually, these dedicated
and high-toned people break down and die like everyone else. will they do so later
on life extending vitamins than they would have otherwise? i couldn't know because
i can't know how long they might have lived without supplementation and since they
refuse to admit the vitamins do them any good, they won't pay for them.
many on life extension programs experience a reverse aging
process for awhile. however, after the full benefit of the supplementation has worked
itself through their body chemistry, they again begin to experience the aging process.
i believe the process will then be slowed by their vitamins compared to what it would
have been without supplements. but i can't prove it. maybe we will have some idea
if the program worked  to  years from now.
at this time i know of only two companies that make top quality
life extension vitamin supplement formulas. one is prolongevity (life extension foundation),
the other, vitamin research products. i prefer to support what i view as the altruistic
motives behind prolongevity and buy my products from them. unfortunately, these vitamin
compounders can not put every possibly beneficial substance in a single bottle of
tablets. the main reason they do not is fear of the power-grabbing food and drug
administration. this agency is threatening constantly to remove certain of the most
useful life-extending substances from the vitamin trade and make them the exclusive
property of prescription-writing medical doctors. so far, public pressure has been
mobilized against the fda every time action was threatened and has not permitted
this. if some product were included in a mix and that product were prohibited, the
entire mixed, bottled and labeled batch that remained unsold at that time would be
wasted, at enormous cost. 
were i manufacturing my own life extension supplement i would
include the following. by the way, to get this all in one day, it is necessary to
take  to  large tablets daily, usually spread throughout the day, taken a few
at a time with each meal. if you compare my suggested formulation to another one,
keep in mind that variations of  percent one way or another won't make a significant
difference, and adding other beneficial substances to my recommendations probably
is only helpful. however, i would not want to eliminate anything in the list below,
it is the minimum:
beta-carotene
, iu
selenium
 mcg
vitamin a
, iu
taurine
 mg
 mg
cyctine
 mg
 mg
gluthaianone
 mg
b- niacinamid
 mg
choline
 mg
 mg
inositol
 mg
 mg
flavanoids
 mg
 mcg
zinc
 mg
 mg
chromium
 mcg
folic acid
 mcg
molybdenum
 mg
biotin
 mcg
manganese
 mg
vitamin c
,mg
iodine (as kelp)
 mg
vitamin e
 iu
co-enzyme q-
 mg
magnesium
, mg
 mg
potassium
 mg
ginko biloba
 mg
calcium
, mg
vitamin d-
 iu
please also keep in mind that there are many other useful
substances not listed above. for example, every day i have a "green drink,"
an herbal preparation containing numerous tonic substances like ginseng and also
various forms of algae and chlorophyll extracts. my green drink makes my body feel
very peppy all day, so it certainly enhances my life and may extend it. it costs
about $, a month to enjoy that. i also use various pure amino acids at times.
phenylalyanine will make me get more aggressive whenever i am feeling a little lackluster;
this nutrient has also been used as an effective therapy against depression. melatonin
taken at bedtime really does help me get to sleep and may have remarkable life-extending
properties. other amino acids help my body manufacture growth hormones and i use
them from the time i begin training seriously in spring through the end of the summer
triathlon competition season. pearson and shaw's book (see bibliography) is a good
starting point to begin learning about this remarkably useful subject. 
the future of life extension
i beg the readers indulgence for a bit of futurology about
what things may look like if the life extension movement continues to develop. 
right now, a full vitamin and vitamin-like substance life
extension program costs between $ and $ dollars per month. however, pharmaceutical
researchers occasionally notice that drugs meant to treat and cure diseases, when
tested on lab animals for safety, make these animals live quite a bit longer and
function better. though the fda doesn't allow any word of this to be printed in official
prescribing data, the word does get around to other researchers, to gerontologists
and eventually to that part of the public that is eagerly looking for longer life.
today there are numerous people who routinely take prescription medicines meant to
cure a disease they do not have and plan to take those medicines for the rest of
their long, long life. 
these drugs being patented, the tariff gets a lot steeper
compared to taking vitamins. (since they are naturally-occurring substances, vitamins
can't be patented and therefore, aren't big-profit items. perhaps that's one reason
the fda is so covertly opposed to vitamins.) right now it would be quite possible
to spend many hundred dollars per month on a life extension program that included
most of these potentially beneficent prescription drugs. 
as more of life-extending substances are discovered, the
cost of participating in a maximally effective life extension program will escalate.
however, those who can afford chemically enhanced functioning will enjoy certain
side-benefits. their productive, enjoyable life spans may measure well over a century,
perhaps approaching two centuries or more. some of these substances greatly improve
intelligence so they will become brighter and have faster reaction times. with more
time to accumulate more wisdom and experience than "short livers" these
folks will become wiser, too. they will have more time to compound their investment
assets and thus will become far more wealthy. they will become an obvious and recognizable
aristocracy. this new upper class will immediately recognize each other on the street
because they will look entirely different than the short-lived poorer folk and will
probably run the political economic system.
and this new aristocratic society i see coming may be far
more pleasant than the one dominated by the oligarchy we now have covertly running
things. for with greater age and experience does really come greater wisdom. i have
long felt that the biggest problem with earth is that we did not live long enough.
as george bernard shaw quipped when he was  (he lived to ), "here i am,
 years old, just getting out of my adolescence and getting some sense, and my body
is falling apart as fast as it can." 
vitamin program for the sick
no matter which way you look at it or how well insured you
may be against it, being sick is expensive (not to mention what it does to one's
quality of life), and by far the best thing to do is to prevent it from happening
in the first place. however, most people do not do anything about their health until
forced to by some painful condition. if you are already sick there are a number of
supplements you can take which have the potential to shorten the duration and severity
of the illness, and hopefully prevent a recurrence. 
the sicker you are, the more supplements you will require;
as health is regained, the dosage and variety of substances can be reduced. in chronic
illness, megadoses of many nutrients are usually beneficial. any sick adult should
begin a life extension vitamin program unless they are highly allergic to so many
things already that they can not tolerate many kinds of vitamins as well. in addition
to the life extension program, vitamin c should be taken by the chronically ill at
a dose from  to  grams daily, depending on the severity of the condition.
many people want to know whether or not they should take
their regular food supplements during a fast. on a water fast most supplements in
a hard tablet form will not be broken down at all, and often can be seen floating
by in the colonic viewing tube looking exactly like it did when you swallowed it.
this waste can be avoided by crushing or chewing (yuck) the tablets, before swallowing.
encapsulated vitamins usually are absorbed, but if you want to make sure, open the
capsule and dump it in the back of your mouth before swallowing with water. powdered
vitamins are well absorbed. 
on a water fast the body is much more sensitive to any substance
introduced, so as a general rule it is not a good idea to take more than one half
your regular dose of food supplements. most fasters do fine without any supplements.
many people get an upset stomach from supplements on an empty stomach, and these
people should not take any during a water fast unless they develop symptoms of mineral
deficiencies (usually a pre-existing condition) such as leg cramps and tremors, these
symptoms necessitate powdered or well-chewed-up mineral supplement. minerals don't
taste too bad to chew, just chalky. 
the same suggestions regarding dosage of supplements for
a water fast are also true for a juice fast or vegetable broth fast. on a raw food
cleansing diet the full dose of supplements should be taken with meals.
there exists an enormous body of data about vitamins; books
and magazine articles are always touting some new product or explaining the uses
of an old one. if you want to know more about using ordinary vitamins you'll find
leads in the bibliography to guide your reading. however, there is one "old"
vitamin and a few newer and relatively unknown life extending substances that are
so useful and important to handling illness that i would like to tell you more about
them.
vitamin c is not a newly discovered vitamin, but was
one of the first ever identified. if you are one of those people that just hate taking
vitamins, and you were for some reason willing to take only one, vitamin c would
be your best choice. vitamin c would be the clear winner because it helps enormously
with any infection and in invaluable in tissue healing and rebuilding collagen. if
i was going on a long trip and didn't want to pack a lot of weight, my first choice
would be to insure three to six grams of vitamin c for daily use when i was healthy
(i'd take the optimum dose--ten grams a day--if weight were no limitation). i'd also
carry enough extra c to really beef up my intake when dealing with an unexpected
acute illness or accident. 
when traveling to far away places, exposed to a whole new
batch of organisms, frequently having difficulty finding healthy foods, going through
time zones, losing nights of sleep, it is easy to become enervated enough to catch
a local cold or flu. if i have brought lots of extra vitamin c with me i know that
my immune system will be able to conquer just about anything--as long as i also stop
eating and can take an enema. i also like to have vitamin c as a part of my first
aid kit because if i experience a laceration, a sprain, broken bone, or a burn, i
can increase my internal intake as well as apply it liberally directly on the damaged
skin surface. vitamin c can be put directly in the eye in a dilute solution with
distilled water for infections and injuries, in the ear for ear infections, and in
the nose for sinus infections. if you are using the acid form of c (ascorbic acid)
and it smarts too much, make a more dilute solution, or switch to the alkaline form
of c (calcium ascorbate) which can be used as a much more concentrated solution without
a stinging sensation. applied directly on the skin c in solution makes a very effective
substitute for sun screen. it doesn't filter out ultraviolet, it beefs up the skin
to better deal with the insult.
i believe vitamin c can deal with a raging infection such
as pneumonia as well or better than antibiotics. but to do that, c is going to have
to be administered at the maximum dose the body can process. this is easily discoverable
by a 'bowel tolerance test' which basically means you keep taking two or three grams
of c each hour, (preferably in the powdered, most rapidly assimilable form) until
you get a runny stool (the trots). the loose stool happens when there is so much
c entering the small intestine that it is not all absorbed, but is instead, passed
through to the large intestine. at that point cut back just enough that the stool
is only a little loose, not runny. at this dose, your blood stream will be as saturated
by vitamin c as you can achieve by oral ingestion. 
it can make an important difference which type of vitamin
c is taken because many people are unable to tolerate the acid form of c beyond 
or  grams a day, but they can achieve a therapeutic dose without discomfort with
the alkaline (buffered) vitamin c products such as calcium ascorbate, sodium ascorbate,
or magnesium-potassium ascorbates. 
vitamin c also speeds up the healing of internal tissues
and damaged connective tissue. damaged internal tissues might include stomach ulcers
(use the alkaline form of vitamin c only), bladder and kidney infections (acid form
usually best), arthritic disorders with damage to joints and connective tissue (alkaline
form usually best). sports injuries heal up a lot faster with a therapeutic dose
of vitamin c. as medicine, vitamin c should be taken at the rate of one or two grams
every two hours (depending on the severity of the condition), spaced out to avoid
unnecessary losses in the urine which happens if it were taken ten grams at a time.
if you regularly use the acid form of vitamin c powder, which is the cheapest, be
sure to use a straw and dissolve it in water or juice so that the acid does not dissolve
the enamel on your teeth over time.
and this is as good a point as any to mention that just like
broccoli is not broccoli, a vitamin is not necessarily a vitamin. vitamins are made
by chemical and pharmaceutical companies. to make this confusion even more interesting,
the business names that appear on vitamin bottles are not the real manufacturers.
bronson's pharmaceuticals is a distributor and marketer, not a manufacturer. the
same is true of every vitamin company i know of. these companies buy bulk product
by the barrel or sack; then encapsulate, blend and roll pills, bottle and label,
advertise and make profit. the point of all this is that some actual vitamin manufacturers
produce very high quality products and others shortcut. vitamin distributors must
make ethical (or unethical) choices about their suppliers. 
it is beyond the scope of this book to be a manual for going
into the vitamin business. however, there are big differences in how effective vitamins
with the same chemical name are and the differences hinge on who actually brewed
them up. 
for example, there are at least two quality levels of vitamin
c on the market right now. the pharmaceutical grade is made by roche or basf. another
form, it could be called "the bargain barrel brew," is made in china. top
quality vitamin c is quite a bit more costly; as i write this, the price differential
is about  percent between the cheap stuff and the best. this can make a big difference
in bottle price and profit. most of the discount retail vitamin companies use the
chinese product. 
there's more than a price difference. the vitamin c from
china contains measurable levels of lead, cadmium, mercury, iron and other toxic
metals. the fda allows this slightly contaminated product to be sold in the us because
the recommended daily allowance for vitamin c is a mere  milligrams per day. taken
at that level, the toxic metals would, as the fda sees it, do no harm. however, many
users of vitamin c take  - times the rda. the cheap form of c would expose
them to potentially toxic levels of heavy metal poisons. the highly refined top-quality
product removes impurities to a virtually undetectable level. 
i buy my c from bronson who ethically gives me the quality
stuff. i know for a fact that the vitamin c sold by prolongevity is also top quality.
i've had clients who bought cheaper c than bronson's and discovered it was not quite
like bronson's in appearance or taste. more importantly, it did not seem to have
the same therapeutic effect. 
the distributors i've mentioned so far, bronson, now, cooper,
prolongevity and vitamin research products are all knowledgeable about differences
between actual manufacturers and are ethical, buying and reselling only high quality
products. other distributors i believe to be reputable include twin labs, schiff
and plus. i know there are many other distributors with high ethic levels but i can
not evaluate all their product lines. and as i've mentioned earlier, businesses come
and go rather quickly, but i hope my book will be read for decades. i do know that
i would be very reluctant to buy my vitamins at a discount department store or supermarket;
when experimenting with new suppliers i have at times been severely disappointed.
co-enzyme q-. this substance is normally manufactured
in the human body and is also found in minuscule amounts in almost every cell on
earth. for that reason it is also called "ubiquinone." but this vitamin
has been only recently discovered, so as i write this book co-enzyme q- is not
widely known. 
q- is essential to the functioning of the mitochondria,
that part of the cell that produces energy. with less q- in heart cells, for example,
the heart has less energy and pumps less. the same is true of the immune system cells,
the liver cells, every cell. as we age the body is able to make less and less q-,
contributing to the loss of energy frequently experienced with age, as well as the
diminished effectiveness of the immune system, and a shortened life span. 
q- was first used for its ability to revitalize heart cells.
it was a prescription medicine in japan. but unlike other drugs used to stimulate
the heart, at any reasonable dose q- has no harmful side effects. it also tends
to give people the extra pick up they are trying to get out of a cup of coffee. but
q- does so by improving the function of every cell in the body, not by whipping
exhausted adrenals like caffeine does. q- is becoming very popular with athletes
who measure their overall cellular output against known standards.
besides acting as a general tonic, when fed to lab animals,
co-enzyme q- makes them live  to  percent longer!
dmae is another extremely valuable vitamin-like substance
that is not widely known. it is a basic building material that the body uses to make
acetylcholine, the most generalized neurotransmitter in the body. small quantities
of dmae are found in fish, but the body usually makes it in a multi-stage synthesis
that starts with the amino acid choline, arrives at dmae at about step number three
and ends up finally with acetylcholine.
the body's nerves are wrapped in fatty tissue that should
be saturated with acetylcholine. every time a nerve impulse is transmitted from one
nerve cell to the next, a molecule of acetylcholine is consumed. thus acetylcholine
has to be constantly replaced. as the body ages, levels of acetylcholine surrounding
the nerves drop and in consequence, the nerves begin to deteriorate. dmae is rapidly
and easily converted into acetylcholine and helps maintain acetylcholine levels in
older people at a youthful level.
when laboratory rats are fed dmae they solve mazes more rapidly,
remember better, live about  percent longer than rats not fed dmae and most interestingly,
when autopsied, their nervous systems resemble those of a young rat, without any
evidence of the usual deterioration of aging. human nervous systems also deteriorate
with age, especially those of people suffering from senility. it is highly probable
that dmae will do the same thing to us. dmae also smoothes out mood swings in humans
and seems to help my husband, steve, when he has a big writing project. he can keep
working without getting 'writers block', fogged out, or rollercoastering.
dmae is a little hard to find. prolongevity and vrp sell
it in powder form. since the fda doesn't know any mdr and since the product is not
capped up, the bottle of powder sagely states that one-quarter teaspoonful contains
 milligrams. get the hint? dmae tastes a little like sour salt and one-quarter
teaspoonful dissolves readily in water every morning before breakfast, or anytime
for that matter. dmae is also very inexpensive considering what it does. a year's
supply costs about $.
lecithin is a highly tonic and inexpensive food supplement
that is underutilized by many people even though it is easily obtainable in healthfood
stores. it is an emulsifier, breaking fats down into small separate particles, keeping
blood cholesterol emulsified to prevent arterial deposits. taken persistently, lecithin
partially and slowly eliminates existing cholesterol deposits from the circulatory
system. 
in our cholesterol-frightened society lecithin should be
a far more popular supplement than it currently is. it is easy to take either as
a food in the granular form or when encapsulated. lecithin granules have very little
flavor and can be added to a home-made vinegar and oil salad dressing, where they
emulsify the oil and make it blend with the vinegar, thickening the mixture and causing
it to stick to the salad better. lecithin can also be put in a fruits smoothie. a
scant tablespoon a day is sufficient. try to buy the kind of lecithin that has the
highest phosphatidyl choline content because this substance is the second benefit
of taking lecithin. phosphatidyl choline is another precursor used by the body to
build acetylcholine and helps maintain the nervous system.
algae. spirulina or sun dried chlorella are also great
food supplements. both make many people feel energized, pepped-up. it is possible
to fast on either product and still maintain sufficient energy levels to take of
minimal work responsibilities. algae reduces appetite and as a dietary supplement
can assist in weight loss. it contains large amounts of highly-assimilable protein
due to it's high chlorophyll content, as well as a large amount of beta carotene.
it also assists in detoxification of the lymphatic system. it can be purchased as
tablets or powder. take a heaping teaspoon daily, or at least six tablets.
chapter seven 
the analysis of disease states: 
helping the body recover
from the hygienic dictionary
diagnosis. [] in the united states, making a diagnosis
implies that you are a doctor duly licensed to engage in diagnostic function. . .
. the making of a diagnosis is reserved only for doctors. . . . the term "analysis"
does not have such an explicit legal definition. thus, it is the term of choice of
iridologists and the one most often used by them. it is essential for the survival
and promotion of iridology that those who choose to engage in its practice avoid
naming any disease condition. as we have seen, to do so is to infringe on rights
reserved exclusively for doctors and can land the iridologist, sooner or later, in
a snarl of legal troubles. 
it is better for the iridologist to
refrain from suggesting to a person that he has any particular disease, letting such
diagnostics remain the province of licensed doctors. in so doing, the iridologist
will avoid transgressing the law and stepping on the toes of those who are legally
qualified to diagnose. 
it is indeed unfortunate that one of
the greatest pitfalls awaiting the iridologist is the temptation to name diseases.
the feelings of satisfaction and power resulting from conferring a name are deeply
rooted in the human psyche. for example, the bible tells us that man's first task
on earth was to name the animals, thus giving him power and dominion over them. 
strong is the temptation to name diseases
because nearly everyone has come to expect that his malady has a name. patients have
come to expect, and doctors have been trained to make, a diagnosis. . . . "after
all," the patient may reason, "how can you hope to deal with my condition
if you aren't knowledgeable enough to call it by name?" 
it is not necessary to name diseases
in order to exercise dominion over them. dr. bernard jensen, visions of health.
in self defense, i must make it very clear from the first
word that hygienists and most other naturopaths of various persuasions, and especially
i myself, have never in the past, never!, and do not now, diagnose, treat or offer
to cure, disease or illness. diagnosis and curing are sole, exclusive privileges
of certified, duly-licensed medical doctors and may only be done with a grant of
authority to do so from the state. should an unlicensed person diagnose, offer to
treat or attempt to cure disease or illness, they will have committed a felonious
act. with big penalties. therefore, i do not do it. 
when one of my clients comes to me and says that a medical
doctor says they have some disease or other, i agree that the medical doctor says
they have some disease or other, and i never dare say that they don't. or even confirm
on my own authority that i think they do have some disease or other.
what i can legally do for a client is to analyze the state
of their body and its organs, looking for weaknesses and apparent allergies. i can
lawfully state that i think their liver tests weak, the pancreas appears not to be
functioning well in terms of handling meat digestion, that the kidney is having a
hard time of it. i can say i see a lump sticking out of their body when one is obviously
sticking out of their body; i can not say that lump is cancerous but i can state
that the cells in that lump test overly strong and that if i myself had a mass of
growing cells testing overly strong and if i believed in the standard medical model,
then i would be rushing my overly strong testing cells to an oncologist. but i don't
dare say the person has a cancer. or diabetes. or is getting close to kidney failure.
that is a diagnosis.
to me, diagnosis is a form of magic rite in which the physician
discovers the secret name of the devil that is inhabiting one's body and then, knowing
that secret name, performs the correct rite and ritual to cast that demon out. i
don't know why people are made so happy knowing the name of their condition! does
it really matter? either the body can heal the condition or it can't. if it can,
you will recover (especially if you give the body a little help). if the body can't
heal a condition you will die or live a long time being miserable. no "scientific"
medical magic can do better than that.
by describing a disease in terms of its related organ weaknesses,
instead of pinning a latin name on it, i am able to assist the body to achieve recovery
in a superior way that the physician rarely does. by discovering that the body with
the lump of overly strong cells also has a weak spleen, liver and thymus gland, i
can take actions to strengthen the spleen, liver and thymus. if the body can strengthen
its spleen, liver and thymus, then the overly strong cells miraculously vanish. but
of course i and what i did did not cure any disease. any improvements that happen
i assign (correctly) to the body's own healing power. 
the way i analyze the organic integrity of the body is through
a number of related methods, including the general appearance of the body, the patient's
health history, various clues such as body and breath odor, skin color and tone,
and especially, biokinesiology, the applied science of muscle testing. biokinesiology
can be used to test the strength or weakness of specific organs and their function.
a weak latissimus dorsi muscle indicates a weak pancreas, for example. specific acupuncture
points can be tested in conjunction with muscle strength to indicate the condition
of specific organs or glands. the strength of the arm's resistance to downward pressure
could be calibrated with a spring scale and precisely gauged, but experienced practitioners
have no need for this bother, because they are able to pick up subtle changes in
the arms resistance that are not apparent to the teste. thus muscle testing
becomes an art form, and becomes as effective as the person using it is sensitive
and aware. 
biokinesiology works because every organ and gland in the
body is interconnected with other parts of the body through nerve pathways and nerve
transmissions, which are electrical and can be measured through muscle testing. this
may seem too esoteric for the "scientific" among you, but acupuncture points
and energy manifestations around and in the body--are now accepted phenomena, their
reality demonstrated by special kinds of photography. acupuncturists, who heal by
manipulating the body's energy field with metal needles, are now widely accepted
in the western hemisphere. kinesiology utilizes the same acupuncture points (and
some others too) for analytic purposes so it is sometimes called "contact reflex
analysis."
i have studied and used kinesiology for  years with the
majority of my clients with very good success. there are some few people who are
very difficult to test because they are either too debilitated, lack electrical conductivity,
or their state of mind is so skeptical and negative about this type of approach that
they put up an impenetrable mental barrier and/or hold their body so rigidly that
i can hardly determine a response. a skilled can overcome the obstacle of a weak
body that can barely respond, but the person who is mentally opposed and determined
to prove you wrong should not be tested. if you proceed it is sure to have an unsatisfactory
outcome for all concerned. for even if i manage to accurately analyze the condition
of a skeptical client, they will never believe the analysis and will not follow suggestions.
the "scientific," open-minded, "reasonable"
client can be better approached using an academic-like discussion based on published
literature that demonstrates how people with similar symptoms and complaints do very
well on a particular dietary regimen and supplements. this type of person will sometimes
follow dietary recommendations to the last letter, because their scientific background
has trained them to be obedient.
when a client comes to me, i like to take a real good look
at who is sitting in front of me. i take my leisure to find out all about their history,
their complaints, their motivation to change, their experience with natural healing,
their level of personal responsibility, whether or not they have to work, whether
or not they can take time out to heal, will they fast or take supplements, do they
have sufficient finances to carry a program through to a successful completion, do
they have people closely connected to them that are strongly opposed to alternative
approaches, can they withstand some discomfort and self-denial, do they have toxic
relationships with other people that are contributing to their condition, are they
willing to read and educate themselves in greater depth about natural healing, etc.
i need to know the answers to these questions in order to help them choose a program
which is most likely to succeed. 
even though fasting is the most effective method i know of,
it is not for people who are compelled to keep up a work schedule, nor is it for
people who are very ill and do not have anyone to assist them and supervise them.
nor is it for people who do not understand fasting and are afraid of it. people who
have associates that are opposed to it, and people who do not have a strongly-functioning
liver or kidneys should not fast either. seriously ill people that have been on a
meat-heavy diet with lots of addicting substances need a long runway into a fast
so as to not overwhelm their organs of elimination. does the person in front of me
have an eating disorder, or an otherwise suicidal approach to fasting, etc. clearly
fasting is not for everyone, and if i recommend it to the wrong person, the result
will be a bad reputation for a marvelous tool. 
given that many clients can not fast without a lot of preparation,
the majority of my clients start out with a gentle detox program that takes considerably
more time, but works. these gradients have been outlined under the healing programs
for the chronically ill, acutely ill, etc.
to help rebuild poorly functioning organs, i sometimes use
a specialized group of food supplements called protomorphogens. these are not readily
available to the general public and perhaps should not be casually purchasable like
vitamins, because, as with many prescription drugs, supervision is usually necessary
for their successful use. if the fda ever succeeds at making protomorphogens unavailable
to me, i could still have very good results. (at this time the canadian authorities
do not allow importation of protomorphogens for resale, though individuals can usually
clear small shipments through canada customs if for their own personal use.) but
protomorphogens do facilitate healing and sometimes permit healing to occur at a
lower gradient of handling. without them a body might have to fast to heal, with
the aid of protomorphogens a person might be able to get better without fasting.
and if protomorphogens are used (chewed up--ugh!) while fasting, healing is accelerated.
protomorphogens are made from freeze-dried, organically-raised
animal organ meats (usually calf or lamb) combined with very specific vitamins, herbs
and other co-factors to potentiate the effect. i view protomorphogens as containing
nutritional supplementation specific for the rebuilding of the damaged organ.
doctor royal lee, a medical genius who developed protomorphogens
therapy in the s and who spent several stints in prison in exchange for his benevolence
and concern for human well-being, also founded the company that has supplied me with
protomorphogens. after decades of official persecution and denial of the efficacy
of protomorphogens by the power structure, it looks like they are about to finally
have their day. as i write this book cutting-edge medical research companies are
developing therapies using concentrated animal proteins (protomorphogens) to treat
arthritis, multiple sclerosis, eye inflamations and juvenile diabetes. the researchers
talk as though they are highly praiseworthy for "discovering" this approach.
unfortunately, this development is likely to cut two ways.
on one hand, it vindicates dr. lee; on the other, when these drug companies find
a way to patent their materials, they may finally succeed at forcing protomorphogens
(currently quite inexpensive) off the non-prescription market and into the restricted
and profitable province of the md.
i divide clients into two basic types: simple cases and complex
ones. when i was treating mental illness, occasionally i had a client who had not
been sick for too long. i could usually make this client well quite easily. but if
the person had already become institutionalized, had been psychotic for many years,
had received much prior treatment, then their case had been made much more difficult.
this sort had a poor prognosis. a very similar situation exists with physical illnesses.
many people get sick only because they lack information about how to keep themselves
healthy and about what made them sick. once they find out the truth, they take my
medicine without complaint and almost inevitably get better very rapidly. some of
these people can be quite ill when they first come to me but usually they have not
been sick for very long. their intention when coming into my office is very positive
and have no counter intentions to getting better. there are no spiritual or psychological
reasons that they deserve to be sick. if this person had not found me, they almost
certainly would have found some other practitioner who would have made them well.
this type of person honestly feels they are entitled to wellness. and they are.
however, some of the sick are not sick for lack of life-style
information; they suffer from a mental/spiritual malady as well, one that inevitably
preceded their illness by many years. in fact, their physical ailments are merely
reflections of underlying problems. this patient's life is usually a snarl of upsets,
problems, and guilty secrets. their key relationships are usually vicious or unhealthy.
their level of interpersonal honesty may be poor. there are usually many things about
their lives they do not confront and so, can not change. with this type of case,
all the physical healing in the world will not make them permanently better because
the mental and emotional stresses they live under serve as a constant source of enervation.
cases like this usually do not have only one thing wrong
with them. they almost always have been sick for a long time; most have been what
i call "doctor hoppers," confused by contrary diagnoses and conflicting
md opinions. when i get a case like this i know from the first that healing is going
to be a long process, and a dubious one at that. on the physical level, their body
will only repair one aspect of their multiple illnesses at a time. simultaneously,
they must be urged to confront their life on a gentle gradient. there is usually
a lot of backsliding and rollercoastering. the detoxification process, physical and
psychological, can take several years and must happen on all the levels of their
life. this kind of case sees only gradual improvement interspersed with periods of
worsening that indicate there remains yet another level of mental unawareness that
has to be unraveled. 
few medical doctors or holistic therapists really understand
or can help this kind of case. to do so, the doctor has to be in touch with their
own reactive mind and their own negative, evil impulses (which virtually all humans
have). few people, including therapists, are willing to be aware of their own dark
side. but when we deny it in ourselves, we must pretend it doesn't exist in others,
and become its victim instead of conquering it. anyone who denies that they have
or are influenced by their own darker aspects who seem to be totally sweet and light,
is lying; proof of this is that they still are here on earth.
all this generalizing about diagnostic methods and clinical
approaches could go on for chapters and more chapters, and writing them would be
fine if i were teaching a group of health clinicians that were reading this book
to become better practitioners. but i'm sure most of my readers are far more interested
in some complaint of their own or in the health problem of a loved one, and are intensely
interested in one might go about handling various conditions and complaints, what
types of organ weaknesses are typically associated with them, and what approaches
i usually recommend to encourage healing. and, most importantly, what kind of success
or lack of it have i had over the past twenty five years, encouraging the healing
of various conditions with hygienic methods.
in the case studies that follow i will mostly report the
simpler, easier-to-fix problems because that is what most people have; still, many
of these involve life-threatening or quality-of-life-destroying illnesses. i will
tell the success story of one very complicated, long-suffering case that involved
multiple levels of psychological and spiritual handling as well as considerable physical
healing.
arthritis
some years back my  years old mother came from the family
homestead in the wilds of northern british columbia to visit me at the great oaks
school. she had gotten into pathetic physical condition. fifteen years previously
she had remarried. tom, her new husband, had been a gold prospector and general mountain
man, a wonderfully independent and cantankerous cuss, a great hunter and wood chopper
and all around good-natured backwoods homestead handyman. tom had tired of solitary
log cabin life and to solve his problem had taken on the care and feeding of a needy
widow, my mom. he began doing the cooking and menu planning. tom, a little older
than my mother, had no sense about eating but could still shoot game. ever since
their marriage she had been living on moose meat stews with potatoes and gravy, white
flour bread with jam, black tea with canned milk, a ritual glass of brandy at bedtime,
and almost no fresh fruit or vegetables. 
in her youth, my mother had been a concert pianist; now she
had such large arthritic knobs on all of her knuckles that her hands had become claws.
though there was still that very same fine upright in the cabin that i had learned
to play as a child, she had long since given up the piano. her knees also had large
arthritic knobs; this proud woman with a straight back and long, flowing strides
was bent over, limping along with a cane. she was also  pounds overweight and her
blood pressure was a very dangerous  over , just asking for a stroke. 
instead of a welcoming feast, the usual greeting offered
to a loved one who has not been seen for a few years, i immediately started her on
a juice fast. i gave her freshly prepared carrot juice (one quart daily) mixed with
wheat grass juice (three ounces daily) plus daily colonics. she had no previous experience
with these techniques but she gamely accepted everything i threw her way because
she knew i was doing it because i loved her and wanted to see her in better condition.
she also received a daily full body massage with particular attention to the hand
and knees, stimulating the circulation to the area and speeding the removal of wastes.
every night her hands and knees were wrapped in warm castor oil compresses held in
place with old sheeting.
i did not use any vitamins or food supplements in her case.
i did give her flavorful herbal teas made of peppermint and chamomile because she
needed the comfort of a hot cupa; but these teas were in no way medicinal except
for her morale.
in three weeks on this program, grannybelle, as i and my
daughters called her, had no unsightly knobs remaining on either her knuckles or
knees and she could walk and move her fingers without pain within a normal range
of movement. the big payoff for me besides seeing her look so wonderful ( years
younger and  pounds lighter) was to hear her sit down and treat us to a beethoven
recital. and her blood pressure was  over .
breast cancer
i have worked with many young women with breast cancer; so
many in fact, that their faces and cases tend to blur. but whenever i think about
them, kelly inevitably comes to mind because we became such good friends. like me,
kelly was an independent-minded back country canuck. at the age , she received
a medical diagnosis of breast cancer. kelly had already permitted a lumpectomy and
biopsy, but had studied the statistical outcomes and did not want to treat her illness
with radical mastectomy, radiation and chemotherapy because she knew her odds of
long-term survival without radical medical treatment were equal to or better than
allowing the doctors to do everything possible. nor did she want to lose even one
of her breasts. she knew how useful her breasts were because she had already suckled
one child, not to mention their contribution to one's own self-image as a whole person.
i admired kelly's unusual independent-mindedness because she comes from a country
where universal health coverage is in place; her insurance would have paid all the
costs had she been willing to accept conventional medicine, but canadian national
health insurance does not cover alternative therapy.
kelly stayed with me for nearly two months as a residential
faster, because she needed to be far from the distractions of a troubled family life.
with financial support from her parents and child-care from her friends she was able
to take time out to give the recovery of health top priority in her life without
worrying about whether her small son was being well cared for. this peace of mind
was also very important to her recovery.
analysis with biokinesiology showed a pervasively weak immune
system, including a weak thymus gland, spleen, and an overloaded lymphatic system.
her liver was weak, but not as weak as it might have been, because she had become
a vegetarian, and had been working on her health in a haphazard fashion for a few
years. kelly's body also showed weaknesses in pancreatic and adrenal function as
well as a toxic colon. most immediately worrisome to her, biokinesiology testing
showed several over-strong testing lumpy areas in the breasts and over-strong testing
lumpy lymph nodes in the armpits. cancerous tumors always test overly strong
kelly's earlier life-style had contributed to her condition
in several ways. she had worked for years in a forestry tree nursery handling seedling
trees treated with highly toxic chemicals. she had worked as a cook in a logging
camp for several seasons, eating too much meat and greasy food. and she had also
spent the usual number of adolescent and young adult years deeply involved in recreational
drug use and the bad diet that went with it. 
kelly started right in on a rigorous water fast that lasted
for one entire month. she had a colonic every day, plus body work including reflexology,
holding and massage of neurolymphatic and neurovascular points, and stimulation of
acupuncture points related to weak organ systems and general massage to stimulate
overall circulation and lymphatic drainage. she took protomorphogens to help rebuild
her weakened organs; she took ten grams of vitamin c every day and a half-dose of
life extension vitamin mix in assimilable powdered form; she drank herbal teas of
echinacea and fenugreek seeds and several ounces of freshly squeezed wheat grass
juice every day. twice each day she made poultices out of clay and the pulp left
over from making her wheat grass juice, filled an old bra with this mixture and pressed
it to her breast for several hours until the clay dried. shortly, i will explain
all the measures in some detail.
these physical therapies were accompanied by counseling sessions
dealing with some severe and long-unresolved problems, response patterns and relationships
that triggered her present illness. her son's father (kelly's ex) was suppressive
and highly intimidating. fearful of him, kelly seemed unable to successfully extricate
herself from the relationship due to the ongoing contact which revolved over visitation
and care of their son. but kelly had grit! while fasting, she confronted these tough
issues in her life and unflinchingly made the necessary decisions. when she returned
to canada she absolutely decided, without any nagging doubts, reservations or qualifications,
to make any changes necessary to ensure her survival. only after having made these
hard choices could she heal.
i one respect, kelly was a highly unusual faster. throughout
the entire month on water, kelly took daily long walks, frequently stopping to lie
down and rest in the sun on the way. she would climb to or from the top of a very
large and steep hill nearby. she never missed a day, rain or shine. 
at the end of her month on water kelly's remaining breast
lumps had disappeared, the lymphatic system and immune system tested strong, as well
as the liver, pancreas, adrenals, and large intestine. no areas tested overly strong.
she broke the fast with the same discipline she had conducted
it, on carrot juice, a cup every two hours. after three days on juice she began a
raw food diet with small servings of greens and sprouts well chewed, interspersed
at two hour intervals with fresh juicy fruits. after about ten days on "rabbit
food," she eased into avocados, cooked vegetables, nuts, seeds, and whole grains
and then went home.
as i write this, it is eight years since kelly's long fast.
she still comes to see me every few years to check out her diet and just say hello.
she has had two more children by a new, and thoroughly wonderful husband and suckled
them both for two years each; her peaceful rural life centers around this new, happy
family and the big, organic garden she grows. she religiously takes her life extension
vitamins and keeps her dietary and life-style indiscretions small and infrequent.
she is probably going to live a long, time. 
i consider kelly's cluster of organ weaknesses very typical
of all cancers regardless of type or location, as well as being typical of aids and
other critical infections by organisms that usually reside in the human body without
causing trouble (called "opportunistic"). all these diseases are varieties
of immune system failure. all of these conditions present a similar pattern of immune
system weaknesses. they all center around what i call the "deadly triangle,"
comprised of a weak thymus gland, weak spleen, and a weak liver. the thymus and spleen
form the core of the body's immune system. the weak liver contributes to a highly
toxic system that further weakens the immune system. to top it off, people with cancer
invariably have a poor ability to digest cooked protein (animal or vegetable) (usually
from a weak pancreas unable to make enough digestive enzymes) and eat too much of
it, giving them a very toxic colon, and an overloaded lymphatic system. 
whenever i analyze someone with this pattern, especially
the entire deadly triangle, i let the person know that if i had those particular
weaknesses i would consider my survival to be at immediate risk i'd consider it an
emergency situation demanding vigorous attention. it does not matter if they don't
yet have a tumor, or fibroid, or opportunistic infection; if they don't already have
something of that nature they soon will. 
here's yet another example of why i disapprove of diagnosis.
by giving the condition a name like "lymphoma" or "melanoma",
"chronic fatigue syndrome" "epstein-barr syndrome" or "aids,"
"systemic yeast infection", "hepatitis" or what have, people
think the doctor then understands their disease. but the doctor rarely understands
that all these seemingly different diseases are essentially the same disease--a toxic
body with a dysfunctional immune system. what is relevant is that a person with the
deadly triangle must strengthen their immune system, and their pancreas, and their
liver, and detoxify their body immediately. if these repairs are accomplished in
time, the condition goes away, whatever its latin name may have been. 
now, about some of the adjuncts to kelly's healing. let me
stress here that had none of these substances or practices been used, she probably
still would have recovered. perhaps a bit more slowly. perhaps a bit less comfortably.
conversely, had kelly treated her cancer with every herb, poultice and vitamin known
to man but had neglected fasting and colonics, she might well have died. it has been
wisely said that intelligence may be defined as the ability to correctly determine
differences, similarities, and importances. i want my readers to be intelligent about
understanding the relative importances of different hygienic treatment and useful
supporting practices. 
echinacea and chaparral leaves, red clover flowers, and fenugreek
seeds are made into medicinal teas that i find very helpful in detoxification programs,
because they all are aggressive blood or lymph cleansers and boost the immune response.
these same teas can be used to help the body throw off a cold, flu, or other acute
illness but they have a much more powerful effect on a fasting body than on one that
is eating. echinacea and chaparral are extraordinarily bitter and may be better accepted
if ground up and encapsulated, or mixed with other teas with pleasant flavors such
as peppermint or lemon grass. these teas should be simmered until they are at the
strongest concentration palatable, drinking three or four cups of this concentrate
a day. if you use echinacea, then chaparral probably isn't necessary and visa versa.
red clover is another blood cleanser, perhaps a little less effective but it has
a pleasant, sweet taste and may be better accepted by the squeamish.
if there is lymphatic congestion i always include fenugreek
seed tea brewed at the strength of approximately one tablespoon of seeds to a quart
of water. expect the tea to be brown, thick and mucilaginous, with a reasonably pleasant
taste reminiscent of maple syrup.
kelly used poultices of clay and wheat grass pulp on her
lumps, somewhat like the warm castor oil poultices i used on my mother's arthritic
deposits. poultices not only feel very comforting, but they have the effect of softening
up deposits and tumors so that a detoxifying, fasting body is more able to re absorb
them. poultices draw, pulling toxins out through the skin, unburdening the liver.
clay (freshly-mixed potters clay i purchase from a potters' guild), mixed with finely
chopped or blended young wheat grass (in emergencies i've even used lawn grasses)
makes excellent drawing poultices. without clay, i've also used vegetable poultices
made of chopped or blended comfrey leaves, comfrey root, slightly cooked (barely
wilted) cabbage leaves, slightly steamed onion or garlic (cooked just enough to soften
it). these are very effective to soften tumors, abscesses and ulcers. aloe poultices
are good on burns. poultices should be thought of as helpful adjuncts to other, more
powerful healing techniques and not as remedies all by themselves, except for minor
skin problems.
poultices, to be effective, need to be troweled on half an
inch thick, extending far beyond the effected area, covered with cheese cloth or
rags torn from old cotton sheets so they don't dry out too fast. fresh poultices
needs to be applied several times daily. they also need to be left on the body until
they do dry. then poultices are thrown away, to be followed by another as often as
patience will allow. do not cover poultices tightly with plastic because if they
don't dry out they won't draw much. the drawing is in the drying.
sometimes poultices cause a tumor or deposit to be expelled
through the skin rather than being adsorbed, all with rather spectacular pus and
gore. this phenomena is actually beneficial and should be welcomed because anytime
the body can push toxins out through the skin, the burden on the organs of elimination
are lessened.
wheat grass juice has a powerful anti-tumor effect, is very
perishable, is laborious to make, but is worth the effort because it contains powerful
enzymes and nutrients that help detoxify and heal when taken internally or applied
to the skin. as a last resort with dying patients who can no longer digest anything
taken by mouth i've implanted wheat grass juice rectally (in a cleansed colon). some
of them haven't died. you probably can't buy wheat grass juice that retains much
medicinal effect because it needs to be very fresh and should be drunk within minutes
of squeezing. chilled sharply and immediately after squeezing it might maintain some
potency for an hour or two. extracting juice from grass takes a special press that
resembles a meat grinder. 
the wheat is grown in transplant or seedling trays in bright
light. i know someone who uses old plastic cafeteria trays for this. the seed is
soaked overnight, spread densely atop a tray, covered shallowly with fine soil, kept
moist but not soggy. when the grass is about four inches high, begin harvesting by
cutting off the leaves with a scissors and juicing them. if the tray contains several
inches of soil you usually get a second cutting of leaves. you need to start a new
tray every few days; one tray can be cut for three or four days. (kulvinskas, )
more wheat grass juice is not better than just enough; three
ounces a day is plenty! it is a very powerful substance! the flavor of wheat grass
juice is so intense that some people have to mix it with carrot juice to get it down.
do not overuse. the energizing effects of wheat grass can be so powerful that some
people make a regular practice of drinking it. however, i've seen many people who
use wheat grass juice as a tonic become allergic to it much as antibiotic dependent
people do to antibiotics. better to save wheat grass for emergencies.
i also have treated my own breast cancers--twice. the first
time i was only  years old. one night i noticed that it hurt to sleep the way i
usually did on my left side because there was a hard lump in my left breast. it was
quite large--about the size of a goose egg. having just completed rn training two
years prior, i had been well brain washed about my poor prognosis and knew exactly
what requisite actions must taken. 
i scheduled a biopsy under anesthetic, so that if the tumor
was malignant they could proceed to full mastectomy without delay. i was ignorant
of any alternative course of action at the time.
i might add that before i grew my first tumor i had been
consuming large amounts of red meat in a mistaken understanding gained in nursing
school that a good diet contained large amounts of animal protein. in addition to
the stress of being a full time psychology graduate student existing on a very low
budget, i was experiencing i very frustrating relationship with a young man that
left me constantly off center and confused.
a biopsy was promptly performed. the university hospital's
sop required that three pathologists make an independent decision about the nature
of a tumor before proceeding with radical surgery. two of the pathologist agreed
that my tumor was malignant, which represented the required majority vote. but the
surgeon removed only the lump, which he said was well encapsulated and for some reason
did not proceed with a radical mastectomy. these days many surgeons routinely limit
themselves to lumpectomies. 
i never did find out why i awakened from general anesthetic
with two breasts, but i have since supposed that due to my tender age the surgeon
was reluctant to disfigure me without at least asking me for permission, or giving
me some time to prepare psychologically. when i came out of anesthesia he told me
that the lump was malignant, and that he had removed it, and that he needed to do
a radical mastectomy to improve my prognosis over the next few years. he asked me
to think it over, but he signed me up on his surgery list for the following monday.
i did think it over and found i was profoundly annoyed at
the idea of being treated like i was just a statistic, so i decided that i would
be unique. i made a firm decision that i would be well and stay well--and i was for
the next fifteen years. the decision healed me.
when i was  i had a recurrence. at the time i had in residence
ethyl and marge, the two far-gone breast cancer cases i already told you about. i
also had in residence a young woman with a breast tumor who had not undergone any
medical treatment, not even a lumpectomy. (i will relate her case in detail shortly.)
i was too identified emotionally with helping these three, overly-empathetic due
to my own history. i found myself taking on their symptoms and their pain. i went
so far into sympathy as to grow back my tumor--just as it had the first time--a lump
mushroomed from nothing to the size of a goose egg in only three weeks in exactly
the same place as the first one. just out of curiosity i went in for a needle biopsy.
once again it was judged to be malignant, and i got the same pressure from the surgeon
for immediate surgery. this time, however, i had an alternative system of healing
that i believed in. so i went home, continued to care for my very sick residents,
and began to work on myself. 
the first thing i had to confront about myself was that i
was being a compassionate fool. i needed to learn how to maintain my own personal
boundaries, and clearly delineate what stuff in my mind and my body was really mine
and what was another's. i needed to apply certain mental techniques of self-protection
known to and practiced by many healers. i knew beyond doubt that i had developed
sympathetic breast cancer because a similar phenomena had happened to me before.
once, when i had previously been working on a person with very severe back pain with
hands-on techniques, i suddenly had the pain, and the client was totally free of
it. so i protected myself when working with sick people. i would wash my hands and
arms thoroughly with cold water, or with water and vinegar after contact. i would
shake off their "energy," have a cold shower, walk bare foot on the grass,
and visualize myself well with intact boundaries. these prophylaxes had been working
for me, but i was particularly vulnerable to people with breast cancer. 
i also began detoxification dieting, took more supplements,
and used acupressure and reflexology as my main lines of attack. my healing diet
consisted of raw food exclusively. i allowed myself fruits (not sweet fruits) and
vegetables (including a lot of raw cabbage because vegetables in the cabbage family
such as cauliflower and broccoli are known to have a healing effect on cancer), raw
almonds, raw apricot kernels, and some sprouted grains and legumes. i drank diluted
carrot juice, and a chlorophyll drink made up of wheat grass and barley green and
aloe vera juice. i took echinaechia, red clover, and fenugreek seeds. i worked all
the acupuncture points on my body that strengthen the immune system, including the
thymus gland, lymph nodes, and spleen. i also worked the meridians, and reflex points
for the liver, and large intestine. i massaged the breast along the natural lines
of lymphatic drainage from the area. 
last, and of great importance, i knew that the treatment
would work, and that the tumor would quickly disappear. it did vanish totally in
three months. it would have gone away quicker if i had water fasted, but i was unable
to do this because i needed physical strength to care for my resident patients and
family. 
eighteen years have passed since that episode, and i have
had no further reappearance of breast tumors. at age  i still have all my body
parts, and have had no surgery except the original lumpectomy. many, viewing my muscles
and athletic performance, would say my health is exceptional but i know my own frailties
and make sure i do not aggravate them. i still have exactly the same organ deficiencies
as other cancer patients and must keep a very short leash on my lifestyle.
if for some reason i wanted to make my life very short, all
i would have to do would be to abandon my diet, stop taking supplements, eat red
meat and ice cream every day and be unhappy about something. incidentally, i have
had many residential clients with breast cancer since then, and have not taken on
their symptoms, so i can assume that i have safely passed that hurdle.
i've helped dozens of cases of simple breast cancer where
my treatment began before the cancer broadly spread. kelly's case was not the easiest
of this group, nor the hardest. sometimes there was lymphatic involvement that the
medical doctors had not yet treated in any way. all but one of my early-onset breast
cancer cases recovered. i believe those are far better results than achieved by ama
treatment. 
before i crow too much, let me stress that every one of these
women was a good candidate for recovery--under  years old, ambulatory and did not
feel very sick. and most importantly, every one of them had received no other debilitating
medical treatment except a needle biopsy or simple lumpectomy. none of these women
had old tumors (known about for more than six months) and none of the tumors were
enormous (nothing larger than a walnut). 
clearly, this group is not representative of the average
breast cancer case. hygienic therapy for cancer is a radical idea these days and
tends to attract younger people, or older, desperate people who have already been
through the works. in every one of my simple cases the tumors were reabsorbed by
the body during the thirty days of water fasting and the client left happy.
except one. i think i should describe this unsuccessful case,
this "dirty case," so my readers get a more balanced idea of how fearsome
cancer really isn't if the sick person can clearly resolve to get better and has
no problem about achieving wellness.
marie was an artisan and musician from seattle who grew up
back east in an upper-middle class dysfunctional family. she was in her late twenties.
she had been sexually abused by an older brother, was highly reactive, and had never
been able to communicate honestly with anyone except her lesbian lover (maybe, about
some things). 
three years prior to coming to see me marie had been medically
diagnosed as having breast cancer and had been advised to have immediate surgery.
she ignored this advice; marie never told her friends, said nothing to her family
and tried to conceal it from her lover because she did not want to disrupt their
life together. 
on her own, she did begin eating a macrobiotic diet. in spite
of this diet, the tumor grew, but grew very slowly. after two years the tumor was
discovered by her lover, who after a year of exhausting and upsetting arguments,
forced marie to seek treatment. since marie adamantly refused to go the conventional
medical route, she ended up on my doorstep as a compromise.
by this time the tumor was the size of a fist and had broken
through the skin of the left breast. it was very ugly, very hard. biokinesiology
showed the usual deadly triangle and other associated organ weakneses typical of
cancer. marie began fasting on water with colonics and poultices and bodywork and
counseling and supplements. at the end of the water fast, marie looked much healthier,
with clear eyes and clear skin and had a sort of shine about her, but the tumor had
only receded enough for the skin to close over it; it was still large, and very hard.
to fully heal, marie probably needed at least two more water fasts of equal length
interspersed with a few months on a raw food diet. but she lacked the personal toughness
to confront another fast in the near future. nor was she emotionally up to what she
regarded as the deprivation of a long-term raw foods healing diet.
so i advised her to seek other treatment. still unwilling
to accept standard medical management of her case, marie chose to go to the philippines
to have "psychic surgery." she was excited and optimistic about this; i
was interested myself because i was dubious about this magical procedure; if marie
went i would have a chance to see the results (if any) on a person i was very familiar
with. marie had her tickets and was due to leave in days when her lover, against
marie's directly-stated wishes, called her parents and informed them of what was
happening. 
the parents had known nothing of marie's cancer and were
shocked, upset, outraged! they had not known marie was a lesbian, much less that
their daughter was flirting with (from their view) obvious quackery. their daughter
needed immediate saving and her parents and brother (the one who had abused her)
flew to oregon and surprisingly appeared the next day in a state of violent rage.
they threatened lawsuits, police, incarceration, they threatened to have their daughter
civilly committed as unable to take care of herself. they thought everything marie
had done for the last three years was my fault. i was lucky to stay out of jail.
of course, all of this was why marie had not told them in the first place; she had
wanted to avoid this kind of a scene.
marie did not have enough personal integrity to withstand
the domination of her immediate family. they put her in a hospital, where marie had
a radical mastectomy, chemotherapy and radiation. assured that they had done everything
that should have been done, the self-righteous parents went back home. marie never
recovered from chemotherapy and radiation. she died in the hospital surrounded by
her lesbian friends who took dedicated, ever-so-sympathetic turns maintaining an
emotional round-the-clock vigil.
marie's death was partly my fault. she was an early case
of mine. at the time i did not yet understand the total effect of lack of ethics
and irresponsibility on illness. had marie really wanted to live in the first place,
she would have sought treatment three years earlier. in our counseling sessions she
always evaded this question and i had not been wise enough to pin her down with my
knee on her chest and make her answer up. marie had too many secrets from everybody
and was never fully honest in any of her relationships, including with me. i think
she only came to great oaks at her lover's insistence and to the day she died was
trying to pretend that nothing was wrong. 
all marie really wanted from her life was to be loved and
have a lot of loving attention. in the end, her dramatic death scene gave her that,
which is probably why she manifested cancer and kept it and eventually, died from
it.
the name for this game is "secondary gain." a lot
of sick people are playing it. their illness lets them win their deepest desire;
they get love, attention, revenge, sympathy, complete service, pampering, create
guilt in others. when sick people receive too much secondary gain they never get
well.
one of the hardest things about being a healer is that one
accumulates an ever-enlarging series of dirty, failed cases like this one. it is
depressing and makes a person want to quit doctoring. whenever i get involved with
a case i really want them to get better. my life is put entirely out of joint for
several months dealing with a residential faster. my schedule is disrupted; my family
life suffers; my personal health suffers. no amount of mere money could pay for this.
and then some of these people go and waste all my help to accomplish some discreditable
secret agenda that they have never really admitted to themselves or others.
constant complaints
alice was a middle-aged woman who couldn't understand why
she had always felt tired, even when she was young. her life had been this way ever
since she could remember. most puzzling to her was why her life was so job-like.
she did everything the proper way. doing things correctly was important to her, and
fitted her puritan background. alice supported all the right causes, did good works,
was active in a unitarian church and bought all her food at the healthfood store--and
made sure it was organically grown.
but in spite of alice's righteous living, her existence was
a treadmill of constant, minor complaints. she was constantly exhausted, so much
so she had difficulty getting up in the morning and feared she might have chronic
fatigue syndrome (whatever that is). alice suffered bouts of depression over thoughts
like these, and had many acute illnesses like colds that hung on interminably and
would not go away. she had a constant post-nasal drip. though she enjoyed life, her
body was a millstone around her neck.
i've had a lot of clients exactly like alice. sometimes they
complain of headaches; sometimes constant yeast or bladder infections. whatever the
complaints, the symptoms are rarely severe enough to classify themselves as someone
who is seriously ill, but their symptoms rarely go away and they almost never feel
good. medical doctors rarely find anything wrong with them, though they will frequently
prescribe an antibiotic to treat a somewhat constant infection, or an antihistamine
for sinus symptoms. getting a new prescription drug makes the complaint go away for
a short time until their resistance is lowered again and the very same complaint
returns. these people frequently depend on over the counter pills and are routinely
prescribed sleeping remedies and antidepressants. if instead of this route they will
but take my medicine they are usually easy to fix and afterwards are amazed that
it was all that simple and that so much of their life has been less than it could
have been.
alice had been through the medical doctor route. she had
become quite familiar with antibiotics for her colds and flu, and also took synthetic
thyroid hormone--the doctor had diagnosed her fatigue as being caused by an underactive
thyroid, which was partly correct--but the thyroid medication didn't give her much
more energy. alice had been supporting this medical doctor in grand style for over
thirty years but never obtained the relief she sought. 
i put alice through my usual two hour first-time-visit thorough
analysis. for two weeks before coming to see me she had saved tiny samples of everything
she ate, wrapped them in plastic film, carefully labeled, and put them in the freezer.
along with these food samples and a typed list of all these foods, she brought a
big box full of her condiments, herb teas, vitamins, spices, prescription medications,
over the counter drugs, oils, grains, breads, crackers and small samples of her usual
fresh vegetables and fruits. even her water. her entire kitchen! by biokinesiology
we proceeded to test all of her foods for allergic reactions. i also tested the integrity
of her organs and glands and in the process, got a detailed medical history and list
of her complaints.
alice had exhausted adrenals, and they probably had been
that way for thirty years. her pancreas was now too weak to digest the legumes that
made up a large part of her vegetarian diet. she was allergic to wheat, soy, and
dairy products and had especially been eating dairy in the mistaken notion that it
was necessary to keep up her protein intake. really very typical. so many health
food store shoppers these days mistakenly believe that, because they are vegetarian
and do not eat meat, they especially need to boost their protein intake with dairy
and soy. unfortunately, so many north americans are highly allergic to dairy and
unfortunately, soy products are as hard or harder to digest than cooked meats. 
alice was especially shocked to discover that she was allergic
to such foods as cabbage family vegetables, alfalfa sprouts and citrus. most people
don't think that anyone could be allergic to something as healthy as alfalfa sprouts.
the doctor was right about one thing; her thyroid was underperforming. he had not
noticed that her heart was weak.
medical doctors rarely discover an organ weakness until that
organ actually begins to catastrophically fail. a busy honest doctor will usually
tell the complaining patient there is nothing wrong with them: go home, take two
aspirin, accept the fact that your body is not perfect and don't worry about it.
a hungry doctor will be delighted to perform countless lab tests, seeking any possible
reason for the complaint. this can go on as long as the patient has money or as long
as the insurance company will pay. they rarely find anything "wrong" and
the patient is far better off if the doctor doesn't discover something "serious"
to treat because their treatment may carry with it consequences far more severe than
the complaint. for example, i have seen dozens of people whose lives were virtually
ruined after surgical treatment for chronic back pain.
biokinesiology is actually a far more sensitive system of
analysis than lab tests. it picks up weaknesses at a very early stage so total organ
failure can be prevented. rarely will any of the organ weaknesses i discover be confirmed
by a medical doctor. first i put alice on a six week cleanse. she did one week on
fresh, raw food; one week on dilute carrot juice with some green leafy vegetables
juice too; one week on water fasting; and then she repeated the series. after six
weeks of detoxification, i gave alice a life extension megavitamin formula, discovered
she could not handle the acid form of vitamin c (that she had already been taking)
and had her start on protomorphogens to rebuild her weakened endocrine system, her
exhausted adrenals and weak pancreas. she also began taking pancreatic enzymes when
she ate vegetable protein. she was put on a maintenance diet that eliminated foods
she was allergic to; the diet primarily consisted of whole grains, nuts, cooked and
raw vegetables, and raw fruits. on her maintenance diet alice had a profound resurgence
of energy and rediscovered a sense of well-being she had not known for decades. she
began to feel like she had when she was a child. her constant sinus drip was gone.
she was able to stop taking synthetic thyroid hormones and instead, supported her
endocrine system with protomorphogens.
a rampaging infection
at the age of , john, an old bohemian client of mine, came
into a moderate inheritance and went "native" in the fiji islands in the
south pacific. he spent about four months hanging out with the locals. life there
was so much fun that john completely forgot that his body was actually rather delicate,
that many of his organs were weak, and that to feel good, he had to live a fairly
simon-pure life. 
but the jovial, accepting, devil-may-care fijians enjoyed
a constant party, even more so because john's money allowed the fijians to manifest
powerful, tropical, home-grown strains of recreational herbs to smoke in abundance,
beer and rum and worse, the fijians (and john) constantly used a very toxic though
only mildly-euphoric narcotic called kava, something europeans usually have no genetic
resistance to. the fijians (and john) also ate a lot of freshly-caught fish fried
in grease, well-salted, and huge, brain-numbing bowls of greasy starches, foods that
they call i'coi, or "real food" as opposed to things like fruit and vegetables
that aren't real food because they don't knock you to the floor for hours trying
to digest them in a somnambulant doze.
john miraculously kept up with this party for a few months
and then, while scuba diving, got some small coral scratches on his leg. these got
infected. the infections got worse. soon he had several huge, suppurating, ulcerous
sores on his legs and worse, the infections became systemic and began spreading rapidly.
he was running a fever and was in considerable pain. so john booked an emergency
ticket home and fled to find doctor isabelle. when i met his plane he was rolled
out in a wheelchair, unable to walk because of pain and swelling in his legs.
john was violently opposed to ordinary medical treatment;
he especially would not have taken antibiotics even if he had died without them because
previous courses of antibiotics had been the precipitant of life-threatening conditions
that first brought john to my care. john used his last strength to get to me because
he knew that had a hospital gotten its clutches on him the medical doctors would
have done exactly as they pleased. 
i gave john a colonic, a gentle, mental spanking, and put
him to bed without any supper. he started water fasting and did colonics every day.
he began gobbling vitamin c (as calcium ascorbate) a few grams every hour. i put
huge poultices on his sores made of clay and chopped lawn grass (we needed a week
or so before a tray of wheat grass would be ready). john's sores were amazing. every
day a new one seemed to appear on a different part of the body. the old ones kept
getting bigger and deeper. the largest original ones were about three inches in diameter,
smelled horribly and had almost eaten the flesh down to the bone. his pain was severe;
there was no position john could assume that didn't irritate one sore or another,
and it was a good thing my house was remote because john frequently relieved his
pain by screaming. john was never delirious, but he was always original. he did not
have to scream, but enjoyed its relief and howled quite dramatically. i wore earplugs.
after about two weeks of water fasting, john counted up the
total of his sores. there were forty three. seven or eight of them were enormous,
two or three inches in diameter and well into the flesh, but the last ones to appear
were shallow, small and stayed small. after that point no more new ones showed up
and the body began to make visible headway against the infection. very slowly and
then more and more rapidly, the sores began to close up and heal from the edges.
john's fever began to drop. and he had less pain. i should mention that john brought
an extremely virulent and aggressive pathogenic organism into our house to which
we americans had no resistance. both my husband and i were attacked where the skin
had been broken. however, unlike john, in our cases, our healthy bodies immediately
walled-off the organism and the small, reddened pustules, though painful, did not
