 captured fly serves as a nucleus to begin the balloon on. one
 case of a captured fly but no balloon was observed. after
 commencing, it is probable that the rest of the structure is made
 by revolving the completed part between the hind legs and adding
 more bubbles somewhat spirally. the posterior end of the balloon
 is left more or less open. the purpose of this structure is to
 attract the female. when numerous males were flying up and down
 the road, it happened several times that a female was seen to
 approach them from some choke-cherry blossoms near by. the males
 immediately gathered in her path, and she with little hesitation
 selected for a mate the one with the largest balloon, taking a
 position upon his back. after copulation had begun, the pair
 would settle down toward the ground, select a quiet spot, and the
 female would alight by placing her front legs across a horizontal
 grass blade, her head resting against the blade so as to brace
 the body in position. here she would continue to hold the male
 beneath her for a little time, until the process was finished.
 the male, meanwhile, would be rolling the balloon about in a
 variety of positions, juggling with it, one might almost say.
 after the male and female parted company, the male immediately
 dropped the balloon upon the ground, and it was greedily seized
 by ants. no illustration could properly show the beauty of the
 balloon." (aldrich and turley, "a balloon-making fly," american
 naturalist, october, .)
 "in many species of moths the males 'assemble' around the freshly
 emerged female, but no special advantage appears to attend on
 early arrival. the female sits apparently motionless, while the
 little crowd of suitors buzz around her for several minutes.
 suddenly, and, as far as one can see, without any sign from the
 female, one of the males pairs with her and all the others
 immediately disappear. in these cases the males do not fight or
 struggle in any way, and as one watches the ceremony the wonder
 arises as to how the moment is determined, and why the pairing
 did not take place before. proximity does not decide the point,
 for long beforehand the males often alight close to the female
 and brush against her with fluttering wings. i have watched the
 process exactly as i have described it in a common northern
 noctua, the antler moth (charæax graminis), and i have seen
 the same thing among beetles." (e. b. poulton, the colors of
 animals, , p. .) this author mentions that among some
 butterflies the females take the active part. the example here
 quoted of courtship among moths illustrates how phenomena which
 are with difficulty explicable by the theory of sexual selection
 in its original form become at once intelligible when we realize
 the importance of tumescence in courtship.
 of the argentine cow-bird (molothrus bonariensis) hudson says
 (argentine ornithology, vol. i, p. ): "the song of the male,
 particularly when making love, is accompanied with gestures and
 actions somewhat like those of the domestic pigeon. he swells
 himself out, beating the ground with his wings, and uttering a
 series of deep internal notes, followed by others loud and clear;
 and occasionally, when uttering them, he suddenly takes wing and
 flies directly away from the female to a distance of fifty yards,
 and performs a wide circuit about her in the air, singing all the
 time. the homely object of his passion always appears utterly
 indifferent to this curious and pretty performance; yet she must
 be even more impressionable than most female birds, since she
 continues scattering about her parasitical and often wasted eggs
 during four months in every year."
 of a tyrant-bird (pitangus bolivianus) hudson writes
 (argentine ornithology, vol. i, p. ): "though the male and
 female are greatly attached, they do not go afield to hunt in
 company, but separate to meet again at intervals during the day.
 one of a couple (say, the female) returns to the trees where they
 are accustomed to meet, and after a time, becoming impatient or
 anxious at the delay of her consort, utters a very long, clear
 call-note. he is perhaps a quarter of a mile away, watching for a
 frog beside a pool, or beating over a thistle-bed, but he hears
 the note and presently responds with one of equal power. then,
 perhaps, for half an hour, at intervals of half a minute, the
 birds answer each other, though the powerful call of the one must
 interfere with his hunting. at length he returns; then the two
 birds, perched close together, with their yellow bosoms almost
 touching, crests elevated, and beating the branch with their
 wings, scream their loudest notes in concert—a confused jubilant
 noise that rings through the whole plantation. their joy at
 meeting is patent, and their action corresponds to the warm
 embrace of a loving human couple."
 of the red-breasted marsh-bird (leistes superciliaris) hudson
 (argentine ornithology, vol. i, p. ) writes: "these birds
 are migratory, and appear everywhere in the eastern part of the
 argentine country early in october, arriving singly, after which
 each male takes up a position in a field or open space abounding
 with coarse grass and herbage, where he spends most of his time
 perched on the summit of a tall stalk or weed, his glowing
 crimson bosom showing at a distance like some splendid flower
 above the herbage. at intervals of two or three minutes he soars
 vertically up to a height of twenty or twenty-five yards to utter
 his song, composed of a single long, powerful and rather musical
 note, ending with an attempt at a flourish, during which the bird
 flutters and turns about in the air; then, as if discouraged at
 his failure, he drops down, emitting harsh, guttural chirps, to
 resume his stand. meanwhile the female is invisible, keeping
 closely concealed under the long grass. but at length, attracted
 perhaps by the bright bosom and aërial music of the male, she
 occasionally exhibits herself for a few moments, starting up with
 a wild zigzag flight, and, darting this way and that, presently
 drops into the grass once more. the moment she appears above the
 grass the male gives chase, and they vanish from sight together."
 "courtship with the mallard," says j. g. millais (natural history
 of british ducks, p. ), "appears to be carried on by both
 sexes, though generally three or four drakes are seen showing
 themselves off to attract the attention of a single duck.
 swimming round her, in a coy and semi-self-conscious manner, they
 now and again all stop quite still, nod, bow, and throw their
 necks out in token of their admiration and their desire of a
 favorable response. but the most interesting display is when all
 the drakes simultaneously stand up in the water and rapidly pass
 their bills down their breasts, uttering at the same time a low
 single note somewhat like the first half of the call that teal
 and pintail make when 'showing off.' at other times the
 love-making of the drake seems to be rather passive than active.
 while graciously allowing himself to be courted, he holds his
 head high with conscious pride, and accepts as a matter of course
 any attention that may be paid to him. a proud bird is he when
 three or four ducks come swimming along beside and around him,
 uttering a curious guttural note, and at the same time dipping
 their bills in quick succession to right and left. he knows what
 that means, and carries himself with even greater dignity than
 before. in the end, however, he must give in. as a last appeal,
 one of his lady lovers may coyly lower herself in the water till
 only the top of her back, head, and neck is seen, and so
 fascinating an advance as this no drake of any sensibility can
 withstand."
 the courting of the argus pheasant, noted for the extreme beauty
 of the male's plumage, was observed by h. o. forbes in sumatra. it
 is the habit of this bird to make "a large circus, some ten or
 twelve feet in diameter, in the forest, which it clears of every
 leaf and twig and branch, till the ground is perfectly swept and
 garnished. on the margin of this circus there is invariably a
 projecting branch or high-arched root, at a few feet elevation
 above the ground, on which the female bird takes its place, while
 in the ring the male—the male birds alone possess great
 decoration—shows off all its magnificence for the gratification
 and pleasure of his consort and to exalt himself in her eyes."
 (h. o. forbes, a. naturalist's wanderings, , p. .)
 "all ostriches, adults as well as chicks, have a strange habit
 known as 'waltzing.' after running for a few hundred yards they
 will also stop, and, with raised wings, spin around rapidly for
 some time after until quite giddy, when a broken leg occasionally
 occurs.... vicious cocks 'roll' when challenging to fight or when
 wooing the hen. the cock will suddenly bump down on to his knees
 (the ankle-joint), open his wings, and then swing them
 alternately backward and forward, as if on a pivot.... while
 rolling, every feather over the whole body is on end, and the
 plumes are open, like a large white fan. at such a time the bird
 sees very imperfectly, if at all; in fact, he seems so
 preoccupied that, if pursued, one may often approach unnoticed.
 just before rolling, a cock, especially if courting the hen, will
 often run slowly and daintily on the points of his toes, with
 neck slightly inflated, upright, and rigid, the tail
 half-drooped, and all his body-feathers fluffed up; the wings
 raised and expanded, the inside edges touching the sides of the
 neck for nearly the whole of its length, and the plumes showing
 separately, like an open fan. in no other attitude is the
 splendid beauty of his plumage displayed to such advantage."
 (s. c. cronwright schreiner, "the ostrich," zoölogist, march,
 as may be seen from the foregoing fairly typical examples, the
 phenomena of courtship are highly developed, and have been most
 carefully studied, in animals outside the mammal series. it may
 seem a long leap from birds to man; yet, as will be seen, the
 phenomena among primitive human peoples, if not, indeed, among
 many civilized peoples also, closely resemble those found among
 birds, though, unfortunately, they have not usually been so
 carefully studied.
 in australia, where dancing is carried to a high pitch of
 elaboration, its association with the sexual impulse is close and
 unmistakable. thus, mr. samuel gason (of whom it has been said
 that "no man living has been more among blacks or knows more of
 their ways") remarks concerning a dance of the dieyerie tribe:
 "this dance men and women only take part in, in regular form and
 position, keeping splendid time to the rattle of the beat of two
 boomerangs; some of the women keep time by clapping their hands
 between their thighs; promiscuous sexual intercourse follows
 after the dance; jealousy is forbidden." again, at the mobierrie,
 or rat-harvest, "many weeks' preparation before the dance comes
 off; no quarreling is allowed; promiscuous sexual intercourse
 during the ceremony." the fact that jealousy is forbidden at
 these festivals clearly indicates that sexual intercourse is a
 recognized and probably essential element in the ceremonies. this
 is further emphasized by the fact that at other festivals open
 sexual intercourse is not allowed. thus, at the mindarie, or
 dance at a peace festival (when a number of tribes comes
 together), "there is great rejoicing at the coming festival,
 which is generally held at the full of the moon, and kept up all
 night. the men are artistically decorated with down and feathers,
 with all kinds of designs. the down and feathers are stuck on
 their bodies with blood freshly taken from their penis; they are
 also nicely painted with various colors; tufts of boughs are tied
 on their ankles to make a noise while dancing. promiscuous sexual
 intercourse is carried on secretly; many quarrels occur at this
 time." (journal of the anthropological institute, vol. xxiv,
 november, , p. .)
 in australian dances, sometimes men and women dance together,
 sometimes the men dance alone, sometimes the women. in one dance
 described by eyre: "women are the chief performers; their bodies
 are painted with white streaks, and their hair adorned with
 cockatoo feathers. they carry large sticks in their hands, and
 place themselves in a row in front, while the men with their
 spears stand in a row behind them. they then all commence their
 movements, but without intermingling, the males and females
 dancing by themselves. the women have occasionally another mode
 of dancing, by joining the hands together over the head, closing
 the feet, and bringing the knees into contact. the legs are then
 thrown outward from the knee, while the feet and hands are kept
 in their original position, and, being drawn quickly in again, a
 sharp sound is produced by the collision. this is also practised
 alone by young girls or by several together for their own
 amusement. it is adopted also when a single woman is placed in
 front of a row of male dancers to excite their passions." (e. j.
 eyre, journals of expeditions into central australia, vol. ii,
 p. .)
 a charming australian folk-tale concerning two sisters with
 wings, who disliked men, and their wooing by a man, clearly
 indicates, even among the australians (whose love-making is
 commonly supposed to be somewhat brutal in character), the
 consciousness that it is by his beauty, charm, and skill in
 courtship that a man wins a woman. unahanach, the lover, stole
 unperceived to the river where the girls were bathing and at last
 showed himself carelessly sitting on a high tree. the girls were
 startled, but thought it would be safe to amuse themselves by
 looking at the intruder. "young and with the most active figure,
 yet of a strength that defied the strongest emu, and even enabled
 him to resist an 'old man' kangaroo, he had no equal in the
 chase, and conscious power gave a dignity to his expression that
 at one glance calmed the fears of the two girls. his large
 brilliant eyes, shaded by a deep fringe of soft black eyelashes,
 gazed down upon them admiringly, and his rich black hair hung
 around his well-formed face, smooth and shining from the emu-oil
 with which it was abundantly covered." at last he persuaded them
 to talk and by and by induced them to call him husband. then they
 went off with him, with no thought of flight in their hearts.
 ("australian folklore stories," collected by w. dunlop, journal
 of the anthropological institute, new series, vol. i, , p.
 of the people of torres straits haddon states (reports
 anthropological expedition to torres straits, vol. v, p. ):
 "it was during the secular dance, or kap, that the girls
 usually lost their hearts to the young men. a young man who was a
 good dancer would find favor in the sight of the girls. this can
 be readily understood by anyone who has seen the active, skilful,
 and fatiguing dances of these people. a young man who could
 acquit himself well in these dances must be possessed of no mean
 strength and agility, qualities which everywhere appeal to the
 opposite sex. further, he was decorated, according to local
 custom, with all that would render him more imposing in the eyes
 of the spectators. as the former chief of mabuiag put it, 'in
 england if a man has plenty of money, women want to marry him; so
 here, if a man dances well they too want him.' in olden days the
 war-dance, which was performed after a successful foray, would be
 the most powerful excitement to a marriageable girl, especially
 if a young man had distinguished himself sufficiently to bring
 home the head of someone he had killed."
 among the tribes inhabiting the mouth of the wanigela river, new
 guinea, "when a boy admires a girl, he will not look at her,
 speak to her, or go near her. he, however, shows his love by
 athletic bounds, posing, and pursuit, and by the spearing of
 imaginary enemies, etc., before her, to attract her attention. if
 the girl reciprocates his love she will employ a small girl to
 give to him an ugauga gauna, or love invitation, consisting of
 an areca-nut whose skin has been marked with different designs,
 significant of her wish to ugauga. after dark he is apprised of
 the place where the girl awaits him; repairing thither, he seats
 himself beside her as close as possible, and they mutually share
 in the consumption of the betel-nut." this constitutes betrothal;
 henceforth he is free to visit the girl's house and sleep there.
 marriages usually take place at the most important festival of
 the year, the kapa, preparations for which are made during the
 three previous months, so that there may be a bountiful and
 unfailing supply of bananas. much dancing takes place among the
 unmarried girls, who, also, are tattooed at this time over the
 whole of the front of the body, special attention being paid to
 the lower parts, as a girl who is not properly tattooed there
 possesses no attraction in the eyes of young men. married women
 and widows and divorced women are not forbidden to take part in
 these dances, but it would be considered ridiculous for them to
 do so. (r. e. guise, "on the tribes of the wanigela river,"
 journal of the anthropological institute, new series, vol. i,
 , pp. ,  et seq.)
 in the island of nias in the malay archipelago, modigliani
 (mainly on the excellent authority of sundermann, the missionary)
 states, at a wedding "dancing and singing go on throughout the
 day. the women, two or three at a time, a little apart from the
 men, take part in the dancing, which is very well adapted to
 emphasize the curves of the flanks and the breasts, though at the
 same time the defects of their legs are exhibited in this series
 of rhythmic contortions which constitute a nias dance. the most
 graceful movement they execute is a lascivious undulation of the
 flanks while the face and breast are slowly wound round by the
 sarong [a sort of skirt] held in the hands, and then again
 revealed. these movements are executed with jerks of the wrist
 and contortions of the flanks, not always graceful, but which
 excite the admiration of the spectators, even of the women, who
 form in groups to sing in chorus a compliment, more or less
 sincere, in which they say: 'they dance with the grace of birds
 when they fly. they dance as the hawk flies; it is lovely to
 see.' they sing and dance both at weddings and at other
 festivals." (elio modigliani, un viaggio a nias, , p. .)
 in sumatra marsden states that chastity prevails more, perhaps,
 than among any other people: "but little apparent courtship
 precedes their marriages. their manners do not admit of it, the
 boojong and geddas (youths of each sex) being carefully kept
 asunder and the latter seldom trusted from under the wings of
 their mothers.... the opportunities which the young people have
 of seeing and conversing with each other are at the birnbangs,
 or public festivals. on these occasions the young people meet
 together and dance and sing in company. the men, when determined
 in their regard, generally employ an old woman as their agent, by
 whom they make known their sentiments, and send presents to the
 female of their choice. the parents then interfere, and the
 preliminaries being settled, a birnbang takes place. the young
 women proceed in a body to the upper end of the balli (hall),
 where there is a part divided off for them by a curtain. they do
 not always make their appearance before dinner, that time,
 previous to a second or third meal, being appropriated to
 cock-fighting or other diversions peculiar to men. in the evening
 their other amusements take place, of which the dances are the
 principal. these are performed either singly or by two women, two
 men, or with both mixed. their motions and attitudes are usually
 slow, approaching often to the lascivious. they bend forward as
 they dance, and usually carry a fan, which they close and strike
 smartly against their elbows at particular cadences.... the
 assembly seldom breaks up before daylight and these birnbangs
 are often continued for several days together. the young men
 frequent them in order to look out for wives, and the lasses of
 course set themselves off to the best advantage. they wear their
 best silken dresses, of their own weaving, as many ornaments of
 filigree as they possess, silver rings upon their arms and legs,
 and ear-rings of a particular construction. their hair is
 variously adorned with flowers, and perfumed with oil of
 benjamin. civet is also in repute, but more used by the men. to
 render their skin fine, smooth, and soft they make use of a white
 cosmetic called poopoor [a mixture of ginger, patch-leaf,
 maize, sandal-wood, fairy-cotton, and mush-seed with a basis of
 fine rice]." (w. marsden, history of sumatra, , p. .)
 the alfurus of seram in the moluccas, who have not yet been
 spoilt by foreign influences, are very fond of music and dancing.
 their maku dances, which take place at night, have been
 described by joest: "great torches of dry bamboos and piles of
 burning resinous leaves light up the giant trees to their very
 summits and reveal in the distance the little huts which the
 alfuras have built in the virgin forests, as well as the skulls
 of the slain. the women squat together by the fire, making a
 deafening noise with the gongs and the drums, while the young
 girls, richly adorned with pearls and fragrant flowers, await the
 beginning of the dance. then appear the men and youths without
 weapons, but in full war-costume, the girdle freshly marked with
 the number of slain enemies. [among the alfuras it is the man who
 has the largest number of heads to show who has most chance of
 winning the object of his love.] they hold each other's arms and
 form a circle, which is not, however, completely closed. a song
 is started, and with small, slow steps this ring of bodies, like
 a winding snake, moves sideways, backward, closes, opens again,
 the steps become heavier, the songs and drums louder, the girls
 enter the circle and with closed eyes grasp the girdle of their
 chosen youths, who clasp them by the hips and necks, the chain
 becomes longer and longer, the dance and song more ardent, until
 the dancers grow tired and disappear in the gloom of the forest."
 (w. joest, welt-fahrten, , bd. ii, p. .)
 the women of the new hebrides dance, or rather sway, to and fro
 in the midst of a circle formed by the men, with whom they do not
 directly mingle. they leap, show their genital parts to the men,
 and imitate the movements of coitus. meanwhile the men unfasten
 the manou (penis-wrap) from their girdles with one hand, with
 the other imitating the action of seizing a woman, and, excited
 by the women, also go through a mock copulation. sometimes, it is
 said, the dancers masturbate. this takes place amid plaintive
 songs, interrupted from time to time by loud cries and howls.
 (untrodden fields of anthropology, by a french army-surgeon,
 , vol. ii, p. .)
 among the hill tribes of the central indian hills may be traced a
 desire to secure communion with the spirit of fertility embodied
 in vegetation. this appears, for instance, in a tree-dance, which
 is carried out on a date associated not only with the growths of
 the crops or with harvest, but also with the seasonal period for
 marriage and the annual saturnalia. (w. crooke, "the hill
 tribes," journal of the anthropological institute, new series,
 vol. i, , p. .) the association of dancing with seasonal
 ritual festivals of a generative character—of which the above is
 a fairly typical instance—leads us to another aspect of these
 phenomena on which i have elsewhere touched in these studies
 (vol. i) when discussing the "phenomena of periodicity."
 the tahitians, when first discovered by europeans, appear to have
 been highly civilized on the sexual side and very licentious. yet
 even at tahiti, when visited by cook, the strict primitive
 relationship between dancing and courtship still remained
 traceable. cook found "a dance called timorodee, which is
 performed by young girls, whenever eight or ten of them can be
 collected together, consisting of motions and gestures beyond
 imagination wanton, in the practice of which they are brought up
 from their earliest childhood, accompanied by words which, if it
 were possible, would more explicitly convey the same ideas. but
 the practice which is allowed to the virgin is prohibited to the
 woman from the moment that she has put these hopeful lessons in
 practice and realized the symbols of the dance." he added,
 however, that among the specially privileged class of the areoi
 these limitations were not observed, for he had heard that this
 dance was sometimes performed by them as a preliminary to sexual
 intercourse. (hawkesworth, an account of the voyages, etc.,
 , vol. ii, p. .)
 among the marquesans at the marriage of a woman, even of high
 rank, she lies with her head at the bridegroom's knees and all
 the male guests come in single file, singing and dancing—those
 of lower class first and the great chiefs last—and have
 connection with the woman. there are often a very large number of
 guests and the bride is sometimes so exhausted at the end that
 she has to spend several days in bed. (tautain, "etude sur le
 mariage chez les polynésiens," l'anthropologie,
 november-december, , p. .) the interesting point for us
 here is that singing and dancing are still regarded as a
 preliminary to a sexual act. it has been noted that in sexual
 matters the polynesians, when first discovered by europeans, had
 largely gone beyond the primitive stage, and that this applies
 also to some of their dances. thus the hula-hula dance, while
 primitive in origin, may probably be compared more to a civilized
 than to a primitive dance, since it has become divorced from real
 life. in the same way, while the sexual pantomime dance of the
 azimba girls of central africa has a direct and recognized
 relationship to the demands of real life, the somewhat allied
 danses du ventre of the hamitic peoples of northern africa are
 merely an amusement, a play more or less based on the sexual
 instinct. at the same time it is important to bear in mind that
 there is no rigid distinction between dances that are, and those
 that are not, primitive. as haddon truly points out in a book
 containing valuable detailed descriptions of dances, even among
 savages dances are so developed that it is difficult to trace
 their origin, and at torres straits, he remarks, "there are
 certainly play or secular dances, dances for pure amusement
 without any ulterior design." (a. c. haddon, head hunters, p.
 .) when we remember that dancing had probably become highly
 developed long before man appeared on the earth, this difficulty
 in determining the precise origin of human dancing cannot cause
 surprise.
 spix and martius described how the muras of brazil by moonlight
 would engage all night in a bacchantic dance in a great circle,
 hand in hand, the men on one side, the women on the other,
 shouting out all the time, the men "who will marry me?" the
 women, "you are a beautiful devil; all women will marry you,"
 (spix and martius, reise in brasilien, , vol. iii, p.
 .) they also described in detail the dance of the brazilian
 puris, performed in a state of complete nakedness, the men in a
 row, the women in another row behind them. they danced backward
 and forward, stamping and singing, at first in a slow and
 melancholy style, but gradually with increasing vigor and
 excitement. then the women began to rotate the pelvis backward
 and forward, and the men to thrust their bodies forward, the
 dance becoming a pantomimic representation of sexual intercourse
 (ibid., vol. i, , pp. -).
 among the apinages of brazil, also, the women stand in a row,
 almost motionless, while the men dance and leap in front of them,
 both men and women at the same time singing. (buscalioni, "reise
 zu den apinages," zeitschrift für ethnologie, , ht. , p.
 among the gilas of new mexico, "when a young man sees a girl whom
 he desires for a wife, he first endeavors to gain the good-will
 of the parents; this accomplished, he proceeds to serenade his
 lady-love, and will often sit for hours, day after day, near her
 home, playing on his flute. should the girl not appear, it is a
 sign she rejects him; but if, on the other hand, she comes out to
 meet him, he knows that his suit is accepted, and he takes her to
 his home. no marriage ceremony is performed."[] (h. h. bancroft,
 native races of the pacific, vol. i, p. .)
 "among the minnetarees a singular night-dance is, it is said,
 sometimes held. during this amusement an opportunity is given to
 the squaws to select their favorites. a squaw, as she dances,
 will advance to a person with whom she is captivated, either for
 his personal attractions or for his renown in arms; she taps him
 on the shoulder and immediately runs out of the lodge and betakes
 herself to the bushes, followed by the favorite. but if it should
 happen that he has a particular preference for another from whom
 he expects the same favor, or if he is restrained by a vow, or is
 already satiated with indulgence, he politely declines her offer
 by placing his hand in her bosom, on which they return to the
 assembly and rejoin the dance." it is worthy of remark that in
 the language of the omahas the word watche applies equally to
 the amusement of dancing and to sexual intercourse. (s. h. long,
 expedition to the rocky mountains, , vol. i, p. .)
 at a kaffir marriage "singing and dancing last until midnight.
 each party [the bride's and the bridegroom's] dances in front of
 the other, but they do not mingle together. as the evening
 advances, the spirits and passions of all become greatly excited;
 and the power of song, the display of muscular action, and the
 gesticulations of the dancers and leapers are something
 extraordinary. the manner in which, at certain times, one man or
 woman, more excited than the rest, bounds from the ranks, leaps
 into the air, bounces forward, and darts backward beggars all
 description. these violent exercises usually close about
 midnight, when each party retires; generally, each man selects a
 paramour, and, indulging in sexual gratification, spends the
 remainder of the night." (w. c. holden, the kaffir race, ,
 p. .)
 at the initiation of kaffir boys into manhood, as described by
 holden, they were circumcised. "cattle are then slaughtered by
 the parents, and the boys are plentifully supplied with flesh
 meat; a good deal of dancing also ensues at this stage of the
 proceedings. the ukut-shila consists in attiring themselves
 with the leaves of the wild date in the most fantastic manner;
 thus attired they visit each of the kraals to which they belong
 in rotation, for the purpose of dancing. these dances are the
 most licentious which can be imagined. the women act a prominent
 part in them, and endeavor to excite the passions of the novices
 by performing all sorts of obscene gesticulations. as soon as the
 soreness occasioned by the act of circumcision is healed the boys
 are, as it were, let loose upon society, and exempted from nearly
 all the restraints of law; so that should they even steal and
 slaughter their neighbor's cattle they would not be punished; and
 they have the special privilege of seizing by force, if force be
 necessary, every unmarried woman they choose, for the purpose of
 gratifying their passions." similar festivals take place at the
 initiation of girls. (w. c. holden, the kaffir race, , p.
 the rev. j. macdonald has described the ceremonies and customs
 attending and following the initiation-rites of a young girl on
 her first menstruation among the zulus between the tugela and
 delagoa bay. at this time the girl is called an intonjane. a
 beast is killed as a thank-offering to the ancestral spirits,
 high revel is held for several days, and dancing and music take
 place every night till those engaged in it are all exhausted or
 daylight arrives. "after a few days and when dancing has been
 discontinued, young men and girls congregate in the outer
 apartment of the hut, and begin singing, clapping their hands,
 and making a grunting noise to show their joy. at nightfall most
 of the young girls who were the intonjane's attendants, leave for
 their own homes for the night, to return the following morning.
 thereafter the young men and girls who gathered into the hut in
 the afternoon separate into pairs and sleep together in puris
 naturalibus, for that is strictly ordained by custom. sexual
 intercourse is not allowed, but what is known as metsha or
 ukumetsha is the sole purpose of the novel arrangement.
 ukumetsha may be defined as partial intercourse. every man who
 sleeps thus with a girl has to send to the father of the
 intonjane an assegai; should he have formed an attachment for his
 partner of the night and wish to pay her his addresses, he sends
 two assegais." (rev. j. macdonald, "manners, etc., of south
 african tribes," journal of the anthropological institute, vol.
 xx, november, , p. .)
 goncourt reports the account given him by a french officer from
 senegal of the dances of the women, "a dance which is a gentle
 oscillation of the body, with gradually increasing excitement,
 from time to time a woman darting forward from the group to stand
 in front of her lover, contorting herself as though in a
 passionate embrace, and, on passing her hand between her thighs,
 showing it covered with the moisture of amorous enjoyment."
 (journal, vol. ix, p. .) the dance here referred to is
 probably the bamboula dance of the wolofs, a spring festival
 which has been described by pierre loti in his roman d'un
 spahi, and concerning which various details are furnished by a
 french army-surgeon, acquainted with senegal, in his untrodden
 fields of anthropology. the dance, as described by the latter,
 takes place at night during full moon, the dancers, male and
 female, beginning timidly, but, as the beat of the tam-tams and
 the encouraging cries of the spectators become louder, the dance
 becomes more furious. the native name of the dance is anamalis
 fobil, "the dance of the treading drake." "the dancer in his
 movements imitates the copulation of the great indian duck. this
 drake has a member of a corkscrew shape, and a peculiar movement
 is required to introduce it into the duck. the woman tucks up her
 clothes and convulsively agitates the lower part of her body; she
 alternately shows her partner her vulva and hides it from him by
 a regular movement, backward and forward, of the body."
 (untrodden fields of anthropology, paris, , vol. ii, p.
 among the gurus of the ivory coast (gulf of guinea), eysséric
 observes, dancing is usually carried on at night and more
 especially by the men, and on certain occasions women must not
 appear, for if they assisted at fetichistic dances "they would
 die." under other circumstances men and women dance together with
 ardor, not forming couples but often vis-à-vis: their movements
 are lascivious. even the dances following a funeral tend to
 become sexual in character. at the end of the rites attending the
 funeral of a chief's son the entire population began to dance
 with ever-growing ardor; there was nothing ritualistic or sad in
 these contortions, which took on the character of a lascivious
 dance. men and women, boys and girls, young and old, sought to
 rival each other in suppleness, and the festival became joyous
 and general, as if in celebration of a marriage or a victory.
 (eysséric, "la côte d'ivoire," nouvelles archives des missions
 scientifiques, tome ix, , pp. -.)
 mrs. french-sheldon has described the marriage-rites she observed
 at taveta in east africa. "during this time the young people
 dance and carouse and make themselves generally merry and
 promiscuously drunk, carrying the excess of their dissipation to
 such an extent that they dance until they fall down in a species
 of epileptic fit." it is the privilege of the bridegroom's four
 groomsmen to enjoy the bride first, and she is then handed over
 to her legitimate husband. this people, both men and women, are
 "great dancers and merry-makers; the young fellows will collect
 in groups and dance as though in competition one with the other;
 one lad will dash out from the circle of his companions, rush
 into the middle of a circumscribed space, and scream out 'wow,
 wow!' another follows him and screams; then a third does the
 same. these men will dance with their knees almost rigid, jumping
 into the air until their excitement becomes very great and their
 energy almost spasmodic, leaving the ground frequently three feet
 as they spring into the air. at some of their festivals their
 dancing is carried to such an extent that i have seen a young
 fellow's muscles quiver from head to foot and his jaws tremble
 without any apparent ability on his part to control them, until,
 foaming at the mouth and with his eyes rolling, he falls in a
 paroxysm upon the ground, to be carried off by his companions."
 the writer adds significantly that this dancing "would seem to
 emanate from a species of voluptuousness." (mrs. french-sheldon,
 "customs among the natives of east africa," journal of the
 anthropological institute, vol. xxi, may, , pp. -.) it
 may be added that among the suaheli dances are intimately
 associated with weddings; the suaheli dances have been minutely
 described by velten (sitten und gebraüche der suaheli, pp.
 -). among the akamba of british east africa, also,
 according to h. r. tate (journal of the anthropological
 institute, jan.-june, , p. ), the dances are followed by
 connection between the young men and girls, approved of by the
 parents.
 the dances of the faroe islanders have been described by raymond
 pilet ("rapport sur une mission en islande et aux lies féroë,"
 nouvelles archives des missions scientifiques, tome vii, ,
 p. ). these dances, which are entirely decorous, include
 poetry, music, and much mimicry, especially of battle. they
 sometimes last for two consecutive days and nights. "the dance is
 simply a permitted and discreet method by which the young men may
 court the young girls. the islander enters the circle and places
 himself beside the girl to whom he desires to show his affection;
 if he meets with her approval she stays and continues to dance at
 his side; if not, she leaves the circle and appears later at
 another spot."
 pitre (usi, etc., del popolo siciliano, vol. ii, p. , as
 quoted in marro's pubertà) states that in sicily the youth who
 wishes to marry seeks to give some public proof of his valor and
 to show himself off. in chiaramonte, in evidence of his virile
 force, he bears in procession the standard of some confraternity,
 a high and richly adorned standard which makes its staff bend to
 a semicircle, of such enormous weight that the bearer must walk
 in a painfully bent position, his head thrown back and his feet
 forward. on reaching the house of his betrothed he makes proof of
 his boldness and skill in wielding this extremely heavy standard
 which at this moment seems a plaything in his hands, but may yet
 prove fatal to him through injury to the loins or other parts.
 this same tendency, which we find in so highly developed a degree
 among animals and primitive human peoples, is also universal
 among the children of even the most civilized human races,
 although in a less organized and more confused way. it manifests
 itself as "showing-off." sanford bell, in his study of the
 emotion of love in children, finds that "showing-off" is an
 essential element in the love of children in what he terms the
 second stage (from the eighth to the twelfth year in girls and
 the fourteenth in boys). "it constitutes one of the chief numbers
 in the boy's repertory of love charms, and is not totally absent
 from the girl's. it is a most common sight to see the boys taxing
 their resources in devising means of exposing their own
 excellencies, and often doing the most ridiculous and extravagant
 things. running, jumping, dancing, prancing, sparring, wrestling,
 turning handsprings, somersaults, climbing, walking fences,
 swinging, giving yodels and yells, whistling, imitating the
 movements of animals, 'taking people off,' courting danger,
 affecting courage are some of its common forms.... this
 'showing-off' in the boy lover is the forerunner of the skilful,
 purposive, and elaborate means of self-exhibition in the adult
 male and the charming coquetry in the adult female, in their
 love-relations." (sanford bell, "the emotion of love between the
 sexes," american journal psychology, july, ; cf.
 "showing-off and bashfulness," pedagogical seminary, june,
if, in the light of the previous discussion, we examine such facts as
those here collected, we may easily trace throughout the perpetual
operations of the same instinct. it is everywhere the instinctive object
of the male, who is very rarely passive in the process of courtship, to
assure by his activity in display, his energy or skill or beauty, both his
own passion and the passion of the female. throughout nature sexual
conjugation only takes place after much expenditure of energy.[] we are
deceived by what we see among highly fed domesticated animals, and among
the lazy classes of human society, whose sexual instincts are at once both
unnaturally stimulated and unnaturally repressed, when we imagine that the
instinct of detumescence is normally ever craving to be satisfied, and
that throughout nature it can always be set off at a touch whenever the
stimulus is applied. so far from the instinct of tumescence naturally
needing to be crushed, it needs, on the contrary, in either sex to be
submitted to the most elaborate and prolonged processes in order to bring
about those conditions which detumescence relieves. a state of tumescence
is not normally constant, and tumescence must be obtained before
detumescence is possible.[] the whole object of courtship, of the mutual
approximation and caresses of two persons of the opposite sex, is to
create the state of sexual tumescence.
it will be seen that the most usual method of attaining tumescence—a
method found among the most various kinds of animals, from insects and
birds to man—is some form of the dance. among the negritos of the
philippines dancing is described by a. b. meyer as "jumping in a circle
around a girl and stamping with the feet"; as we have seen, such a dance
is, essentially, a form of courtship that is widespread among animals.
"the true cake-walk," again, stanley hall remarks, "as seen in the south
is perhaps the purest expression of this impulse to courtship antics seen
in man."[] muscular movement of which the dance is the highest and most
complex expression, is undoubtedly a method of auto-intoxication of the
very greatest potency. all energetic movement, indeed, tends to produce
active congestion. in its influence on the brain violent exercise may thus
result in a state of intoxication even resembling insanity. as lagrange
remarks, the visible effects of exercise—heightened color, bright eyes,
resolute air and walk—are those of slight intoxication, and a girl who
has waltzed for a quarter of an hour is in the same condition as if she
had drunk champagne.[] groos regards the dance as, above all, an
intoxicating play of movement, possessing, like other methods of
intoxication,—and even apart from its relationship to combat and
love,—the charm of being able to draw us out of our everyday life and
lead us into a self-created dream-world.[] that the dance is not only a
narcotic, but also a powerful stimulant, we may clearly realize from the
experiments which show that this effect is produced even by much less
complex kinds of muscular movement. this has been clearly determined, for
instance, by féré, in the course of a long and elaborate series of
experiments dealing with the various influences that modify work as
measured by mosso's ergograph. this investigator found that muscular
movement is the most efficacious of all stimulants in increasing muscular
power.[] it is easy to trace these pleasurable effects of combined
narcotic and stimulant motion in everyday life and it is unnecessary to
enumerate its manifestations.[] 
dancing is so powerful an agent on the organism, as sergi truly
 remarks (les emotions, p. ), because its excitation is
 general, because it touches every vital organ, the higher centers
 no longer dominating. primitive dancing differs very widely from
 that civilized kind of dancing—finding its extreme type in the
 ballet—in which energy is concentrated into the muscles below
 the knee. in the finest kinds of primitive dancing all the limbs,
 the whole body, take part. for instance, "the marquisan girls,"
 herman melville remarked in typee, "dance all over, as it were;
 not only do their feet dance, but their arms, hands,
 fingers,—ay, their very eyes seem to dance in their heads. in
 good sooth, they so sway their floating forms, arch their necks,
 toss aloft their naked arms, and glide, and swim, and whirl,"
 etc.
 if we turn to a very different people, we find this
 characteristic of primitive dancing admirably illustrated by the
 missionary, holden, in the case of kaffir dances. "so far as i
 have observed," he states, "the perfection of the art or science
 consists in their being able to put every part of the body into
 motion at the same time. and as they are naked, the bystander
 has a good opportunity of observing the whole process, which
 presents a remarkably odd and grotesque appearance,—the head,
 the trunk, the arms, the legs, the hands, the feet, bones,
 muscles, sinews, skin, scalp, and hair, each and all in motion at
 the same time, with feathers waving, tails of monkeys and wild
 beasts dangling, and shields beating, accompanied with whistling,
 shouting, and leaping. it would appear as though the whole frame
 was hung on springing wires or cords. dances are held in high
 repute, being the natural expression of joyous emotion, or
 creating it when absent. there is, perhaps, no exercise in
 greater accordance with the sentiments or feelings of a barbarous
 people, or more fully calculated to gratify their wild and
 ungoverned passions." (w. c. holden, the kaffir race, , p.
dancing, as the highest and most complex form of muscular movement, is the
most potent method of obtaining the organic excitement muscular movement
yields, and thus we understand how from the earliest zoölogical ages it
has been brought to the service of the sexual instinct as a mode of
attaining tumescence. among savages this use of dancing works harmoniously
with the various other uses which dancing possesses in primitive times
and which cause it to occupy so large and vital a part in savage life that
it may possibly even affect the organism to such an extent as to mold the
bones; so that some authorities have associated platycnemia with dancing.
as civilization advances, the other uses of dancing fall away, but it
still remains a sexual stimulant. burton, in his anatomy of melancholy,
brings forward a number of quotations from old authors showing that
dancing is an incitement to love.[]
the catholic theologians (debreyne, mœchialogie, pp.
 -) for the most part condemn dancing with much severity. in
 protestant germany, also, it is held that dance meetings and
 musical gatherings are frequent occasions of unchastity. thus in
 the leipzig district when a girl is asked "how did you fall?" she
 nearly always replies "at the dance." (die
 geschlechtlich-sittliche verhältnisse im deutschen reiche, vol.
 i, p. .) it leads quite as often, and no doubt oftener, to
 marriage. rousseau defended it on this account (nouvelle
 heloïse, bk. iv, letter x); dancing is, he held, an admirable
 preliminary to courtship, and the best way for young people to
 reveal themselves to each other, in their grace and decorum,
 their qualities and defects, while its publicity is its
 safeguard. an international congress of dancing masters was held
 at barcelona in . in connection with this congress, giraudet,
 president of the international academy of dancing masters, issued
 an inquiry to over  teachers of dancing throughout the world
 in order to ascertain the frequency with which dancing led to
 marriage. of over one million pupils of dancing, either married
 or engaged to be married, it was found that in most countries
 more than  per cent. met their conjugal partners at dances. the
 smallest proportion was in norway, with only  per cent., and
 the highest, germany, with  per cent. intermediate are france,
  per cent.; america,  per cent.; italy,  per cent.; spain,
  per cent.; holland, bulgaria, and england,  per cent.;
 australia and roumania,  per cent., etc. of the teachers
 themselves  per cent. met their partners at dances. (quoted
 from the figaro in beiblatt "sexualreform" to geschlecht und
 gesellschaft, , p. .) 
in civilization, however, dancing is not only an incitement to love and a
preliminary to courtship, but it is often a substitute for the normal
gratification of the sexual instinct, procuring something of the pleasure
and relief of gratified love. in occasional abnormal cases this may be
consciously realized. thus sadger, who regards the joy of dancing as a
manifestation of "muscular eroticism," gives the case of a married
hysterical woman of , with genital anesthesia, but otherwise strongly
developed skin eroticism, who was a passionate dancer: "i often felt as
though i was giving myself to my partner in dancing," she said, "and was
actually having coitus with him. i have the feeling that in me dancing
takes the place of coitus."[] normally something of the same feeling is
experienced by many young women, who will expend a prodigious amount of
energy in dancing, thus procuring, not fatigue, but happiness and
relief.[] it is significant that, after sexual relations have begun,
girls generally lose much of their ardor in dancing. even our modern
dances, it is worthy of note, are often of sexual origin; thus, the most
typical of all, the waltz, was originally (as schaller, quoted by groos,
states) the close of a complicated dance which "represented the romance of
love, the seeking and the fleeing, the playful sulking and shunning, and
finally the jubilation of the wedding."[]
not only is movement itself a source of tumescence, but even the spectacle
of movement tends to produce the same effect. the pleasure of witnessing
movement, as represented by its stimulating effect on the muscular
system,—for states of well-being are accompanied by an increase of
power,—has been found susceptible of exact measurement by féré. he has
shown that to watch a colored disk when in motion produced stronger
muscular contractions, as measured by the dynamometer, than to watch the
same disk when motionless. even in the absence of color a similar
influence of movement was noted, and watching a modified metronome
produced a greater increase of work with the ergograph than when working
to the rhythm of the metronome without watching it.[] this psychological
fact has been independently discovered by advertisers, who seek to impress
the value of their wares on the public by the device of announcing them by
moving colored lights. the pleasure given by the ballet largely depends on
the same fact. not only is dancing an excitation, but the spectacle of
dancing is itself exciting, and even among savages dances have a public
which becomes almost as passionately excited as the dancers
themselves.[] it is in virtue of this effect of dancing and similar
movements that we so frequently find, both among the lower animals and
savage man, that to obtain tumescence in both sexes, it is sufficient for
one sex alone, usually the male, to take the active part. this point
attracted the attention of kulischer many years ago, and he showed how the
dances of the men, among savages, excite the women, who watch them
intently though unobtrusively, and are thus influenced in choosing their
lovers. he was probably the first to insist that in man sexual selection
has taken place mainly through the agency of dances, games, and
festivals.[]
it is now clear, therefore, why the evacuation theory of the sexual
impulse must necessarily be partial and inadequate. it leaves out of
account the whole of the phenomena connected with tumescence, and those
phenomena constitute the most prolonged, the most important, the most
significant stage of the sexual process. it is during tumescence that the
whole psychology of the sexual impulse is built up; it is as an incident
arising during tumescence and influencing its course that we must probably
regard nearly every sexual aberration. it is with the second stage of the
sexual process, when the instinct of detumescence arises, that the analogy
of evacuation can alone be called in. even here, that analogy, though
real, is not complete, the nervous element involved in detumescence being
out of all proportion to the extent of the evacuation. the typical act of
evacuation, however, is a nervous process, and when we bear this in mind
we may see whatever truth the evacuation theory possesses. beaunis classes
the sexual impulse with the "needs of activity," but under this head he
coordinates it with the "need of urination." that is to say, that both
alike are nervous explosions. micturition, like detumescence, is a
convulsive act, and, like detumescence also, it is certainly connected
with cerebral processes; thus in epilepsy the passage of urine which may
occur (as in a girl described by gowers with minor attacks during which it
was emitted consciously, but involuntarily) is really a part of the
process.[]
there appears, indeed, to be a special and intimate connection between the
explosion of sexual detumescence and the explosive energy of the bladder;
so that they may reinforce each other and to a limited extent act
vicariously in relieving each other's tension. it is noteworthy that
nocturnal and diurnal incontinence of urine, as well as "stammering" of
the bladder, are all specially liable to begin or to cease at puberty. in
men and even infants, distention of the bladder favors tumescence by
producing venous congestion, though at the same time it acts as a physical
hindrance to sexual detumescence[]; in women—probably not from pressure
alone, but from reflex nervous action—a full bladder increases both
sexual excitement and pleasure, and i have been informed by several women
that they have independently discovered this fact for themselves and
acted in accordance with it. conversely, sexual excitement increases the
explosive force of the bladder, the desire to urinate is aroused, and in
women the sexual orgasm, when very acute and occurring with a full
bladder, is occasionally accompanied, alike in savage and civilized life,
by an involuntary and sometimes full and forcible expulsion of urine.[]
the desire to urinate may possibly be, as has been said, the normal
accompaniment of sexual excitement in women (just as it is said to be in
mares; so that the arabs judge that the mare is ready for the stallion
when she urinates immediately on hearing him neigh). the association may
even form the basis of sexual obsessions.[] i have elsewhere shown that,
of all the influences which increase the expulsive force of the bladder,
sexual excitement is the most powerful.[] it may also have a reverse
influence and inhibit contraction of the bladder, sometimes in association
with shyness, but also independently of shyness. there is also reason to
suppose that the nervous energy expended in an explosion of the tension
of the sexual organs may sometimes relieve the bladder; it is well
recognized that a full bladder is a factor in producing sexual emissions
during sleep, the explosive energy of the bladder being inhibited and
passing over into the sexual sphere. conversely, it appears that explosion
of the bladder relieves sexual tension. an explosion of the nervous
centers connected with the contraction of the bladder will relieve nervous
tension generally; there are forms of epilepsy in which the act of
urination constitutes the climax, and gowers, in dealing with minor
epilepsy, emphasizes the frequency of micturition, which "may occur with
spasmodic energy when there is only the slightest general stiffness,"
especially in women. he adds the significant remark that it "sometimes
seems to relieve the cerebral tension,"[] and gives the case of a girl
in whom the aura consisted mainly of a desire to urinate; if she could
satisfy this the fit was arrested; if not she lost consciousness and a
severe fit followed.
if micturition may thus relieve nervous tension generally, it is not
surprising that it should relieve the tension of the centers with which it
is most intimately connected. sérieux records the case of a girl of ,
possessed by an impulse to masturbation which she was unable to control,
although anxious to conquer it, who only found relief in the act of
urination; this soothed her and to some extent satisfied the sexual
excitement; when the impulse to masturbate was restrained the impulse to
urinate became imperative; she would rise four or five times in the night
for this purpose, and even urinate in bed or in her clothes to obtain the
desired sexual relief.[] i am acquainted with a lady who had a similar,
but less intense, experience during childhood. sometimes, especially in
children, the act of urination becomes an act of gratification at the
climax of sexual pleasure, the imitative symbol of detumescence. thus
schultze-malkowsky describes a little girl of  who would bribe her girl
companions with little presents to play the part of horses on all fours
while she would ride on their necks with naked thighs in order to obtain
the pleasurable sensation of close contact. with one special friend she
would ride facing backward, and leaning forward to embrace her body
impulsively, and at the same time pressing the neck closely between her
thighs, would urinate.[] féré has recorded the interesting case of a man
who, having all his life after puberty been subject to monthly attacks of
sexual excitement, after the age of  completely lost the liability to
these manifestations, but found himself subject, in place of them, to
monthly attacks of frequent and copious urination, accompanied by sexual
day-dreams, but by no genital excitement.[] such a case admirably
illustrates the compensatory relation of sexual and vesical excitation.
this mutual interaction is easily comprehensible when we recall the very
close nervous connection which exists between the mechanisms of the sexual
organs and the bladder.
nor are such relationships found to be confined to these two centers; in a
lesser degree the more remote explosive centers are also affected; all
motor influences may spread to related muscles; the convulsion of
laughter, for instance, seems to be often in relation with the sexual
center, and groos has suggested that the laughter which, especially in the
sexually minded, often follows allusions to the genital sphere is merely
an effort to dispel nascent sexual excitement by liberating an explosion
of nervous energy in another direction.[] nervous discharges tend to
spread, or to act vicariously, because the motor centers are more or less
connected.[] of all the physiological motor explosions, the sexual
orgasm, or detumescence, is the most massive, powerful, and overwhelming.
so volcanic is it that to the ancient greek philosophers it seemed to be a
minor kind of epilepsy. the relief of detumescence is not merely the
relief of an evacuation; it is the discharge, by the most powerful
apparatus for nervous explosion in the body, of the energy accumulated and
stored up in the slow process of tumescence, and that discharge
reverberates through all the nervous centers in the organism.
"the sophist of abdera said that coitus is a slight fit of
 epilepsy, judging it to be an incurable disease." (clement of
 alexandria, pædagogus, bk. ii, chapter x.) and cœlius
 aurelianus, one of the chief physicians of antiquity, said that
 "coitus is a brief epilepsy." féré has pointed out that both
 these forms of nervous storm are sometimes accompanied by similar
 phenomena, by subjective sensations of sight or smell, for
 example; and that the two kinds of discharge may even be
 combined. (féré, les epileptiques, pp. -; also "exces
 vénériens et epilepsie," comptes-rendus de la société de
 biologie, april , , and the same author's instinct
 sexuel, pp. , , and his "priapisme epileptique," la
 médecine moderne, february , .) the epileptic convulsion in
 some cases involves the sexual mechanism, and it is noteworthy
 that epilepsy tends to appear at puberty. in modern times even so
 great a physician as boerhaave said that coitus is a "true
 epilepsy," and more recently roubaud, hammond, and kowalevsky
 have emphasized the resemblance between coitus and epilepsy,
 though without identifying the two states. some authorities have
 considered that coitus is a cause of epilepsy, but this is denied
 by christian, strümpell, and löwenfeld. (löwenfeld, sexualleben
 und nervenleiden, , p. .) féré has recorded the case of a
 youth in whom the adoption of the practice of masturbation,
 several times a day, was followed by epileptic attacks which
 ceased when masturbation was abandoned. (féré, comptes-rendus de
 la socitété de biologie, april , .) 
it seems unprofitable at present to attempt any more fundamental analysis
of the sexual impulse. beaunis, in the work already quoted, vaguely
suggests that we ought possibly to connect the sexual excitation which
leads the male to seek the female with chemical action, either exercised
directly on the protoplasm of the organism or indirectly by the
intermediary of the nervous system, and especially by smell in the higher
animals. clevenger, spitzka, kiernan, and others have also regarded the
sexual impulse as protoplasmic hunger, tracing it back to the presexual
times when one protozoal form absorbed another. in the same way joanny
roux, insisting that the sexual need is a need of the whole organism, and
that "we love with the whole of our body," compares the sexual instinct to
hunger, and distinguishes between "sexual hunger" affecting the whole
system and "sexual appetite" as a more localized desire; he concludes that
the sexual need is an aspect of the nutritive need.[] useful as these
views are as a protest against too crude and narrow a conception of the
part played by the sexual impulse, they carry us into a speculative region
where proof is difficult. 
we are now, however, at all events, in a better position to define the
contents of the sexual impulse. we see that there are certainly, as moll
has indicated, two constituents in that impulse; but, instead of being
unrelated, or only distantly related, we see that they are really so
intimately connected as to form two distinct stages in the same process: a
first stage, in which—usually under the parallel influence of internal
and external stimuli—images, desires, and ideals grow up within the mind,
while the organism generally is charged with energy and the sexual
apparatus congested with blood; and a second stage, in which the sexual
apparatus is discharged amid profound sexual excitement, followed by deep
organic relief. by the first process is constituted the tension which the
second process relieves. it seems best to call the first impulse the
process of tumescence; the second the process of detumescence.[] the
first, taking on usually a more active form in the male, has the double
object of bringing the male himself into the condition in which discharge
becomes imperative, and at the same time arousing in the female a similar
ardent state of emotional excitement and sexual turgescence. the second
process has the object, directly, of discharging the tension thus produced
and, indirectly, of effecting the act by which the race is propagated.
it seems to me that this is at present the most satisfactory way in which
we can attempt to define the sexual impulse.
[] c. lloyd morgan, "instinct and intelligence in animals,"
nature, february , .
[] essais, livre iii, ch. v.
[] féré, "la prédisposition dans l'étiologie des perversions
sexuelles," revue de médecine, . in his more recent work on the
evolution and dissolution of the sexual instinct féré perhaps slightly
modified his position by stating that "the sexual appetite is, above all,
a general need of the organism based on a sensation of fullness, a sort of
need of evacuation," l'instinct sexuel, , p. . löwenfeld (ueber
die sexuelle konstitution, p. ) gives a qualified acceptance to the
excretory theory, as also rohleder (die zeugung beim menschen, p. ).
[] goltz, centralblatt für die med. wissenschaften, , no.
, and , no. ; also beiträge zur lehre von den funktionen des
frosches, berlin, , p. .
[] j. tarchanoff, "zur physiologie des geschlechtsapparatus des
frosches," archiv für die gesammte physiologie, , vol. xl, p. .
[] e. steinach, "untersuchungen zur vergleichenden physiologie
der männlicher geschlechtsorgane insbesondere der accessorischen
geschlechtsdrüsen," archiv für die gesammte physiologie, vol. lvi, ,
pp. -.
[] see, e.g., shattock and seligmann, "the acquirement of
secondary sexual characters," proceedings of the royal society, vol.
lxxiii, , p. .
[] for facts bearing on this point, see guinard, art.
"castration," richet's dictionnaire de physiologie. the general results
of castration are summarized by robert müller in ch. vii of his
sexualbiologie; also by f. h. a. marshall, the physiology of
reproduction, ch, ix; see also e. pittard, "les skoptzy,"
l'anthropologie, , p. .
[] for an ancient discussion of this point, see schurig,
spermatologia, , cap. ix.
[] j. j. matignon, superstition, crime, et misère en chine,
"les eunuques du palais impérial de pékin," .
[] p. marie, "eunuchisme et erotisme," nouvelle iconographie
de la salpêtrière, , no. , and progrès médical, jan. , .
[] pedagogical seminary, july, , p. .
[] see, for instance, the case reported in another volume of
these studies ("sexual inversion"), in which castration was performed on
a sexual invert without effecting any change.
[] guinard, art. "castration," dictionnaire de physiologie.
[] m. a. colman, medical standard, august, ; clara barrus,
american journal of insanity, april, ; macnaughton-jones, british
gynæcological journal, august, ; w. g. bridgman, medical standard,
; j. m. cotterill, british medical journal, april ,  (also
private communication); paul f. mundé, american journal of obstetrics,
march, .
[] see swale vincent, internal secretion and the ductless
glands, ; f. h. a. marshall, the physiology of reproduction, ,
ch. ix; munzer, berliner klinische wochenschrift, nov., ; c. sajous,
the internal secretions, vol. i, . the adrenal glands have been
fully and interestingly studied by glynn, quarterly journal of medicine,
jan., ; the thyroid, by ewan waller, practitioner, aug., ; the
internal secretion of the ovary, by a. louise mcilroy, proceedings royal
society medicine, july, . for a discussion at the neurology section
of the british medical association meeting, , see british medical
journal, nov. , .
[] since this was written i have come across a passage in
hampa (p. ), by rafael salillas, the spanish sociologist, which shows
that the analogy has been detected by the popular mind and been embodied
in popular language: "a significant anatomico-physiological concordance
supposes a resemblance between the mouth and the sexual organs of a woman,
between coitus and the ingestion of food, and between foods which do not
require mastication and the spermatic ejaculation; these representations
find expression in the popular name papo given to women's genital
organs. 'papo' is the crop of birds, and is derived from 'papar' (latin,
papare), to eat soft food such as we call pap. with this representation
of infantile food is connected the term leche [milk] as applied to the
ejaculated genital fluid." cleland, it may be added, in the most
remarkable of english erotic novels, the memoirs of fanny hill, refers
to "the compressive exsuction with which the sensitive mechanism of that
part [the vagina] thirstily draws and drains the nipple of love," and
proceeds to compare it to the action of the child at the breast. it
appears that, in some parts of the animal world at least, there is a real
analogy of formation between the oral and vaginal ends of the trunk. this
is notably the case in some insects, and the point has been elaborately
discussed by walter wesché, "the genitalia of both the sexes in diptera,
and their relation to the armature of the mouth," transactions of the
linnean society, second series, vol. ix, zoölogy, .
[] näcke now expresses himself very dubiously on the point;
see, e.g., archiv für kriminal-anthropologie, , p. .
[] untersuchungen über die libido sexualis, berlin, -.
[] moll adopts the term "impulse of detumescence"
(detumescenztrieb) instead of "impulse of ejaculation," because in women
there is either no ejaculation or it cannot be regarded as essential.
[] i quote from the second edition, as issued in .
[] this is the theory which by many has alone been seen in
darwin's descent of man. thus even his friend wallace states
unconditionally (tropical nature, p. ) that darwin accepted a
"voluntary or conscious sexual selection," and seems to repeat the same
statement in darwinism (), p. . lloyd morgan, in his discussion
of the pairing instinct in habit and instinct (), seems also only to
see this side of darwin's statement.
[] in his variation of animals and plants under
domestication, darwin was puzzled by the fact that, in captivity, animals
often copulate without conceiving and failed to connect that fact with the
processes behind his own theory of sexual selection.
[] beaunis, sensations internes, ch. v, "besoins sexuels,"
. it may be noted that many years earlier burdach (in his physiologie
als erfahrungswissenschaft, ) had recognized that the activity of the
male favored procreation, and that mental and physical excitement seemed
to have the same effect in the female also.
[] it is scarcely necessary to point out that this is too
extreme a position. as j. g. millais remarks of ducks (natural history of
british ducks, p. ), in courtship "success in winning the admiration of
the female is rather a matter of persistent and active attention than
physical force," though the males occasionally fight over the female. the
ruff (machetes pugnax) is a pugnacious bird, as his name indicates. yet,
the reeve, the female of this species, is, as e. selous shows ("sexual
selection in birds," zoölogist, feb. and may, ), completely mistress
of the situation. "she seems the plain and unconcerned little mistress of
a numerous and handsome seraglio, each member of which, however he flounce
and bounce, can only wait to be chosen." any fighting among the males is
only incidental and is not a factor in selection. moreover, as r. müller
points out (loc. cit., p. ), fighting would not usually attain the
end desired, for if the males expend their time and strength in a serious
combat they merely afford a third less pugnacious male a better
opportunity of running off with the prize.
[] l. tillier, l'instinct sexuel, , pp. , , , 
et seq., .
[] k. groos, die spiele der thiere, ; die spiele der
menschen, ; both are translated into english.
[] prof. h. e. ziegler, in a private letter to professor groos,
spiele der thiere, p. .
[] die spiele der thiere, p. . this had been briefly
pointed out by earlier writers. thus, haeckel (gen. morph., ii, p. )
remarked that fighting for females is a special or modified kind of
struggle for existence, and that it acts on both sexes.
[] it may be added that in the human species, as bray remarks
("le beau dans la nature," revue philosophique, october, , p. ),
"the hymen would seem to tend to the same end, as if nature had wished to
reinforce by a natural obstacle the moral restraint of modesty, so that
only the vigorous male could insure his reproduction." there can be no
doubt that among many animals pairing is delayed so far as possible until
maturity is reached. "it is a strict rule amongst birds," remarks j. g.
millais (op. cit., p. ), "that they do not breed until both sexes have
attained the perfect adult plumage." until that happens, it seems
probable, the conditions for sexual excitation are not fully established.
we know little, says howard (zoölogist, , p. ), of the age at
which birds begin to breed, but it is known that "there are yearly great
numbers of individuals who do not breed, and the evidence seems to show
that such individuals are immature."
[] a. marro, la puberté, , p. .
[] lloyd morgan, animal behavior, , pp. -. it may be
added that, on the esthetic side, hirn, in his study (the origins of
art, ), reaches conclusions which likewise, in the main, concord with
those of groos.
[] it may be noted that the marriage ceremony itself is often
of the nature of a courtship, a symbolic courtship, embodying a method of
attaining tumescence. as crawley, who has brought out this point, puts it,
"marriage-rites of union are essentially identical with love charms," and
he refers in illustration to the custom of the australian arunta, among
whom the man or woman by making music on the bull-roarer compels a person
of the opposite sex to court him or her, the marriage being thus
completed. (e. crawley, the mystic rose, p. .)
[] the more carefully animals are observed, the more often this
is found to be the case, even with respect to species which possess no
obvious and elaborate process for obtaining tumescence. see, for instance,
the detailed and very instructive account—too long to quote here—given
by e. selous of the preliminaries to intercourse practised by a pair of
great crested grebes, while nest-building. intercourse only took place
with much difficulty, after many fruitless invitations, more usually given
by the female. ("observational diary of the habits of the great crested
grebe," zöologist, september, .) it is exactly the same with
savages. the observation of foley (bulletin de la société d'anthropologie
de paris, november , ) that in savages "sexual erethism is very
difficult" is of great significance and certainly in accordance with the
facts. this difficulty of erethism is the real cause of many savage
practices which to the civilized person often seem perverse; the women of
the caroline islands, for instance, as described by finsch, require the
tongue or even the teeth to be applied to the clitoris, or a great ant to
be applied to bite the parts, in order to stimulate orgasm. westermarck,
after quoting a remark of mariner's concerning the women of tonga,—"it
must not be supposed that these women are always easily won; the greatest
attentions and the most fervent solicitations are sometimes requisite,
even though there be no other lover in the way,"—adds that these words
"hold true for a great many, not to say all, savage and barbarous races
now existing." (human marriage, p. .) the old notions, however, as to
the sexual licentiousness of peoples living in natural conditions have
scarcely yet disappeared. see appendix a; "the sexual instinct in
savages."
[] in men a certain degree of tumescence is essential before
coitus can be effected at all; in women, though tumescence is not
essential to coitus, it is essential to orgasm and the accompanying
physical and psychic relief. the preference which women often experience
for prolonged coitus is not, as might possibly be imagined, due to
sensuality, but has a profound physiological basis.
[] stanley hall, adolescence, vol. i, p. .
[] see lagrange's physiology of bodily exercise, especially
chapter ii. it is a significant fact that, as sergi remarks (les
emotions, p. ), the physiological results of dancing are identical
with the physiological results of pleasure.
[] groos, spiele der menschen, p. . zmigrodzki (die
mutter bei den volkern des arischen stammes, p.  et seq.) has an
interesting passage describing the dance—especially the russian dance—in
its orgiastic aspects.
[] féré, "l'influence sur le travail volontaire d'un muscle de
l'activité d'autres muscles," nouvelles iconographie de la salpêtrière,
[] "the sensation of motion," kline remarks ("the migratory
impulse," american journal of psychology, october, , p. ), "as yet
but little studied from a pleasure-pain standpoint, is undoubtedly a
pleasure-giving sensation. for aristippus the end of life is pleasure,
which he defines as gentle motion. motherhood long ago discovered its
virtue as furnished by the cradle. galloping to town on the parental knee
is a pleasing pastime in every nursery. the several varieties of swings,
the hammock, see-saw, flying-jenny, merry-go-round, shooting the chutes,
sailing, coasting, rowing, and skating, together with the fondness of
children for rotating rapidly in one spot until dizzy and for jumping from
high places, are all devices and sports for stimulating the sense of
motion. in most of these modes of motion the body is passive or
semipassive, save in such motions as skating and rotating on the feet. the
passiveness of the body precludes any important contribution of stimuli
from kinesthetic sources. the stimuli are probably furnished, as dr. hall
and others have suggested, by a redistribution of fluid pressure (due to
the unusual motions and positions of the body) to the inner walls of the
several vascular systems of the body."
[] anatomy of melancholy, part iii., sect. ii, mem. ii, subs.
iv.
[] sadger, "haut-, schleimhaut-, und muskel-erotik," jahrbuch
für psychoanalytische forschungen, bd. iii, , p. .
[] marro (pubertà, p.  et seq.) has some observations on
this point. it was an insight into this action of dancing which led the
spanish clergy of the eighteenth century to encourage the national
enthusiasm for dancing (as baretti informs us) in the interests of
morality.
[] it is scarcely necessary to remark that a primitive dance,
even when associated with courtship, is not necessarily a sexual
pantomime; as wallaschek, in his comprehensive survey of primitive dances,
observes, it is more usually an animal pantomime, but nonetheless
connected with the sexual instinct, separation of the sexes, also, being
no proof to the contrary. (wallaschek, primitive music, pp. -.)
grosse (anfänge der kunst, english translation, p. ) has pointed out
that the best dancer would be the best fighter and hunter, and that sexual
selection and natural selection would thus work in harmony.
[] féré, "le plaisir de la vue du mouvement," comptes-rendus
de la société de biologie, november , ; also travail et plaisir,
ch. xxix.
[] groos repeatedly emphasizes the significance of this fact
(spiele der menschen, pp. -,  et seq.); grosse (anfänge der
kunst, p. ) had previously made some remarks on this point.
[] m. kulischer, "die geschlechtliche zuchtwahl bei den
menschen in der urzeit," zeitschrift für ethnologie, , p.  et
seq.
[] sir w. r. gowers, epilepsy, d ed., , pp. , .
[] guyon, leçons cliniques sur les maladies des voies
urinaires, d ed., , vol. ii, p. .
[] see, e.g., féré, l'instinct sexuel, pp. -: brantôme
was probably the first writer in modern times who referred to this
phenomenon. macgillicuddy (functional disorders of the nervous system in
women, p. ) refers to the case of a lady who always had sudden and
uncontrollable expulsion of urine whenever her husband even began to
perform the marital act, on which account he finally ceased intercourse
with her. kubary states that in ponape (western carolines) the men are
accustomed to titillate the vulva of their women with the tongue until the
excitement is so intense that involuntary emission of urine takes place;
this is regarded as the proper moment for intercourse.
[] thus pitres and régis (transactions of the international
medical congress, moscow, vol. iv, p. ) record the case of a young girl
whose life was for some years tormented by a groundless fear of
experiencing an irresistible desire to urinate. this obsession arose from
once seeing at a theater a man whom she liked, and being overcome by
sexual feeling accompanied by so strong a desire to urinate that she had
to leave the theater. an exactly similar case in a young woman of erotic
temperament, but prudish, has been recorded by freud (zur neurosenlehre,
bd. i, p. ). morbid obsessions of modesty involving the urinary sphere
and appearing at puberty are evidently based on transformed sexual
emotion. such a case has been recorded by marandon de montyel (archives
de neurologie, vol. xii, , p. ); this lady, who was of somewhat
neuropathic temperament, from puberty onward, in order to be able to
urinate found it necessary not only to be absolutely alone, but to feel
assured that no one even knew what was taking place.
[] h. ellis, "the bladder as a dynamometer," american journal
of dermatology, may, .
[] sir w. gowers, "minor epilepsy," british medical journal,
january , ; ib., epilepsy, d ed., , p. ; see also h.
ellis, art. "urinary bladder, influence of the mind on the," in tuke's
dictionary of psychological medicine.
[] sérieux, recherches cliniques sur les anomalies de
l'instinct sexuel, p. .
[] emil schultze-malkowsky, "der sexuelle trieb in
kindesalter," geschlecht und gesellschaft, vol. ii, part , p. .
[] féré, "note sur un cas de periodicité sexuelle chez
l'homme," comptes-rendus société de biologie, july , .
[] it is a familiar fact that, in women, occasionally, a
violent explosion of laughter may be propagated to the bladder-center and
produce urination. "she laughed till she nearly wetted the floor," i have
heard a young woman in the country say, evidently using without thought a
familiar locution. professor bechterew has recorded the case of a young
married lady who, from childhood, wherever she might be—in friends'
houses, in the street, in her own drawing-room—had always experienced an
involuntary and forcible emission of urine, which could not be stopped or
controlled, whenever she laughed; the bladder was quite sound and no
muscular effort produced the same result. (w. bechterew, neurologisches
centralblatt, .) in women these relationships are most easily
observed, partly because in them the explosive centers are more easily
discharged, and partly, it is probable, so far as the bladder is
concerned, because, although after death the resistance to the emission of
urine is notably less in women, during life about the same amount of force
is necessary in both sexes; so that a greater amount of energy flows to
the bladder in women, and any nervous storm or disturbance is thus
specially apt to affect the bladder.
[] "every pain," remarks marie de manacéine, "produces a number
of movements which are apparently useless: we cry out, we groan, we move
our limbs, we throw ourselves from one side to the other, and at bottom
all these movements are logical because by interrupting and breaking our
attention they render us less sensitive to the pain. in the days before
chloroform, skillful surgeons requested their patients to cry out during
the operation, as we are told by gratiolet, who could not explain so
strange a fact, for in his time the antagonism of movements and attention
was not recognized." (marie de manacéine, archives italiennes de
biologie, , p. .) this antagonism of attention by movement is but
another way of expressing the vicarious relationship of motor discharges.
[] joanny roux, psychologie de l'instinct sexuel, , pp.
-. it is disputed whether hunger is located in the whole organism, and
powerful arguments have been brought against the view. (w. cannon, "the
nature of hunger," popular science monthly, sept., .) thirst is
usually regarded as organic (a. mayer, la soif, ).
[] if there is any objection to these terms it is chiefly
because they have reference to vascular congestion rather than to the
underlying nervous charging and discharging, which is equally fundamental,
and in man more prominent than the vascular phenomena.
the chief key to the relationship between love and pain to be found in
animal courtship—courtship a source of combativity and of cruelty—human
play in the light of animal courtship—the frequency of crimes against the
person in adolescence—marriage by capture and its psychological
basis—man's pleasure in exerting force and woman's pleasure in
experiencing it—resemblance of love to pain even in outward
expression—the love-bite—in what sense pain may be pleasurable—the
natural contradiction in the emotional attitude of women toward
men—relative insensibility to pain of the organic sexual sphere in
women—the significance of the use of the ampallang and similar appliances
in coitus—the sexual subjection of women to men in part explainable as
the necessary condition for sexual pleasure.
the relation of love to pain is one of the most difficult problems, and
yet one of the most fundamental, in the whole range of sexual psychology.
why is it that love inflicts, and even seeks to inflict, pain? why is it
that love suffers pain, and even seeks to suffer it? in answering that
question, it seems to me, we have to take an apparently circuitous route,
sometimes going beyond the ostensible limits of sex altogether; but if we
can succeed in answering it we shall have come very near one of the great
mysteries of love. at the same time we shall have made clear the normal
basis on which rest the extreme aberrations of love.
the chief key to the relationship of love to pain is to be found by
returning to the consideration of the essential phenomena of courtship in
the animal world generally. courtship is a play, a game; even its combats
are often, to a large extent, mock-combats; but the process behind it is
one of terrible earnestness, and the play may at any moment become deadly.
courtship tends to involve a mock-combat between males for the possession
of the female which may at any time become a real combat; it is a pursuit
of the female by the male which may at any time become a kind of
persecution; so that, as colin scott remarks, "courting may be looked upon
as a refined and delicate form of combat." the note of courtship, more
especially among mammals, is very easily forced, and as soon as we force
it we reach pain.[] the intimate and inevitable association in the
animal world of combat—of the fighting and hunting impulses—with the
process of courtship alone suffices to bring love into close connection
with pain.
among mammals the male wins the female very largely by the display of
force. the infliction of pain must inevitably be a frequent indirect
result of the exertion of power. it is even more than this; the infliction
of pain by the male on the female may itself be a gratification of the
impulse to exert force. this tendency has always to be held in check, for
it is of the essence of courtship that the male should win the female, and
she can only be won by the promise of pleasure. the tendency of the male
to inflict pain must be restrained, so far as the female is concerned, by
the consideration of what is pleasing to her. yet, the more carefully we
study the essential elements of courtship, the clearer it becomes that,
playful as these manifestations may seem on the surface, in every
direction they are verging on pain. it is so among animals generally; it
is so in man among savages. "it is precisely the alliance of pleasure and
pain," wrote the physiologist burdach, "which constitutes the voluptuous
emotion."
nor is this emotional attitude entirely confined to the male. the female
also in courtship delights to arouse to the highest degree in the male the
desire for her favors and to withhold those favors from him, thus finding
on her part also the enjoyment of power in cruelty. "one's cruelty is
one's power," millament says in congreve's way of the world, "and when
one parts with one's cruelty one parts with one's power."
at the outset, then, the impulse to inflict pain is brought into
courtship, and at the same time rendered a pleasurable idea to the female,
because with primitive man, as well as among his immediate ancestors, the
victor in love has been the bravest and strongest rather than the most
beautiful or the most skilful. until he can fight he is not reckoned a man
and he cannot hope to win a woman. among the african masai a man is not
supposed to marry until he has blooded his spear, and in a very different
part of the world, among the dyaks of borneo, there can be little doubt
that the chief incentive to head-hunting is the desire to please the
women, the possession of a head decapitated by himself being an excellent
way of winning a maiden's favor.[] such instances are too well known to
need multiplication here, and they survive in civilization, for, even
among ourselves, although courtship is now chiefly ruled by quite other
considerations, most women are in some degree emotionally affected by
strength and courage. but the direct result of this is that a group of
phenomena with which cruelty and the infliction of pain must inevitably be
more or less allied is brought within the sphere of courtship and rendered
agreeable to women. here, indeed, we have the source of that love of
cruelty which some have found so marked in women. this is a phase of
courtship which helps us to understand how it is that, as we shall see,
the idea of pain, having become associated with sexual emotion, may be
pleasurable to women.
thus, in order to understand the connection between love and pain, we have
once more to return to the consideration, under a somewhat new aspect, of
the fundamental elements in the sexual impulse. in discussing the
"evolution of modesty" we found that the primary part of the female in
courtship is the playful, yet serious, assumption of the rôle of a hunted
animal who lures on the pursuer, not with the object of escaping, but with
the object of being finally caught. in considering the "analysis of the
sexual impulse" we found that the primary part of the male in courtship is
by the display of his energy and skill to capture the female or to arouse
in her an emotional condition which leads her to surrender herself to him,
this process itself at the same time heightening his own excitement. in
the playing of these two different parts is attained in both male and
female that charging of nervous energy, that degree of vascular
tumescence, necessary for adequate discharge and detumescence in an
explosion by which sperm-cells and germ-cells are brought together for the
propagation of the race. we are now concerned with the necessary interplay
of the differing male and female rôles in courtship, and with their
accidental emotional by-products. both male and female are instinctively
seeking the same end of sexual union at the moment of highest excitement.
there cannot, therefore, be real conflict.[] but there is the semblance
of a conflict, an apparent clash of aim, an appearance of cruelty.
moreover,—and this is a significant moment in the process from our
present point of view,—when there are rivals for the possession of one
female there is always a possibility of actual combat, so tending to
introduce an element of real violence, of undisguised cruelty, which the
male inflicts on his rival and which the female views with satisfaction
and delight in the prowess of the successful claimant. here we are brought
close to the zoölogical root of the connection between love and pain.[]
in his admirable work on play in man groos has fully discussed the plays
of combat (kampfspiele), which begin to develop even in childhood and
assume full activity during adolescence; and he points out that, while the
impulse to such play certainly has a wider biological significance, it
still possesses a relationship to the sexual life and to the rivalries of
animals in courtship which must not be forgotten.[]
nor is it only in play that the connection between love and combativity
may still be traced. with the epoch of the first sexual relationship,
marro points out, awakes the instinct of cruelty, which prompts the youth
to acts which are sometimes in absolute contrast to his previous conduct,
and leads him to be careless of the lives of others as well as of his own
life.[] marro presents a diagram showing how crimes against the person
in italy rise rapidly from the age of  to  and reach a climax between
 and . in paris, gamier states, crimes of blood are six times more
frequent in adolescents (aged  to ) than in adults. it is the same
elsewhere.[] this tendency to criminal violence during the age-period of
courtship is a by-product of the sexual impulse, a kind of tertiary sexual
character.
in the process of what is commonly termed "marriage by capture" we have a
method of courtship which closely resembles the most typical form of
animal courtship, and is yet found in all but the highest and most
artificial stages of human society. it may not be true that, as maclennan
and others have argued, almost every race of man has passed through an
actual stage of marriage by capture, but the phenomena in question have
certainly been extremely widespread and exist in popular custom even among
the highest races today. george sand has presented a charming picture of
such a custom, existing in france, in her mare au diable. farther away,
among the kirghiz, the young woman is pursued by all her lovers, but she
is armed with a formidable whip, which she does not hesitate to use if
overtaken by a lover to whom she is not favorable. among the malays,
according to early travelers, courtship is carried on in the water in
canoes with double-bladed paddles; or, if no water is near, the damsel,
stripped naked of all but a waistband, is given a certain start and runs
off on foot followed by her lover. vaughan stevens in  reported that
this performance is merely a sport; but skeat and blagden, in their more
recent and very elaborate investigations in the malay states, find that it
is a rite. 
even if we regard "marriage by capture" as simply a primitive human
institution stimulated by tribal exigencies and early social conditions,
yet, when we recall its widespread and persistent character, its close
resemblance to the most general method of courtship among animals, and the
emotional tendencies which still persist even in the most civilized men
and women, we have to recognize that we are in presence of a real
psychological impulse which cannot fail in its exercise to introduce some
element of pain into love.
there are, however, two fundamentally different theories concerning
"marriage by capture." according to the first, that of maclennan, which,
until recently, has been very widely accepted, and to which professor
tylor has given the weight of his authority, there has really been in
primitive society a recognized stage in which marriages were effected by
the capture of the wife. such a state of things maclennan regarded as once
world-wide. there can be no doubt that women very frequently have been
captured in this way among primitive peoples. nor, indeed, has the custom
been confined to savages. in europe we find that even up to comparatively
recent times the abduction of women was not only very common, but was
often more or less recognized. in england it was not until henry vii's
time that the violent seizure of a woman was made a criminal offense, and
even then the statute was limited to women possessed of lands and goods. a
man might still carry off a girl provided she was not an heiress; but even
the abduction of heiresses continued to be common, and in ireland remained
so until the end of the eighteenth century. but it is not so clear that
such raids and abductions, even when not of a genuinely hostile character,
have ever been a recognized and constant method of marriage.
according to the second set of theories, the capture is not real, but
simulated, and may be accounted for by psychological reasons. fustel de
coulanges, in la cité antique,[] discussing simulated marriage by
capture among the romans, mentioned the view that it was "a symbol of the
young girl's modesty," but himself regarded it as an act of force to
symbolize the husband's power. he was possibly alluding to herbert
spencer, who suggested a psychological explanation of the apparent
prevalence of marriage by capture based on the supposition that, capturing
a wife being a proof of bravery, such a method of obtaining a wife would
be practised by the strongest men and be admired, while, on the other
hand, he considered that "female coyness" was "an important factor" in
constituting the more formal kinds of marriage by capture ceremonial.[]
westermarck, while accepting true marriage by capture, considers that
spencer's statement "can scarcely be disproved."[] in his valuable study
of certain aspects of primitive marriage crawley, developing the
explanation rejected by fustel de coulanges, regards the fundamental fact
to be the modesty of women, which has to be neutralized, and this is done
by "a ceremonial use of force, which is half real and half make-believe."
thus the manifestations are not survivals, but "arising in a natural way
from normal human feelings. it is not the tribe from which the bride is
abducted, nor, primarily, her family and kindred, but her sex"; and her
"sexual characters of timidity, bashfulness, and passivity are
sympathetically overcome by make-believe representations of male
characteristic actions."[]
it is not necessary for the present purpose that either of these two
opposing theories concerning the origin of the customs and feelings we are
here concerned with should be definitely rejected. whichever theory is
adopted, the fundamental psychic element which here alone concerns us
still exists intact.[] it may be pointed out, however, that we probably
have to accept two groups of such phenomena: one, seldom or never existing
as the sole form of marriage, in which the capture is real; and another in
which the "capture" is more or less ceremonial or playful. the two groups
coexist among the turcomans, as described by vambery, who are constantly
capturing and enslaving the persians of both sexes, and, side by side with
this, have a marriage ceremonial of mock-capture of entirely playful
character. at the same time the two groups sometimes overlap, as is
indicated by cases in which, while the "capture" appears to be ceremonial,
the girl is still allowed to escape altogether if she wishes. the
difficulty of disentangling the two groups is shown by the fact that so
careful an investigator as westermarck cites cases of real capture and
mock-capture together without attempting to distinguish between them. from
our present point of view it is quite unnecessary to attempt such a
distinction. whether the capture is simulated or real, the man is still
playing the masculine and aggressive part proper to the male; the woman is
still playing the feminine and defensive part proper to the female. the
universal prevalence of these phenomena is due to the fact that
manifestations of this kind, real or pretended, afford each sex the very
best opportunity for playing its proper part in courtship, and so, even
when the force is real, must always gratify a profound instinct.
it is not necessary to quote examples of marriage by capture from
 the numerous and easily accessible books on the evolution of
 marriage. (sir a. b. ellis, adopting maclennan's standpoint,
 presented a concise statement of the facts in an article on
 "survivals from marriage by capture," popular science monthly,
 , p. .) it may, however, be worth while to bring together
 from scattered sources a few of the facts concerning the
 phenomena in this group and their accompanying emotional state,
 more especially as they bear on the association of love with
 force, inflicted or suffered.
 in new caledonia, foley remarks, the successful coquette goes off
 with her lover into the bush. "it usually happens that, when she
 is successful, she returns from her expedition, tumbled, beaten,
 scratched, even bitten on the nape and shoulders, her wounds thus
 bearing witness to the quadrupedal attitude she has assumed amid
 the foliage." (foley, bulletin de la société d'anthropologie,
 paris, november , .)
 of the natives of new south wales, turnbull remarked at the
 beginning of the nineteenth century that "their mode of courtship
 is not without its singularity. when a young man sees a female to
 his fancy he informs her she must accompany him home; the lady
 refuses; he not only enforces compliance with threats but blows;
 thus the gallant, according to the custom, never fails to gain
 the victory, and bears off the willing, though struggling
 pugilist. the colonists for some time entertained the idea that
 the women were compelled and forced away against their
 inclinations; but the young ladies informed them that this mode
 of gallantry was the custom, and perfectly to their taste," (j.
 turnbull, a voyage round the world, , p. ; cf. brough
 smyth, aborigines of victoria, , vol. i, p. .)
 as regards capture of women among central australian tribes,
 spencer and gillen remark: "we have never in any of these central
 tribes met with any such thing, and the clubbing part of the
 story may be dismissed, so far as the central area of the
 continent is concerned. to the casual observer what looks like a
 capture (we are, of course, only speaking of these tribes) is in
 reality an elopement, in which the woman is an aiding and
 abetting party." (northern tribes of central australia. p. .)
 "the new zealand method of courtship and matrimony is a most
 extraordinary one. a man sees a woman whom he fancies he should
 like for a wife; he asks the consent of her father, or, if an
 orphan, of her nearest relative, which, if he obtain, he carries
 his intended off by force, she resisting with all her strength,
 and, as the new zealand girls are generally fairly robust,
 sometimes a dreadful struggle takes place; both are soon stripped
 to the skin and it is sometimes the work of hours to remove the
 fair prize a hundred yards. it sometimes happens that she secures
 her retreat into her father's house, and the lover loses all
 chance of ever obtaining her." (a. earle, narratives of
 residence in new zealand, , p. .)
 among the eskimos (probably near smith sound) "there is no
 marriage ceremony further than that the boy is required to carry
 off his bride by main force, for even among these blubber-eating
 people the woman only saves her modesty by a show of resistance,
 although she knows years beforehand that her destiny is sealed
 and that she is to become the wife of the man from whose
 embraces, when the nuptial day comes, she is obliged by the
 inexorable law of public opinion to free herself, if possible, by
 kicking and screaming with might and main until she is safely
 landed in the hut of her future lord, when she gives up the
 combat very cheerfully and takes possession of her new abode. the
 betrothal often takes place at a very early period of life and at
 very dissimilar ages." marriage only takes place when the lover
 has killed his first seal; this is the test of manhood and
 maturity. (j. j. hayes, open polar sea, , p. .)
 marriage by "capture" is common in war and raiding in central
 africa. "the women, as a rule," johnston says, "make no very
 great resistance on these occasions. it is almost like playing a
 game. a woman is surprised as she goes to get water at the
 stream, or when she is on the way to or from the plantation. the
 man has only got to show her she is cornered and that escape is
 not easy or pleasant and she submits to be carried off. as a
 general rule, they seem to accept very cheerfully these abrupt
 changes in their matrimonial existence." (sir h. h. johnston,
 british central africa, p. .)
 among the wild tribes of the malay peninsula in one form of
 wedding rite the bridegroom is required to run seven times around
 an artificial mound decorated with flowers and the emblem of the
 people's religion. in the event of the bridegroom failing to
 catch the bride the marriage has to be postponed. among the orang
 laut, or sea-gipsies, the pursuit sometimes takes the form of a
 canoe-race; the woman is given a good start and must be overtaken
 before she has gone a certain distance. (w. w. skeat, journal
 anthropological institute, jan.-june, , p. ; skeat and
 blagden, pagan races of the malay, vol. ii, p.  et seq.,
 fully discuss the ceremony around the mound.)
 "calmuck women ride better than the men. a male calmuck on
 horseback looks as if he was intoxicated, and likely to fall off
 every instant, though he never loses his seat; but the women sit
 with more ease, and ride with extraordinary skill. the ceremony
 of marriage among the calmucks is performed on horseback. a girl
 is first mounted, who rides off at full speed. her lover pursues,
 and if he overtakes her she becomes his wife and the marriage is
 consummated upon the spot, after which she returns with him to
 his tent. but it sometimes happens that the woman does not wish
 to marry the person by whom she is pursued, in which case she
 will not suffer him to overtake her; and we were assured that no
 instance occurs of a calmuck girl being thus caught, unless she
 has a partiality for her pursuer. if she dislikes him, she rides,
 to use the language of english sportsmen, 'neck or nothing,'
 until she has completely escaped or until the pursuer's horse is
 tired out, leaving her at liberty to return, to be afterward
 chased by some more favored admirer." (e. d. clarke, travels,
 , vol. i, p. .)
 among the bedouins marriage is arranged between the lover and the
 girl's father, often without consulting the girl herself. "among
 the arabs of sinai the young maid comes home in the evening with
 the cattle. at a short distance from the camp she is met by the
 future spouse and a couple of his young friends and carried off
 by force to her father's tent. if she entertains any suspicion of
 their designs she defends herself with stones, and often inflicts
 wounds on the young men, even though she does not dislike the
 lover, for, according to custom, the more she struggles, bites,
 kicks, cries, and strikes, the more she is applauded ever after
 by her own companions." after being taken to her father's tent,
 where a man's cloak is thrown over her by one of the bridegroom's
 relations, she is dressed in garments provided by her future
 husband, and placed on a camel, "still continuing to struggle in
 a most unruly manner, and held by the bridegroom's friends on
 both sides." she is then placed in a recess of the husband's
 tent. here the marriage is finally consummated, "the bride still
 continuing to cry very loudly. it sometimes happens that the
 husband is obliged to tie his bride, and even to beat her, before
 she can be induced to comply with his desires." if, however, she
 really does not like her husband, she is perfectly free to leave
 him next morning, and her father is obliged to receive her back
 whether he wishes to or not. it is not considered proper for a
 widow or divorced woman to make any resistance on being married.
 (j. l. burckhardt, notes on the bedouins and wahábys, , p.
  et seq.)
 among the turcomans forays for capturing and enslaving their
 persian neighbors were once habitual. vambery describes their
 "marriage ceremonial when the young maiden, attired in bridal
 costume, mounts a high-bred courser, taking on her lap the
 carcass of a lamb or goat, and setting off at full gallop,
 followed by the bridegroom and other young men of the party, also
 on horseback; she is always to strive, by adroit turns, etc., to
 avoid her pursuers, that no one approach near enough to snatch
 from her the burden on her lap. this game, called kökbüri
 (green wolf), is in use among all the nomads of central asia."
 (a. vambery, travels in central asia, , p. .)
 in china, a missionary describes how, when he was called upon to
 marry the daughter of a chinese christian brought up in native
 customs, he was compelled to wait several hours, as the bride
 refused to get up and dress until long after the time appointed
 for the wedding ceremony, and then only by force. "extreme
 reluctance and dislike and fear are the true marks of a happy and
 lively wedding." (a. e. moule, new china and old, p. .)
 it is interesting to find that in the indian art of love a kind
 of mock-combat, accompanied by striking, is a recognized and
 normal method of heightening tumescence. vatsyayana has a
 chapter "on various manners of striking," and he approves of the
 man striking the woman on the back, belly, flanks, and buttocks,
 before and during coitus, as a kind of play, increasing as sexual
 excitement increases, which the woman, with cries and groans,
 pretends to bid the man to stop. it is mentioned that, especially
 in southern india, various instruments (scissors, needles, etc.)
 are used in striking, but this practice is condemned as barbarous
 and dangerous. (kama sutra, french translation, iii, chapter
 v.)
 in the story of aladdin, in the arabian nights, the bride is
 undressed by the mother and the other women, who place her in the
 bridegroom's bed "as if by force, and, according to the custom of
 the newly married, she pretends to resist, twisting herself in
 every direction, and seeking to escape from their hands." (les
 mille nuits, tr. mardrus, vol. xi, p. .)
 it is said that in those parts of germany where preliminary
 probenächte before formal marriage are the rule it is not
 uncommon for a young woman before finally giving herself to a man
 to provoke him to a physical struggle. if she proves stronger she
 dismisses him; if he is stronger she yields herself willingly.
 (w. henz, "probenächte," sexual-probleme, oct., , p. .)
 among the south slavs of servia and bulgaria, according to
 krauss, it is the custom to win a woman by seizing her by the
 ankle and bringing her to the ground by force. this method of
 wooing is to the taste of the woman, and they are refractory to
 any other method. the custom of beating or being beaten before
 coitus is also found among the south slavs. (κρυπτάδια,
 vol. vi, p. .)
 in earlier days violent courtship was viewed with approval in the
 european world, even among aristocratic circles. thus in the
 medieval lai de graélent of marie de france this breton knight
 is represented as very chaste, possessing a high ideal of love
 and able to withstand the wiles of women. one day when he is
 hunting in a forest he comes upon a naked damsel bathing,
 together with her handmaidens. overcome by her beauty, he seizes
 her clothes in case she should be alarmed, but is persuaded to
 hand them to her; then he proceeds to make love to her. she
 replies that his love is an insult to a woman of her high
 lineage. finding her so proud, graélent sees that his prayers are
 in vain. he drags her by force into the depth of the forest, has
 his will of her, and begs her very gently not to be angry,
 promising to love her loyally and never to leave her. the damsel
 saw that he was a good knight, courteous, and wise. she thought
 within herself that if she were to leave him she would never find
 a better friend.
 brantôme mentions a lady who confessed that she liked to be
 "half-forced" by her husband, and he remarks that a woman who is
 "a little difficult and resists" gives more pleasure also to her
 lover than one who yields at once, just as a hard-fought battle
 is a more notable triumph than an easily won victory. (brantôme,
 vie des dames galantes, discours i.) restif de la bretonne,
 again, whose experience was extensive, wrote in his
 anti-justine that "all women of strong temperament like a sort
 of brutality in sexual intercourse and its accessories."
 ovid had said that a little force is pleasing to a woman, and
 that she is grateful to the ravisher against whom she struggles
 (ars amatoria, lib. i). one of janet's patients (raymond and
 janet, les obsessions et la psychasthénie, vol. ii, p. )
 complained that her husband was too good, too devoted. "he does
 not know how to make me suffer a little. one cannot love anyone
 who does not make one suffer a little." another hysterical woman
 (a silk fetichist, frigid with men) had dreams of men and animals
 abusing her: "i cried with pain and was happy at the same time."
 (clérambault, archives d'anthropologie criminelle, june, ,
 p. .)
 it has been said that among slavs of the lower class the wives
 feel hurt if they are not beaten by their husbands. paullinus, in
 the seventeenth century, remarked that russian women are never
 more pleased and happy than when beaten by their husbands, and
 regard such treatment as proof of love. (see, e.g., c. f. von
 schlichtegroll, sacher-masoch und der masochismus, p. .)
 krafft-ebing believes that this is true at the present day, and
 adds that it is the same in hungary, a hungarian official having
 informed him that the peasant women of the somogyer comitate do
 not think they are loved by their husbands until they have
 received the first box on the ear. (krafft-ebing, psychopathia
 sexualis, english translation of the tenth edition, p. .) i
 may add that a russian proverb says "love your wife like your
 soul and beat her like your shuba" (overcoat); and, according
 to another russian proverb, "a dear one's blows hurt not long."
 at the same time it has been remarked that the domination of men
 by women is peculiarly frequent among the slav peoples. (v.
 schlichtegroll, op. cit., p. .) cellini, in an interesting
 passage in his life (book ii, chapters xxxiv-xxxv), describes
 his own brutal treatment of his model caterina, who was also his
 mistress, and the pleasure which, to his surprise, she took in
 it. dr. simon forman, also, the astrologist, tells in his
 autobiography (p. ) how, as a young and puny apprentice to a
 hosier, he was beaten, scolded, and badly treated by the servant
 girl, but after some years of this treatment he turned on her,
 beat her black and blue, and ever after "mary would do for him
 all that she could."
 that it is a sign of love for a man to beat his sweetheart, and a
 sign much appreciated by women, is illustrated by the episode of
 cariharta and repolido, in "rinconete and cortadillo," one of
 cervantes's exemplary novels. the indian women of south
 america feel in the same way, and mantegazza when traveling in
 bolivia found that they complained when they were not beaten by
 their husbands, and that a girl was proud when she could say "he
 loves me greatly, for he often beats me." (fisiologia della
 donna, chapter xiii.) the same feeling evidently existed in
 classic antiquity, for we find lucian, in his "dialogues of
 courtesans," makes a woman say: "he who has not rained blows on
 his mistress and torn her hair and her garments is not yet in
 love," while ovid advises lovers sometimes to be angry with their
 sweethearts and to tear their dresses.
 among the italian camorrista, according to russo, wives are very
 badly treated. expression is given to this fact in the popular
 songs. but the women only feel themselves tenderly loved when
 they are badly treated by their husbands; the man who does not
 beat them they look upon as a fool. it is the same in the east
 end of london. "if anyone has doubts as to the brutalities
 practised on women by men," writes a london magistrate, "let him
 visit the london hospital on a saturday night. very terrible
 sights will meet his eye. sometimes as many as twelve or fourteen
 women may be seen seated in the receiving room, waiting for their
 bruised and bleeding faces and bodies to be attended to. in nine
 cases out of ten the injuries have been inflicted by brutal and
 perhaps drunken husbands. the nurses tell me, however, that any
 remarks they may make reflecting on the aggressors are received
 with great indignation by the wretched sufferers. they positively
 will not hear a single word against the cowardly ruffians.
 'sometimes,' said a nurse to me, 'when i have told a woman that
 her husband is a brute, she has drawn herself up and replied:
 "you mind your own business, miss. we find the rates and taxes,
 and the likes of you are paid out of 'em to wait on us."'"
 (montagu williams, round london, p. .)
 "the prostitute really loves her souteneur, notwithstanding all
 the persecutions he inflicts on her. their torments only increase
 the devotion of the poor slaves to their 'alphonses.'
 parent-duchâtelet wrote that he had seen them come to the
 hospital with their eyes out of their heads, faces bleeding, and
 bodies torn by the blows of their drunken lovers, but as soon as
 they were healed they went back to them. police-officers tell us
 that it is very difficult to make a prostitute confess anything
 concerning her souteneur. thus, rosa l., whom her 'alphonse'
 had often threatened to kill, even putting the knife to her
 throat, would say nothing, and denied everything when the
 magistrate questioned her. maria r., with her face marked by a
 terrible scar produced by her souteneur, still carefully
 preserved many years afterward the portrait of the aggressor, and
 when we asked her to explain her affection she replied: 'but he
 wounded me because he loved me.' the souteneur's brutality only
 increases the ill-treated woman's love; the humiliation and
 slavery in which the woman's soul is drowned feed her love."
 (niceforo, il gergo, etc., , p. .)
 in a modern novel written in autobiographic form by a young
 australian lady the heroine is represented as striking her
 betrothed with a whip when he merely attempts to kiss her. later
 on her behavior so stings him that his self-control breaks down
 and he seizes her fiercely by the arms. for the first time she
 realizes that he loves her. "i laughed a joyous little laugh,
 saying 'hal, we are quits'; when on disrobing for the night i
 discovered on my soft white shoulders and arms—so susceptible to
 bruises—many marks, and black. it had been a very happy day for
 me." (miles franklin, my brilliant career.)
 it is in large measure the existence of this feeling of
 attraction for violence which accounts for the love-letters
 received by men who are accused of crimes of violence. thus in
 one instance, in chicago (as dr. kiernan writes to me), "a man
 arrested for conspiracy to commit abortion, and also suspected of
 being a sadist, received many proposals of marriage and other
 less modest expressions of affection from unknown women. to judge
 by the signatures, these women belonged to the germans and slavs
 rather than to the anglo-celts."
 neuropathic or degenerative conditions sometimes serve to
 accentuate or reveal ancestral traits that are very ancient in
 the race. under such conditions the tendency to find pleasure in
 subjection and pain, which is often faintly traceable even in
 normal civilized women, may become more pronounced. this may be
 seen in a case described in some detail in the archivio di
 psichiatria. the subject was a young lady of , of noble
 italian birth, but born in tunis. on the maternal side there is a
 somewhat neurotic heredity, and she is herself subject to attacks
 of hystero-epileptoid character. she was very carefully, but
 strictly, educated; she knows several languages, possesses marked
 intellectual aptitudes, and is greatly interested in social and
 political questions, in which she takes the socialistic and
 revolutionary side. she has an attractive and sympathetic
 personality; in complexion she is dark, with dark eyes and very
 dark and abundant hair; the fine down on the upper lip and lower
 parts of the cheeks is also much developed; the jaw is large, the
 head acrocephalic, and the external genital organs of normal
 size, but rather asymmetric. ever since she was a child she has
 loved to work and dream in solitude. her dreams have always been
 of love, since menstruation began as early as the age of , and
 accompanied by strong sexual feelings, though at that age these
 feelings remained vague and indefinite; but in them the desire
 for pleasure was always accompanied by the desire for pain, the
 desire to bite and destroy something, and, as it were, to
 annihilate herself. she experienced great relief after periods of
 "erotic rumination," and if this rumination took place at night
 she would sometimes masturbate, the contact of the bedclothes,
 she said, giving her the illusion of a man. in time this vague
 longing for the male gave place to more definite desires for a
 man who would love her, and, as she imagined, strike her.
 eventually she formed secret relationships with two or three
 lovers in succession, each of these relationships being, however,
 discovered by her family and leading to ineffectual attempts at
 suicide. but the association of pain with love, which had
 developed spontaneously in her solitary dreams, continued in her
 actual relations with her lovers. during coitus she would bite
 and squeeze her arms until the nails penetrated the flesh. when
 her lover asked her why at the moment of coitus she would
 vigorously repel him, she replied: "because i want to be
 possessed by force, to be hurt, suffocated, to be thrown down in
 a struggle." at another time she said: "i want a man with all his
 vitality, so that he can torture and kill my body." we seem to
 see here clearly the ancient biological character of animal
 courtship, the desire of the female to be violently subjugated by
 the male. in this case it was united to sensitiveness to the
 sexual domination of an intellectual man, and the subject also
 sought to stimulate her lovers' intellectual tastes. (archivio
 di psichiatria, vol. xx, fasc. -, p. .) 
this association between love and pain still persists even among the most
normal civilized men and women possessing well-developed sexual impulses.
the masculine tendency to delight in domination, the feminine tendency to
delight in submission, still maintain the ancient traditions when the male
animal pursued the female. the phenomena of "marriage by capture," in its
real and its simulated forms, have been traced to various causes. but it
has to be remembered that these causes could only have been operative in
the presence of a favorable emotional aptitude, constituted by the
zoölogical history of our race and still traceable even today. to exert
power, as psychologists well recognize, is one of our most primary
impulses, and it always tends to be manifested in the attitude of a man
toward the woman he loves.[] 
it might be possible to maintain that the primitive element of more or
less latent cruelty in courtship tends to be more rather than less marked
in civilized man. in civilization the opportunity of dissipating the
surplus energy of the courtship process by inflicting pain on rivals
usually has to be inhibited; thus the woman to be wooed tends to become
the recipient of the whole of this energy, both in its pleasure-giving and
its pain-giving aspects. moreover, the natural process of courtship, as it
exists among animals and usually among the lower human races, tends to
become disguised and distorted in civilization, as well by economic
conditions as by conventional social conditions and even ethical
prescription. it becomes forgotten that the woman's pleasure is an
essential element in the process of courtship. a woman is often reduced to
seek a man for the sake of maintenance; she is taught that pleasure is
sinful or shameful, that sex-matters are disgusting, and that it is a
woman's duty, and also her best policy, to be in subjection to her
husband. thus, various external checks which normally inhibit any passing
over of masculine sexual energy into cruelty are liable to be removed.
we have to admit that a certain pleasure in manifesting his power over a
woman by inflicting pain upon her is an outcome and survival of the
primitive process of courtship, and an almost or quite normal constituent
of the sexual impulse in man. but it must be at once added that in the
normal well-balanced and well-conditioned man this constituent of the
sexual impulse, when present, is always held in check. when the normal man
inflicts, or feels the impulse to inflict, some degree of physical pain on
the woman he loves he can scarcely be said to be moved by cruelty. he
feels, more or less obscurely, that the pain he inflicts, or desires to
inflict, is really a part of his love, and that, moreover, it is not
really resented by the woman on whom it is exercised. his feeling is by
no means always according to knowledge, but it has to be taken into
account as an essential part of his emotional state. the physical force,
the teasing and bullying, which he may be moved to exert under the stress
of sexual excitement, are, he usually more or less unconsciously persuades
himself, not really unwelcome to the object of his love.[] moreover, we
have to bear in mind the fact—a very significant fact from more than one
point of view—that the normal manifestations of a woman's sexual pleasure
are exceedingly like those of pain. "the outward expressions of pain," as
a lady very truly writes,—"tears, cries, etc.,—which are laid stress on
to prove the cruelty of the person who inflicts it, are not so different
from those of a woman in the ecstasy of passion, when she implores the man
to desist, though that is really the last thing she desires."[] if a man
is convinced that he is causing real and unmitigated pain, he becomes
repentant at once. if this is not the case he must either be regarded as a
radically abnormal person or as carried away by passion to a point of
temporary insanity.
the intimate connection of love with pain, its tendency to approach
cruelty, is seen in one of the most widespread of the occasional and
non-essential manifestations of strong sexual emotion, especially in
women, the tendency to bite. we may find references to love-bites in the
literature of ancient as well as of modern times, in the east as well as
in the west. plautus, catullus, propertius, horace, ovid, petronius, and
other latin writers refer to bites as associated with kisses and usually
on the lips. plutarch says that flora, the mistress of cnæus pompey, in
commending her lover remarked that he was so lovable that she could never
leave him without giving him a bite. in the arabic perfumed garden there
are many references to love-bites, while in the indian kama sutra of
vatsyayana a chapter is devoted to this subject. biting in love is also
common among the south slavs.[] the phenomenon is indeed sufficiently
familiar to enable heine, in one of his romancero, to describe those
marks by which the ancient chronicler states that edith swanneck
recognized harold, after the battle of hastings, as the scars of the bites
she had once given him.
it would be fanciful to trace this tendency back to that process of
devouring to which sexual congress has, in the primitive stages of its
evolution, been reduced. but we may probably find one of the germs of the
love-bite in the attitude of many mammals during or before coitus; in
attaining a firm grip of the female it is not uncommon (as may be observed
in the donkey) for the male to seize the female's neck between his teeth.
the horse sometimes bites the mare before coitus and it is said that among
the arabs when a mare is not apt for coitus she is sent to pasture with a
small ardent horse, who excites her by playing with her and biting
her.[] it may be noted, also, that dogs often show their affection for
their masters by gentle bites. children also, as stanley hall has pointed
out, are similarly fond of biting.
perhaps a still more important factor is the element of combat in
tumescence, since the primitive conditions associated with tumescence
provide a reservoir of emotions which are constantly drawn on even in the
sexual excitement of individuals belonging to civilization. the tendency
to show affection by biting is, indeed, commoner among women than among
men and not only in civilization. it has been noted among idiot girls as
well as among the women of various savage races. it may thus be that the
conservative instincts of women have preserved a primitive tendency that
at its origin marked the male more than the female. but in any case the
tendency to bite at the climax of sexual excitement is so common and
widespread that it must be regarded, when occurring in women, as coming
within the normal range of variation in such manifestations. the
gradations are of wide extent; while in its slight forms it is more or
less normal and is one of the origins of the kiss,[] in its extreme
forms it tends to become one of the most violent and antisocial of sexual
aberrations.
a correspondent writes regarding his experience of biting and
 being bitten: "i have often felt inclination to bite a woman i
 love, even when not in coitus or even excited. (i like doing so
 also with my little boy, playfully, as a cat and kittens.) there
 seem to be several reasons for this: () the muscular effect
 relieves me; () i imagine i am giving the woman pleasure; () i
 seem to attain to a more intimate possession of the loved one. i
 cannot remember when i first felt desire to be bitten in coitus,
 or whether the idea was first suggested to me. i was initiated
 into pinching by a french prostitute who once pinched my nates in
 coitus, no doubt as a matter of business; it heightened my
 pleasure, perhaps by stimulating muscular movement. it does not
 occur to me to ask to be pinched when i am very much excited
 already, but only at an earlier stage, no doubt with the object
 of promoting excitement. apart altogether from sexual excitement,
 being pinched is unpleasant to me. it has not seemed to me that
 women usually like to be bitten. one or two women have bitten and
 sucked my flesh. (the latter does not affect me.) i like being
 bitten, partly for the same reason as i like being pinched,
 because if spontaneous it is a sign of my partner's amorousness
 and the biting never seems too hard. women do not usually seem to
 like being bitten, though there are exceptions; 'i should like to
 bite you and i should like you to bite me,' said one woman; i did
 so hard, in coitus, and she did not flinch." "she is particularly
 anxious to eat me alive," another correspondent writes, "and
 nothing gives her greater satisfaction than to tear open my
 clothes and fasten her teeth into my flesh until i yell for
 mercy. my experience has generally been, however," the same
 correspondent continues, "that the cruelty is unconscious. a
 woman just grows mad with the desire to squeeze or bite
 something, with a complete unconsciousness of what result it will
 produce in the victim. she is astonished when she sees the result
 and will hardly believe she has done it." it is unnecessary to
 accumulate evidence of a tendency which is sufficiently common to
 be fairly well known, but one or two quotations may be presented
 to show its wide distribution. in the kama sutra we read: "if
 she is very exalted, and if in the exaltation of her passionate
 transports she begins a sort of combat, then she takes her lover
 by the hair, draws his head to hers, kisses his lower lip, and
 then in her delirium bites him all over his body, shutting her
 eyes"; it is added that with the marks of such bites lovers can
 remind each other of their affections, and that such love will
 last for ages. in japan the maiden of ainu race feels the same
 impulse. a. h. savage landor (alone with the hairy ainu, ,
 p. ) says of an ainu girl: "loving and biting went together
 with her. she could not do the one without the other. as we sat
 on a stone in the twilight she began by gently biting my fingers
 without hurting me, as affectionate dogs do to their masters. she
 then bit my arm, then my shoulder, and when she had worked
 herself up into a passion she put her arms around my neck and bit
 my cheeks. it was undoubtedly a curious way of making love, and,
 when i had been bitten all over, and was pretty tired of the new
 sensation, we retired to our respective homes. kissing,
 apparently, was an unknown art to her."
 the significance of biting, and the close relationship which, as
 will have to be pointed out later, it reveals to other phenomena,
 may be illustrated by some observations which have been made by
 alonzi on the peasant women of sicily. "the women of the people,"
 he remarks, "especially in the districts where crimes of blood
 are prevalent, give vent to their affection for their little ones
 by kissing and sucking them on the neck and arms till they make
 them cry convulsively; all the while they say: 'how sweet you
 are! i will bite you, i will gnaw you all over,' exhibiting every
 appearance of great pleasure. if a child commits some slight
 fault they do not resort to simple blows, but pursue it through
 the street and bite it on the face, ears, and arms until the
 blood flows. at such moments the face of even a beautiful woman
 is transformed, with injected eyes, gnashing teeth, and
 convulsive tremors. among both men and women a very common threat
 is 'i will drink your blood.' it is told on ocular evidence that
 a man who had murdered another in a quarrel licked the hot blood
 from the victim's hand." (g. alonzi, archivio di psichiatria,
 vol. vi, fasc. .) a few years ago a nurse girl in new york was
 sentenced to prison for cruelty to the baby in her charge. the
 mother had frequently noticed that the child was in pain and at
 last discovered the marks of teeth on its legs. the girl admitted
 that she had bitten the child because that action gave her
 intense pleasure. (alienist and neurologist, august, , p.
 .) in the light of such observations as these we may
 understand a morbid perversion of affection such as was recorded
 in the london police news some years ago (). a man of  was
 charged with ill-treating his wife's illegitimate daughter, aged
 , during a period of many months; her lips, eyes, and hands were
 bitten and bruised from sucking, and sometimes her pinafore was
 covered with blood. "defendant admitted he had bitten the child
 because he loved it."
 it is not surprising that such phenomena as these should
 sometimes be the stimulant and accompaniment to the sexual act.
 ferriani thus reports such a case in the words of the young man's
 mistress: "certainly he is a strange, maddish youth, though he is
 fond of me and spends money on me when he has any. he likes much
 sexual intercourse, but, to tell the truth, he has worn out my
 patience, for before our embraces there are always struggles
 which become assaults. he tells me he has no pleasure except when
 he sees me crying on account of his bites and vigorous pinching.
 lately, just before going with me, when i was groaning with
 pleasure, he threw himself on me and at the moment of emission
 furiously bit my right cheek till the blood came. then he kissed
 me and begged my pardon, but would do it again if the wish took
 him." (l. ferriani, archivio di psicopatie sessuale, vol. i,
 fasc.  and , , p. .)
 in morbid cases biting may even become a substitute for coitus.
 thus, moll (die konträre sexualempfindung, second edition, p.
 ) records the case of a hysterical woman who was sexually
 anesthetic, though she greatly loved her husband. it was her
 chief delight to bite him till the blood flowed, and she was
 content if, instead of coitus, he bit her and she him, though she
 was grieved if she inflicted much pain. in other still more
 morbid cases the fear of inflicting pain is more or less
 abolished.
 an idealized view of the impulse of love to bite and devour is
 presented in the following passage from a letter by a lady who
 associates this impulse with the idea of the last supper: "your
 remarks about the lord's supper in 'whitman' make it natural to
 me to tell you my thoughts about that 'central sacrament of
 christianity.' i cannot tell many people because they
 misunderstand, and a clergyman, a very great friend of mine, when
 i once told what i thought and felt, said i was carnal. he did
 not understand the divinity and intensity of human love as i
 understand it. well, when one loves anyone very much,—a child, a
 woman, or a man,—one loves everything belonging to him: the
 things he wears, still more his hands, and his face, every bit of
 his body. we always want to have all, or part, of him as part of
 ourselves. hence the expression: i could devour you, i love you
 so. in some such warm, devouring way jesus christ, i have always
 felt, loved each and every human creature. so it was that he took
 this mystery of food, which by eating became part of ourselves,
 as the symbol of the most intense human love, the most intense
 divine love. some day, perhaps, love will be so understood by all
 that this sacrament will cease to be a superstition, a bone of
 contention, an 'article' of the church, and become, in all
 simplicity, a symbol of pure love." 
while in men it is possible to trace a tendency to inflict pain, or the
simulacrum of pain, on the women they love, it is still easier to trace in
women a delight in experiencing physical pain when inflicted by a lover,
and an eagerness to accept subjection to his will. such a tendency is
certainly normal. to abandon herself to her lover, to be able to rely on
his physical strength and mental resourcefulness, to be swept out of
herself and beyond the control of her own will, to drift idly in delicious
submission to another and stronger will—this is one of the commonest
aspirations in a young woman's intimate love-dreams. in our own age these
aspirations most often only find their expression in such dreams. in ages
when life was more nakedly lived, and emotion more openly expressed, it
was easier to trace this impulse. in the thirteenth century we have found
marie de france—a french poetess living in england who has been credited
with "an exquisite sense of the generosities and delicacy of the heart,"
and whose work was certainly highly appreciated in the best circles and
among the most cultivated class of her day—describing as a perfect, wise,
and courteous knight a man who practically commits a rape on a woman who
has refused to have anything to do with him, and, in so acting, he wins
her entire love. the savage beauty of new caledonia furnishes no better
illustration of the fascination of force, for she, at all events, has done
her best to court the violence she undergoes. in middleton's spanish
gypsy we find exactly the same episode, and the unhappy portuguese nun
wrote: "love me for ever and make me suffer still more." to find in
literature more attenuated examples of the same tendency is easy.
shakespeare, whose observation so little escaped, has seldom depicted the
adult passion of a grown woman, but in the play which he has mainly
devoted to this subject he makes cleopatra refer to "amorous pinches," and
she says in the end: "the stroke of death is as a lover's pinch, which
hurts and is desired." "i think the sabine woman enjoyed being carried off
like that," a woman remarked in front of rubens's "rape of the sabines,"
confessing that such a method of love-making appealed strongly to
herself, and it is probable that the majority of women would be prepared
to echo that remark.
it may be argued that pain cannot give pleasure, and that when
 what would usually be pain is felt as pleasure it cannot be
 regarded as pain at all. it must be admitted that the emotional
 state is often somewhat complex. moreover, women by no means
 always agree in the statement of their experience. it is
 noteworthy, however, that even when the pleasurableness of pain
 in love is denied it is still admitted that, under some
 circumstances, pain, or the idea of pain, is felt as pleasurable.
 i am indebted to a lady for a somewhat elaborate discussion of
 this subject, which i may here quote at length: "as regards
 physical pain, though the idea of it is sometimes exciting, i
 think the reality is the reverse. a very slight amount of pain
 destroys my pleasure completely. this was the case with me for
 fully a month after marriage, and since. when pain has
 occasionally been associated with passion, pleasure has been
 sensibly diminished. i can imagine that, when there is a want of
 sensitiveness so that the tender kiss or caress might fail to
 give pleasure, more forcible methods are desired; but in that
 case what would be pain to a sensitive person would be only a
 pleasant excitement, and it could not be truly said that such
 obtuse persons liked pain, though they might appear to do so. i
 cannot think that anyone enjoys what is pain to them, if only
 from the fact that it detracts and divides the attention. this,
 however, is only my own idea drawn from my own negative
 experience. no woman has ever told me that she would like to have
 pain inflicted on her. on the other hand, the desire to inflict
 pain seems almost universal among men. i have only met one man in
 whom i have never at any time been able to detect it. at the same
 time most men shrink from putting their ideas into practice. a
 friend of my husband finds his chief pleasure in imagining women
 hurt and ill-treated, but is too tender-hearted ever to inflict
 pain on them in reality, even when they are willing to submit to
 it. perhaps a woman's readiness to submit to pain to please a man
 may sometimes be taken for pleasure in it. even when women like
 the idea of pain, i fancy it is only because it implies
 subjection to the man, from association with the fact that
 physical pleasure must necessarily be preceded by submission to
 his will."
 in a subsequent communication this lady enlarged and perhaps
 somewhat modified her statements on this point:—
 "i don't think that what i said to you was quite correct.
 actual pain gives me no pleasure, yet the idea of pain does,
 if inflicted by way of discipline and for the ultimate good of
 the person suffering it. this is essential. for instance, i once
 read a poem in which the devil and the lost souls in hell were
 represented as recognizing that they could not be good except
 under torture, but that while suffering the purifying actions of
 the flames of hell they so realized the beauty of holiness that
 they submitted willingly to their agony and praised god for the
 sternness of his judgment. this poem gave me decided physical
 pleasure, yet i know that if my hand were held in a fire for five
 minutes i should feel nothing but the pain of the burning. to get
 the feeling of pleasure, too, i must, for the moment, revert to
 my old religious beliefs and my old notion that mere suffering
 has an elevating influence; one's emotions are greatly modified
 by one's beliefs. when i was about fifteen i invented a game
 which i played with a younger sister, in which we were supposed
 to be going through a process of discipline and preparation for
 heaven after death. each person was supposed to enter this state
 on dying and to pass successively into the charge of different
 angels named after the special virtues it was their function to
 instill. the last angel was that of love, who governed solely by
 the quality whose name he bore. in the lower stages, we were
 under an angel called severity who prepared us by extreme
 harshness and by exacting implicit obedience to arbitrary orders
 for the acquirement of later virtues. our duties were to
 superintend the weather, paint the sunrise and sunset, etc., the
 constant work involved exercising us in patience and submission.
 the physical pleasure came in in inventing and recounting to each
 other our day's work and the penalties and hardships we had been
 subjected to. we never told each other that we got any physical
 pleasure out of this, and i cannot therefore be sure that my
 sister did so; i only imagine she did because she entered so
 heartily into the spirit of the game. i could get as much
 pleasure by imagining myself the angel and inflicting the pain,
 under the conditions mentioned; but my sister did not like this
 so much, as she then had no companion in subjection. i could not,
 however, thus reverse my feelings in regard to a man, as it would
 appear to me unnatural, and, besides, the greater physical
 strength is essential in the superior position. i can, however,
 by imagining myself a man, sometimes get pleasure in conceiving
 myself as educating and disciplining a woman by severe measures.
 there is, however, no real cruelty in this idea, as i always
 imagine her liking it.
 "i only get pleasure in the idea of a woman submitting herself to
 pain and harshness from the man she loves when the following
 conditions are fulfilled: . she must be absolutely sure of the
 man's love. . she must have perfect confidence in his judgment.
 . the pain must be deliberately inflicted, not accidental. . it
 must be inflicted in kindness and for her own improvement, not in
 anger or with any revengeful feelings, as that would spoil one's
 ideal of the man. . the pain must not be excessive and must be
 what when we were children we used to call a 'tidy' pain; i.e.,
 there must be no mutilation, cutting, etc. . last, one would
 have to feel very sure of one's own influence over the man. so
 much for the idea. as i have never suffered pain under a
 combination of all these conditions, i have no right to say that
 i should or should not experience pleasure from its infliction in
 reality."
 another lady writes: "i quite agree that the idea of pain may be
 pleasurable, but must be associated with something to be gained
 by it. my experience is that it [coitus] does often hurt for a
 few moments, but that passes and the rest is easy; so that the
 little hurt is nothing terrible, but all the same annoying if
 only for the sake of a few minutes' pleasure, which is not long
 enough. i do not know how my experience compares with other
 women's, but i feel sure that in my case the time needed is
 longer than usual, and the longer the better, always, with me. as
 to liking pain—no, i do not really like it, although i can
 tolerate pain very well, of any kind; but i like to feel force
 and strength; this is usual, i think, women being—or supposed to
 be—passive in love. i have not found that 'pain at once kills
 pleasure.'"
 again, another lady briefly states that, for her, pain has a
 mental fascination, and that such pain as she has had she has
 liked, but that, if it had been any stronger, pleasure would have
 been destroyed.
 the evidence thus seems to point, with various shades of
 gradation, to the conclusion that the idea or even the reality of
 pain in sexual emotion is welcomed by women, provided that this
 element of pain is of small amount and subordinate to the
 pleasure which is to follow it. unless coitus is fundamentally
 pleasure the element of pain must necessarily be unmitigated
 pain, and a craving for pain unassociated with a greater
 satisfaction to follow it cannot be regarded as normal.
 in this connection i may refer to a suggestive chapter on "the
 enjoyment of pain" in hirn's origins of art. "if we take into
 account," says hirn, "the powerful stimulating effect which is
 produced by acute pain, we may easily understand why people
 submit to momentary unpleasantness for the sake of enjoying the
 subsequent excitement. this motive leads to the deliberate
 creation, not only of pain-sensations, but also of emotions in
 which pain enters as an element. the violent activity which is
 involved in the reaction against fear, and still more in that
 against anger, affords us a sensation of pleasurable excitement
 which is well worth the cost of the passing unpleasantness. it
 is, moreover, notorious that some persons have developed a
 peculiar art of making the initial pain of anger so transient
 that they can enjoy the active elements in it with almost
 undivided delight. such an accomplishment is far more difficult
 in the case of sorrow.... the creation of pain-sensations may be
 explained as a desperate device for enhancing the intensity of
 the emotional state."
 the relation of pain and pleasure to emotion has been thoroughly
 discussed, i may add, by h. r. marshall in his pain, pleasure,
 and æsthetics. he contends that pleasure and pain are "general
 qualities, one of which must, and either of which may, belong to
 any fixed element of consciousness." "pleasure," he considers,
 "is experienced whenever the physical activity coincident with
 the psychic state to which the pleasure is attached involves the
 use of surplus stored force." we can see, therefore, how, if pain
 acts as a stimulant to emotion, it becomes the servant of
 pleasure by supplying it with surplus stored force.
 this problem of pain is thus one of psychic dynamics. if we
 realize this we shall begin to understand the place of cruelty in
 life. "one ought to learn anew about cruelty," said nietzsche
 (beyond good and evil, ), "and open one's eyes. almost
 everything that we call 'higher culture' is based upon the
 spiritualizing and intensifying of cruelty.... then, to be
 sure, we must put aside teaching the blundering psychology of
 former times, which could only teach with regard to cruelty that
 it originated at the sight of the suffering of others; there is
 an abundant, superabundant enjoyment even in one's own suffering,
 in causing one's own suffering." the element of paradox
 disappears from this statement if we realize that it is not a
 question of "cruelty," but of the dynamics of pain.
 camille bos in a suggestive essay ("du plaisir de la douleur,"
 revue philosophique, july, ) finds the explanation of the
 mystery in that complexity of the phenomena to which i have
 already referred. both pain and pleasure are complex feelings,
 the resultant of various components, and we name that resultant
 in accordance with the nature of the strongest component. "thus
 we give to a complexus a name which strictly belongs only to one
 of its factors, and in pain all is not painful." when pain
 becomes a desired end camille bos regards the desire as due to
 three causes: () the pain contrasts with and revives a pleasure
 which custom threatens to dull; () the pain by preceding the
 pleasure accentuates the positive character of the latter; ()
 pain momentarily raises the lowered level of sensibility and
 restores to the organism for a brief period the faculty of
 enjoyment it had lost.
 it must therefore be said that, in so far as pain is pleasurable,
 it is so only in so far as it is recognized as a prelude to
 pleasure, or else when it is an actual stimulus to the nerves
 conveying the sensation of pleasure. the nymphomaniac who
 experienced an orgasm at the moment when the knife passed through
 her clitoris (as recorded by mantegazza) and the prostitute who
 experienced keen pleasure when the surgeon removed vegetations
 from her vulva (as recorded by féré) took no pleasure in pain,
 but in one case the intense craving for strong sexual emotion,
 and in the other the long-blunted nerves of pleasure, welcomed
 the abnormally strong impulse; and the pain of the incision, if
 felt at all, was immediately swallowed up in the sensation of
 pleasure. moll remarks (konträre sexualempfindung, third
 edition, p. ) that even in man a trace of physical pain may be
 normally combined with sexual pleasure, when the vagina
 contracts on the penis at the moment of ejaculation, the pain,
 when not too severe, being almost immediately felt as pleasure.
 that there is no pleasure in the actual pain, even in masochism,
 is indicated by the following statement which krafft-ebing gives
 as representing the experiences of a masochist (psychopathia
 sexualis english translation, p. ): "the relation is not of
 such a nature that what causes physical pain is simply perceived
 as physical pleasure, for the person in a state of masochistic
 ecstasy feels no pain, either because by reason of his emotional
 state (like that of the soldier in battle) the physical effect on
 his cutaneous nerves is not apperceived, or because (as with
 religious martyrs and enthusiasts) in the preoccupation of
 consciousness with sexual emotion the idea of maltreatment
 remains merely a symbol, without its quality of pain. to a
 certain extent there is overcompensation of physical pain in
 psychic pleasure, and only the excess remains in consciousness as
 psychic lust. this also undergoes an increase, since, either
 through reflex spinal influence or through a peculiar coloring in
 the sensorium of sensory impressions, a kind of hallucination of
 bodily pleasure takes place, with a vague localization of the
 objectively projected sensation. in the self-torture of religious
 enthusiasts (fakirs, howling dervishes, religious flagellants)
 there is an analogous state, only with a difference in the
 quality of pleasurable feeling. here the conception of martyrdom
 is also apperceived without its pain, for consciousness is filled
 with the pleasurably colored idea of serving god, atoning for
 sins, deserving heaven, etc., through martyrdom." this statement
 cannot be said to clear up the matter entirely; but it is fairly
 evident that, when a woman says that she finds pleasure in the
 pain inflicted by a lover, she means that under the special
 circumstances she finds pleasure in treatment which would at
 other times be felt as pain, or else that the slight real pain
 experienced is so quickly followed by overwhelming pleasure that
 in memory the pain itself seems to have been pleasure and may
 even be regarded as the symbol of pleasure.
 there is a special peculiarity of physical pain, which may be
 well borne in mind in considering the phenomena now before us,
 for it helps to account for the tolerance with which the idea of
 pain is regarded. i refer to the great ease with which physical
 pain is forgotten, a fact well known to all mothers, or to all
 who have been present at the birth of a child. as professor von
 tschisch points out ("der schmerz," zeitschrift für psychologie
 und physiologie der sinnesorgane, bd. xxvi, ht.  and , ),
 memory can only preserve impressions as a whole; physical pain
 consists of a sensation and of a feeling. but memory cannot
 easily reproduce the definite sensation of the pain, and thus the
 whole memory is disintegrated and speedily forgotten. it is quite
 otherwise with moral suffering, which persists in memory and has
 far more influence on conduct. no one wishes to suffer moral pain
 or has any pleasure even in the idea of suffering it. 
it is the presence of this essential tendency which leads to a certain
apparent contradiction in a woman's emotions. on the one hand, rooted in
the maternal instinct, we find pity, tenderness, and compassion; on the
other hand, rooted in the sexual instinct, we find a delight in roughness,
violence, pain, and danger, sometimes in herself, sometimes also in
others. the one impulse craves something innocent and helpless, to cherish
and protect; the other delights in the spectacle of recklessness,
audacity, sometimes even effrontery.[] a woman is not perfectly happy in
her lover unless he can give at least some satisfaction to each of these
two opposite longings.
the psychological satisfaction which women tend to feel in a certain
degree of pain in love is strictly co-ordinated with a physical fact.
women possess a minor degree of sensibility in the sexual region. this
fact must not be misunderstood. on the one hand, it by no means begs the
question as to whether women's sensibility generally is greater or less
than that of men; this is a disputed question and the evidence is still
somewhat conflicting.[] on the other hand, it also by no means involves
a less degree of specific sexual pleasure in women, for the tactile
sensibility of the sexual organs is no index to the specific sexual
sensibility of those organs when in a state of tumescence. the real
significance of the less tactile sensibility of the genital region in
women is to be found in parturition and the special liability of the
sexual region in women to injury.[] the women who are less sensitive in
this respect would be better able and more willing to endure the risks of
childbirth, and would therefore tend to supplant those who were more
sensitive. but, as a by-product of this less degree of sensibility, we
have a condition in which physical irritation amounting even to pain may
become to normal women in the state of extreme tumescence a source of
pleasurable excitement, such as it would rarely be to normal men.
to calmann appear to be due the first carefully made observations
 showing the minor sensibility of the genital tract in women.
 (adolf calmann, "sensibilitütsprufungen am weiblicken genitale
 nach forensichen gesichtspunkten," archiv für gynäkologie,
 , p. .) he investigated the vagina, urethra, and anus in
 eighteen women and found a great lack of sensibility, least
 marked in anus, and most marked in vagina. [this distribution of
 the insensitiveness alone indicates that it is due, as i have
 suggested, to natural selection.] sometimes a finger in the
 vagina could not be felt at all. one woman, when a catheter was
 introduced into the anus, said it might be the vagina or urethra,
 but was certainly not the anus. (calmann remarks that he was
 careful to put his questions in an intelligible form.) the women
 were only conscious of the urine being drawn off when they heard
 the familiar sound of the stream or when the bladder was very
 full; if the sound of the stream was deadened by a towel they
 were quite unconscious that the bladder had been emptied. [in
 confirmation of this statement i have noticed that in a lady
 whose distended bladder it was necessary to empty by the catheter
 shortly before the birth of her first child—but who had, indeed,
 been partly under the influence of chloroform—there was no
 consciousness of the artificial relief; she merely remarked that
 she thought she could now relieve herself.] there was some sense
 of temperature, but sense of locality, tactile sense, and
 judgment of size were often widely erroneous. it is significant
 that virgins were just as insensitive as married women or those
 who had had children. calmann's experiments appear to be
 confirmed by the experiments of marco treves, of turin, on the
 thermoesthesiometry of mucous membranes, as reported to the turin
 international congress of physiology (and briefly noted in
 nature, november , ). treves found that the sensitivity
 of mucous membranes is always less than that of the skin. the
 mucosa of the urethra and of the cervix uteri was quite incapable
 of heat and cold sensations, and even the cautery excited only
 slight, and that painful, sensation.
 in further illustration of this point reference may be made to
 the not infrequent cases in which the whole process of
 parturition and the enormous distention of tissues which it
 involves proceed throughout in an almost or quite painless
 manner. it is sufficient to refer to two cases reported in paris
 by macé and briefly summarized in the british medical journal,
 may , . in the first the patient was a primipara  years
 of age, and, until the dilatation of the cervix was complete and
 efforts at expulsion had commenced, the uterine contractions were
 quite painless. in the second case, the mother, aged , a
 tripara, had previously had very rapid labors; she awoke in the
 middle of the night without pains, but during micturition the
 fetal head appeared at the vulva, and was soon born.
 further illustration may be found in those cases in which severe
 inflammatory processes may take place in the genital canal
 without being noticed. thus, maxwell reports the case of a young
 chinese woman, certainly quite normal, in whom after the birth of
 her first child the vagina became almost obliterated, yet beyond
 slight occasional pain she noticed nothing wrong until the
 husband found that penetration was impossible (british medical
 journal, january , , p. ). the insensitiveness of the
 vagina and its contrast, in this respect, with the penis—though
 we are justified in regarding the penis as being, like organs of
 special sense, relatively deficient in general sensibility—are
 vividly presented in such an incident as the following, reported
 a few years ago in america by dr. g. w. allen in the boston
 medical and surgical journal: a man came under observation with
 an edematous, inflamed penis. the wife, the night previous, on
 advice of friends, had injected pure carbolic acid into the
 vagina just previous to coitus. the husband, ignorant of the
 fact, experienced untoward burning and smarting during and after
 coitus, but thought little of it, and soon fell asleep. the next
 morning there were large blisters on the penis, but it was no
 longer painful. when seen by dr. allen the prepuce was retracted
 and edematous, the whole penis was much swollen, and there were
 large, perfectly raw surfaces on either side of the glans. 
in this connection we may well bring into line a remarkable group of
phenomena concerning which much evidence has now accumulated. i refer to
the use of various appliances, fixed in or around the penis, whether
permanently or temporarily during coitus, such appliance being employed at
the woman's instigation and solely in order to heighten her excitement in
congress. these appliances have their great center among the indonesian
peoples (in borneo, java, sumatra, the malay peninsula, the philippines,
etc.), thence extending in a modified form through china, to become, it
appears, considerably prevalent in russia; i have also a note of their
appearance in india. they have another widely diffused center, through
which, however, they are more sparsely scattered, among the american
indians of the northern and more especially of the southern continents.
amerigo vespucci and other early travelers noted the existence of some of
these appliances, and since miklucho-macleay carefully described them as
used in borneo[] their existence has been generally recognized. they are
usually regarded merely as ethnological curiosities. as such they would
not concern us here. their real significance for us is that they
illustrate the comparative insensitiveness of the genital canal in women,
while at the same time they show that a certain amount of what we cannot
but regard as painful stimulation is craved by women, in order to heighten
tumescence and increase sexual pleasure, even though it can only by
procured by artificial methods. it is, of course, possible to argue that
in these cases we are not concerned with pain at all, but with a strong
stimulation that is felt as purely pleasurable. there can be no doubt,
however, that in the absence of sexual excitement this stimulation would
be felt as purely painful, and—in the light of our previous
discussion—we may, perhaps, fairly regard it as a painful stimulation
which is craved, not because it is itself pleasurable, but because it
heightens the highly pleasurable state of tumescence.
borneo, the geographical center of the indonesian world, appears
 also to be the district in which these instruments are most
 popular. the ampallang, palang, kambion, or sprit-sail yard,
 as it is variously termed, is a little rod of bone or metal
 nearly two inches in length, rounded at the ends, and used by the
 kyans and dyaks of borneo. before coitus it is inserted into a
 transverse orifice in the penis, made by a painful and somewhat
 dangerous operation and kept open by a quill. two or more of
 these instruments are occasionally worn. sometimes little brushes
 are attached to each end of the instrument. another instrument,
 used by the dyaks, but said to have been borrowed from the
 malays, is the palang anus, which is a ring or collar of
 plaited palm-fiber, furnished with a pair of stiffish horns of
 the same wiry material; it is worn on the neck of the glans and
 fits tight to the skin so as not to slip off. (brooke low, "the
 natives of borneo," journal of the anthropological institute,
 august and november, , p. ; the ampallang and similar
 instruments are described by ploss and bartels, das weib, bd.
 i, chapter xvii; also in untrodden fields of anthropology, by a
 french army surgeon, , vol. ii, pp. -; also mantegazza,
 gli amori degli uomini, french translation, p.  et seq.)
 riedel informed miklucho-macleay that in the celebes the alfurus
 fasten the eyelids of goats with the eyelashes round the corona
 of the glans penis, and in java a piece of goatskin is used in a
 similar way, so as to form a hairy sheath (zeitschrift für
 ethnologie, , pp. -), while among the batta, of sumatra,
 hagen found that small stones are inserted by an incision under
 the skin of the penis (zeitschrift für ethnologie, , ht. ,
 p. ).
 in the malay peninsula stevens found instruments somewhat similar
 to the ampallang still in use among some tribes, and among
 others formerly in use. he thinks they were brought from borneo.
 (h. v. stevens, zeitschrift für ethnologie, , ht. , p.
 .) bloch, who brings forward other examples of similar devices
 (beiträge zur ætiologie der psychopathia sexualis, pp. -),
 considers that the australian mica operation may thus in part be
 explained.
 such instruments are not, however, entirely unknown in europe. in
 france, in the eighteenth century, it appears that rings,
 sometimes set with hard knobs, and called "aides," were
 occasionally used by men to heighten the pleasure of women in
 intercourse. (dühren, marquis de sade, , p. .) in
 russia, according to weissenberg, of elizabethsgrad, it is not
 uncommon to use elastic rings set with little teeth; these rings
 are fastened around the base of the glans. (weissenberg,
 zeitschrift für ethnologie, , ht. , p. .) this
 instrument must have been brought to russia from the east, for
 burton (in the notes to his arabian nights) mentions a
 precisely similar instrument as in use in china. somewhat similar
 is the "chinese hedgehog," a wreath of fine, soft feathers with
 the quills solidly fastened by silver wire to a ring of the same
 metal, which is slipped over the glans. in south america the
 araucanians of argentina use a little horsehair brush fastened
 around the penis; one of these is in the museum at la plata; it
 is said the custom may have been borrowed from the patagonians;
 these instruments, called geskels, are made by the women and
 the workmanship is very delicate. (lehmann-nitsche, zeitschrift
 für ethnologie, , ht. , p. .) it is noteworthy that a
 somewhat similar tuft of horsehair is also worn in borneo.
 (breitenstein,  jahre in india, , pt. i, p. .) most of
 the accounts state that the women attach great importance to the
 gratification afforded by such instruments. in borneo a modest
 woman symbolically indicates to her lover the exact length of the
 ampallang she would prefer by leaving at a particular spot a
 cigarette of that length. miklucho-macleay considers that these
 instruments were invented by women. brooke low remarks that "no
 woman once habituated to its use will ever dream of permitting
 her bedfellow to discontinue the practice of wearing it," and
 stevens states that at one time no woman would marry a man who
 was not furnished with such an apparatus. it may be added that a
 very similar appliance may be found in european countries
 (especially germany) in the use of a condom furnished with
 irregularities, or a frill, in order to increase the woman's
 excitement. it is not impossible to find evidence that, in
 european countries, even in the absence of such instruments, the
 craving which they gratify still exists in women. thus, mauriac
 tells of a patient with vegetations on the glans who delayed
 treatment because his mistress liked him so best (art.
 "végétations," dictionnaire de médecine et chirurgie pratique).
 it may seem that such impulses and such devices to gratify them
 are altogether unnatural. this is not so. they have a zoölogical
 basis and in many animals are embodied in the anatomical
 structure. many rodents, ruminants, and some of the carnivora
 show natural developments of the penis closely resembling some of
 those artificially adopted by man. thus the guinea-pigs possess
 two horny styles attached to the penis, while the glans of the
 penis is covered with sharp spines. some of the caviidæ also have
 two sharp, horny saws at the side of the penis. the cat, the
 rhinoceros, the tapir, and other animals possess projecting
 structures on the penis, and some species of ruminants, such as
 the sheep, the giraffe, and many antelopes, have, attached to the
 penis, long filiform processes through which the urethra passes.
 (f. h. a. marshall, the physiology of reproduction, pp. -.)
 we find, even in creatures so delicate and ethereal as the
 butterflies, a whole armory of keen weapons for use in coitus.
 these were described in detail in an elaborate and fully
 illustrated memoir by p. h. gosse ("on the clasping organs
 ancillary to generation in certain groups of the lepidoptera,"
 transactions of the linnæan society, second series, vol. ii,
 zoölogy, ). these organs, which gosse terms harpes (or
 grappling irons), are found in the papilionidæ and are very
 beautiful and varied, taking the forms of projecting claws,
 hooks, pikes, swords, knobs, and strange combinations of these,
 commonly brought to a keen edge and then cut into sharp teeth.
 it is probable that all these structures serve to excite the
 sexual apparatus of the female and to promote tumescence.
 to the careless observer there may seem to be something vicious
 or perverted in such manifestations in man. that opinion becomes
 very doubtful when we consider how these tendencies occur in
 people living under natural conditions in widely separated parts
 of the world. it becomes still further untenable if we are
 justified in believing that the ancestors of men possessed
 projecting epithelial appendages attached to the penis, and if we
 accept the discovery by friedenthal of the rudiment of these
 appendages on the penis of the human fetus at an early stage
 (friedenthal, "sonderformen der menschlichen leibesbildung,"
 sexual-probleme, feb., , p. ). in this case human
 ingenuity would merely be seeking to supply an organ which nature
 has ceased to furnish, although it is still in some cases needed,
 especially among peoples whose aptitude for erethism has remained
 at, or fallen to, a subhuman level. 
at first sight the connection between love and pain—the tendency of men
to delight in inflicting it and women in suffering it—seems strange and
inexplicable. it seems amazing that a tender and even independent woman
should maintain a passionate attachment to a man who subjects her to
physical and moral insults, and that a strong man, often intelligent,
reasonable, and even kind-hearted, should desire to subject to such
insults a woman whom he loves passionately and who has given him every
final proof of her own passion. in understanding such cases we have to
remember that it is only within limits that a woman really enjoys the
pain, discomfort, or subjection to which she submits. a little pain which
the man knows he can himself soothe, a little pain which the woman gladly
accepts as the sign and forerunner of pleasure—this degree of pain comes
within the normal limits of love and is rooted, as we have seen, in the
experience of the race. but when it is carried beyond these limits, though
it may still be tolerated because of the support it receives from its
biological basis, it is no longer enjoyed. the natural note has been too
violently struck, and the rhythm of love has ceased to be perfect. a woman
may desire to be forced, to be roughly forced, to be ravished away beyond
her own will. but all the time she only desires to be forced toward those
things which are essentially and profoundly agreeable to her. a man who
fails to realize this has made little progress in the art of love. "i like
being knocked about and made to do things i don't want to do," a woman
said, but she admitted, on being questioned, that she would not like to
have much pain inflicted, and that she might not care to be made to do
important things she did not want to do. the story of griselda's unbounded
submissiveness can scarcely be said to be psychologically right, though it
has its artistic rightness as an elaborate fantasia on this theme
justified by its conclusion.
this point is further illustrated by the following passage from a
 letter written by a lady: "submission to the man's will is still,
 and always must be, the prelude to pleasure, and the association
 of ideas will probably always produce this much misunderstood
 instinct. now, i find, indirectly from other women and directly
 from my own experience, that, when the point in dispute is very
 important and the man exerts his authority, the desire to get
 one's own way completely obliterates the sexual feeling, while,
 conversely, in small things the sexual feeling obliterates the
 desire to have one's own way. where the two are nearly equal a
 conflict between them ensues, and i can stand aside and wonder
 which will get the best of it, though i encourage the sexual
 feeling when possible, as, if the other conquers, it leaves a
 sense of great mental irritation and physical discomfort. a man
 should command in small things, as in nine cases out of ten this
 will produce excitement. he should advise in large matters, or
 he may find either that he is unable to enforce his orders or
 that he produces a feeling of dislike and annoyance he was far
 from intending. women imagine men must be stronger than
 themselves to excite their passion. i disagree. a passionate man
 has the best chance, for in him the primitive instincts are
 strong. the wish to subdue the female is one of them, and in
 small things he will exert his authority to make her feel his
 power, while she knows that on a question of real importance she
 has a good chance of getting her own way by working on his
 greater susceptibility. perhaps an illustration will show what i
 mean. i was listening to the band and a girl and her fiancé
 came up to occupy two seats near me. the girl sank into one seat,
 but for some reason the man wished her to take the other. she
 refused. he repeated his order twice, the second time so
 peremptorily that she changed places, and i heard him say: 'i
 don't think you heard what i said. i don't expect to give an
 order three times.'
 "this little scene interested me, and i afterward asked the girl
 the following questions:—
 "'had you any reason for taking one chair more than the other?'
 "'no.'
 "'did mr. ——'s insistence on your changing give you any
 pleasure?'
 "'yes' (after a little hesitation).
 "'why?'
 "'i don't know.'
 "'would it have done so if you had particularly wished to sit in
 that chair; if, for instance, you had had a boil on your cheek
 and wished to turn that side away from him?'
 "'no; certainly not. the worry of thinking he was looking at it
 would have made me too cross to feel pleased.'
 "does this explain what i mean? the occasion, by the way, need
 not be really important, but, as in this imaginary case of the
 boil, if it seems important to the woman, irritation will
 outweigh the physical sensation." 
i am well aware that in thus asserting a certain tendency in women to
delight in suffering pain—however careful and qualified the position i
have taken—many estimable people will cry out that i am degrading a whole
sex and generally supporting the "subjection of women." but the day for
academic discussion concerning the "subjection of women" has gone by. the
tendency i have sought to make clear is too well established by the
experience of normal and typical women—however numerous the exceptions
may be—to be called in question. i would point out to those who would
deprecate the influence of such facts in relation to social progress that
nothing is gained by regarding women as simply men of smaller growth. they
are not so; they have the laws of their own nature; their development must
be along their own lines, and not along masculine lines. it is as true now
as in bacon's day that we only learn to command nature by obeying her. to
ignore facts is to court disappointment in our measure of progress. the
particular fact with which we have here come in contact is very vital and
radical, and most subtle in its influence. it is foolish to ignore it; we
must allow for its existence. we can neither attain a sane view of life
nor a sane social legislation of life unless we possess a just and
accurate knowledge of the fundamental instincts upon which life is built.
[] various mammals, carried away by the reckless fury of the
sexual impulse, are apt to ill-treat their females (r. müller,
sexualbiologie, p. ). this treatment is, however, usually only an
incident of courtship, the result of excess of ardor. "the chaffinches and
saffron-finches (fringella and sycalis) are very rough wooers," says
a. g. butler (zoölogist, , p. ); "they sing vociferously, and
chase their hens violently, knocking them over in their flight, pursuing
and savagely pecking them even on the ground; but when once the hens
become submissive, the males change their tactics, and become for the time
model husbands, feeding their wives from their crop, and assisting in
rearing the young."
[] cf. a. c. haddon, head hunters, p. .
[] marro considers that there may be transference of
emotion,—the impulse of violence generated in the male by his rivals
being turned against his partner,—according to a tendency noted by sully
and illustrated by ribot in his psychology of the emotions, part i,
chapter xii.
[] several writers have found in the facts of primitive animal
courtship the explanation of the connection between love and pain. thus,
krafft-ebing (psychopathia sexualis, english translation of tenth german
edition, p. ) briefly notes that outbreaks of sadism are possibly
atavistic. marro (la pubertà, , p.  et seq.) has some
suggestive pages on this subject. it would appear that this explanation
was vaguely outlined by jäger. laserre, in a bordeaux thesis mentioned by
féré, has argued in the same sense. féré (l'instinct sexuel, p. ), on
grounds that are scarcely sufficient, regards this explanation as merely a
superficial analogy. but it is certainly not a complete explanation.
[] schäfer (jahrbücher für psychologie, bd. ii, p. , and
quoted by krafft-ebing in psychopathia sexualis), in connection with a
case in which sexual excitement was produced by the sight of battles or of
paintings of them, remarks: "the pleasure of battle and murder is so
predominantly an attribute of the male sex throughout the animal kingdom
that there can be no question about the close connection between this side
of the masculine character and male sexuality. i believe that i can show
by observation that in men who are absolutely normal, mentally and
physically, the first indefinite and incomprehensible precursors of sexual
excitement may be induced by reading exciting scenes of chase and war.
these give rise to unconscious longings for a kind of satisfaction in
warlike games (wrestling, etc.) which express the fundamental sexual
impulse to close and complete contact with a companion, with a secondary
more or less clearly defined thought of conquest." groos (spiele der
menschen, , p. ) also thinks there is more or less truth in this
suggestion of a subconscious sexual element in the playful wrestling
combats of boys. freud considers (drei abhandlungen zur sexualtheorie,
p. ) that the tendency to sexual excitement through muscular activity in
wrestling, etc., is one of the roots of sadism. i have been told of normal
men who feel a conscious pleasure of this kind when lifted in games, as
may happen, for instance, in football. it may be added that in some parts
of the world the suitor has to throw the girl in a wrestling-bout in order
to secure her hand.
[] a minor manifestation of this tendency, appearing even in
quite normal and well-conditioned individuals, is the impulse among boys
at and after puberty to take pleasure in persecuting and hurting lower
animals or their own young companions. some youths display a diabolical
enjoyment and ingenuity in torturing sensitive juniors, and even a boy who
is otherwise kindly and considerate may find enjoyment in deliberately
mutilating a frog. in some cases, in boys and youths who have no true
sadistic impulse and are not usually cruel, this infliction of torture on
a lower animal produces an erection, though not necessarily any pleasant
sexual sensations.
[] marro, la pubertà, , p. ; garnier, "la criminalité
juvenile," comptes-rendus congrès internationale d'anthropologie
criminelle, amsterdam, , p. ; archivio di psichiatria, ,
fasc. v-vi, p. .
[] bk. ii, ch. ii.
[] herbert spencer, principles of sociology, , vol. i, p.
[] westermarck, human marriage, p. . grosse is of the same
opinion; he considers also that the mock-capture is often an imitation,
due to admiration, of real capture; he does not believe that the latter
has ever been a form of marriage recognized by custom and law, but only
"an occasional and punishable act of violence." (die formen der familie,
pp. -.) this position is too extreme.
[] ernest crawley, the mystic rose, , p.  et seq.
van gennep rightly remarks that we cannot correctly say that the woman is
abducted from "her sex," but only from her "sexual society."
[] a. van gennep (rites de passage, , pp. -) has
put forward a third theory, though also of a psychological character,
according to which the "capture" is a rite indicating the separation of
the young girl from the special societies of her childhood. gennep regards
this rite as one of a vast group of "rites of passage," which come into
action whenever a person changes his social or natural environment.
[] féré (l'instinct sexuel, p. ) appears to regard the
satisfaction, based on the sentiment of personal power, which may be
experienced in the suffering and subjection of a victim as an adequate
explanation of the association of pain with love. this i can scarcely
admit. it is a factor in the emotional attitude, but when it only exists
in the sexual sphere it is reasonable to base this attitude largely on the
still more fundamental biological attitude of the male toward the female
in the process of courtship. féré regards this biological element as
merely a superficial analogy, on the ground that an act of cruelty may
become an equivalent of coitus. but a sexual perversion is quite commonly
constituted by the selection and magnification of a single moment in the
normal sexual process.
[] the process may, however, be quite conscious. thus, a
correspondent tells me that he not only finds sexual pleasure in cruelty
toward the woman he loves, but that he regards this as an essential
element. he is convinced that it gives the woman pleasure, and that it is
possible to distinguish by gesture, inflection of voice, etc., an
hysterical, assumed, or imagined feeling of pain from real pain. he would
not wish to give real pain, and would regard that as sadism.
[] de sade had already made the same remark, while duchenne, of
boulogne, pointed out that the facial expressions of sexual passion and of
cruelty are similar.
[] κρυπτάδια, vol. vi, p. .
[] daumas, chevaux de sahara, p. .
[] see in vol. iv of these studies ("sexual selection in
man"), appendix a, on "the origins of the kiss."
[] de stendhal (de l'amour) mentions that when in london he
was on terms of friendship with an english actress who was the mistress of
a wealthy colonel, but privately had another lover. one day the colonel
arrived when the other man was present. "this gentleman has called about
the pony i want to sell," said the actress. "i have come for a very
different purpose," said the little man, and thus aroused a love which was
beginning to languish.
[] see havelock ellis, man and woman, chapter vi, "the
senses."
[] this liability is emphasized by adler, die mangelhafte
geschlechtsempfindung des weibes, p. .
[] zeitschrift für ethnologie, bd. viii, , pp. -.
the definition of sadism—de sade—masochism to some extent
normal—sacher-masoch—no real line of demarcation between sadism and
masochism—algolagnia includes both groups of manifestations—the
love-bite as a bridge from normal phenomena to algolagnia—the fascination
of blood—the most extreme perversions are linked on to normal phenomena.
we thus see that there are here two separate groups of feelings: one, in
the masculine line, which delights in displaying force and often inflicts
pain or the simulacrum of pain; the other, in the feminine line, which
delights in submitting to that force, and even finds pleasure in a slight
amount of pain, or the idea of pain, when associated with the experiences
of love. we see, also, that these two groups of feelings are
complementary. within the limits consistent with normal and healthy life,
what men are impelled to give women love to receive. so that we need not
unduly deprecate the "cruelty" of men within these limits, nor unduly
commiserate the women who are subjected to it.
such a conclusion, however, as we have also seen, only holds good within
those normal limits which an attempt has here been made to determine. the
phenomena we have been considering are strictly normal phenomena, having
their basis in the conditions of tumescence and detumescence in animal and
primitive human courtship. at one point, however, when discussing the
phenomena of the love-bite, i referred to the facts which indicate how
this purely normal manifestation yet insensibly passes over into the
region of the morbid. it is an instance that enables us to realize how
even the most terrible and repugnant sexual perversions are still
demonstrably linked on to phenomena that are fundamentally normal. the
love-bite may be said to give us the key to that perverse impulse which
has been commonly called sadism.
there is some difference of opinion as to how "sadism" may be best
defined. perhaps the simplest and most usual definition is that of
krafft-ebing, as sexual emotion associated with the wish to inflict pain
and use violence, or, as he elsewhere expresses it, "the impulse to cruel
and violent treatment of the opposite sex, and the coloring of the idea of
such acts with lustful feeling."[] a more complete definition is that of
moll, who describes sadism as a condition in which "the sexual impulse
consists in the tendency to strike, ill-use, and humiliate the beloved
person."[] this definition has the advantage of bringing in the element
of moral pain. a further extension is made in féré's definition as "the
need of association of violence and cruelty with sexual enjoyment, such
violence or cruelty not being necessarily exerted by the person himself
who seeks sexual pleasure in this association."[] garnier's definition,
while comprising all these points, further allows for the fact that a
certain degree of sadism may be regarded as normal. "pathological sadism,"
he states, "is an impulsive and obsessing sexual perversion characterized
by a close connection between suffering inflicted or mentally represented
and the sexual orgasm, without this necessary and sufficing condition
frigidity usually remaining absolute."[] it must be added that these
definitions are very incomplete if by "sadism" we are to understand the
special sexual perversions which are displayed in de sade's novels. iwan
bloch ("eugen dühren"), in the course of his book on de sade, has
attempted a definition strictly on this basis, and, as will be seen, it is
necessary to make it very elaborate: "a connection, whether intentionally
sought or offered by chance, of sexual excitement and sexual enjoyment
with the real or only symbolic (ideal, illusionary) appearance of
frightful and shocking events, destructive occurrences and practices,
which threaten or destroy the life, health, and property of man and other
living creatures, and threaten and interrupt the continuity of inanimate
objects, whereby the person who from such occurrences obtains sexual
enjoyment may either himself be the direct cause, or cause them to take
place by means of other persons, or merely be the spectator, or, finally,
be, voluntarily or involuntarily, the object against which these processes
are directed."[] this definition of sadism as found in de sade's works
is thus, more especially by its final clause, a very much wider conception
than the usual definition.
donatien alphonse françois, marquis de sade, was born in  at
 paris in the house of the great condé. he belonged to a very
 noble, ancient, and distinguished provençal family; petrarch's
 laura, who married a de sade, was one of his ancestors, and the
 family had cultivated both arms and letters with success. he was,
 according to lacroix, "an adorable youth whose delicately pale
 and dusky face, lighted up by two large black [according to
 another account blue] eyes, already bore the languorous imprint
 of the vice which was to corrupt his whole being"; his voice was
 "drawling and caressing"; his gait had "a softly feminine grace."
 unfortunately there is no authentic portrait of him. his early
 life is sketched in letter iv of his aline et valcourt. on
 leaving the collège-louis-le-grand he became a cavalry officer
 and went through the seven years' war in germany. there can be
 little doubt that the experiences of his military life, working
 on a femininely vicious temperament, had much to do with the
 development of his perversion. he appears to have got into
 numerous scrapes, of which the details are unknown, and his
 father sought to marry him to the daughter of an aristocratic
 friend of his own, a noble and amiable girl of . it so chanced
 that when young de sade first went to the house of his future
 wife only her younger sister, a girl of , was at home; with her
 he at once fell in love and his love was reciprocated; they were
 both musical enthusiasts, and she had a beautiful voice. the
 parents insisted on carrying out the original scheme of marriage.
 de sade's wife loved him, and, in spite of everything, served his
 interests with griselda-like devotion; she was, ginisty remarks,
 a saint, a saint of conjugal life; but her love was from the
 first only requited with repulsion, contempt, and suspicion.
 there were, however, children of the marriage; the career of the
 eldest—an estimable young man who went into the army and also
 had artistic ability, but otherwise had no community of tastes
 with his father—has been sketched by paul ginisty, who has also
 edited the letters of the marquise. de sade's passion for the
 younger sister continued (he idealized her as juliette), though
 she was placed in a convent beyond his reach, and at a much later
 period he eloped with her and spent perhaps the happiest period
 of his life, soon terminated by her death. it is evident that
 this unhappy marriage was decisive in determining de sade's
 career; he at once threw himself recklessly into every form of
 dissipation, spending his health and his substance sometimes
 among refinedly debauched nobles and sometimes among coarsely
 debauched lackeys. he was, however, always something of an
 artist, something of a student, something of a philosopher, and
 at an early period he began to write, apparently at the age of
 . it was at this age, and only a few months after his marriage,
 that on account of some excess he was for a time confined in
 vincennes. he was destined to spend  years of his life in
 prisons, if we include the  years which in old age he passed in
 the asylum at charenton. his actual offenses were by no means so
 terrible as those he loved to dwell on in imagination, and for
 the most part they have been greatly exaggerated. his most
 extreme offenses were the indecent and forcible flagellation in
  of a young woman, rosa keller, who had accosted him in the
 street for alms, and whom he induced by false pretenses to come
 to his house, and the administration of aphrodisiacal bonbons to
 some prostitutes at marseilles. it is owing to the fact that the
 prime of his manhood was spent in prisons that de sade fell back
 on dreaming, study, and novel-writing. shut out from real life,
 he solaced his imagination with the perverted visions—to a very
 large extent, however, founded on knowledge of the real facts of
 perverted life in his time—which he has recorded in justine
 (); les  journées de sodome ou l'ecole du libertinage
 (); aline et valcour ou le roman philosophique ();
 juliette (); la philosophie dans le boudoir (). these
 books constitute a sort of encyclopedia of sexual perversions, an
 eighteenth century psychopathia sexualis, and embody, at the
 same time, a philosophy. he was the first, bloch remarks, who
 realized the immense importance of the sexual question. his
 general attitude may be illustrated by the following passage (as
 quoted by lacassagne): "if there are beings in the world whose
 acts shock all accepted prejudices, we must not preach at them or
 punish them ... because their bizarre tastes no more depend upon
 themselves than it depends on you whether you are witty or
 stupid, well made or hump-backed.... what would become of your
 laws, your morality, your religion, your gallows, your paradise,
 your gods, your hell, if it were shown that such and such
 fluids, such fibers, or a certain acridity in the blood, or in
 the animal spirits, alone suffice to make a man the object of
 your punishments or your rewards?" he was enormously well read,
 bloch points out, and his interest extended to every field of
 literature: belles lettres, philosophy, theology, politics,
 sociology, ethnology, mythology, and history. perhaps his
 favorite reading was travels. he was minutely familiar with the
 bible, though his attitude was extremely critical. his favorite
 philosopher was lamettrie, whom he very frequently quotes, and he
 had carefully studied machiavelli.
 de sade had foreseen the revolution; he was an ardent admirer of
 marat, and at this period he entered into public life as a mild,
 gentle, rather bald and gray-haired person. many scenes of the
 revolution were the embodiment in real life of de sade's
 imagination; such, for instance, were the barbaric tortures
 inflicted, at the instigation of théroigne de méricourt, on la
 belle bouquetière. yet de sade played a very peaceful part in the
 events of that time, chiefly as a philanthropist, spending much
 of his time in the hospitals. he saved his parents-in-law from
 the scaffold, although they had always been hostile to him, and
 by his moderation aroused the suspicions of the revolutionary
 party, and was again imprisoned. later he wrote a pamphlet
 against napoleon, who never forgave him and had him shut up in
 charenton as a lunatic; it was a not unusual method at that time
 of disposing of persons whom it was wished to put out of the way,
 and, notwithstanding de sade's organically abnormal temperament,
 there is no reason to regard him as actually insane.
 royer-collard, an eminent alienist of that period, then at the
 head of charenton, declared de sade to be sane, and his detailed
 report is still extant. other specialists were of the same
 opinion. bloch, who quotes these opinions (neue forschungen,
 etc., p. ), says that the only possible conclusion is that de
 sade was sane, but neurasthenic, and eulenburg also concludes
 that he cannot be regarded as insane, although he was highly
 degenerate. in the asylum he amused himself by organizing a
 theater. lacroix, many years later, questioning old people who
 had known him, was surprised to find that even in the memory of
 most virtuous and respectable persons he lived merely as an
 "aimable mauvais sujet." it is noteworthy that de sade aroused,
 in a singular degree, the love and devotion of women,—whether or
 not we may regard this as evidence of the fascination exerted on
 women by cruelty. janin remarks that he had seen many pretty
 little letters written by young and charming women of the great
 world, begging for the release of the "pauvre marquis."
 sardou, the dramatist, has stated that in  he visited the
 bicêtre and met an old gardener who had known de sade during his
 reclusion there. he told that one of the marquis's amusements
 was to procure baskets of the most beautiful and expensive roses;
 he would then sit on a footstool by a dirty streamlet which ran
 through the courtyard, and would take the roses, one by one, gaze
 at them, smell them with a voluptuous expression, soak them in
 the muddy water, and fling them away, laughing as he did so. he
 died on the d of december, , at the age of . he was almost
 blind, and had long been a martyr to gout, asthma, and an
 affection of the stomach. it was his wish that acorns should be
 planted over his grave and his memory effaced. at a later period
 his skull was examined by a phrenologist, who found it small and
 well formed; "one would take it at first for a woman's head." the
 skull belonged to dr. londe, but about the middle of the century
 it was stolen by a doctor who conveyed it to england, where it
 may possibly yet be found. [the foregoing account is mainly
 founded on paul lacroix, revue de paris, , and curiosités
 de l'histoire de france, second series, procès célèbres, p.
 ; janin, revue de paris, ; eugen dühren (iwan bloch),
 der marquis de sade und seine zeit, third edition, ; id.,
 neue forschungen über den marquis de sade und seine zeit, ;
 lacassagne, vacher l'eventreur et les crimes sadiques, ;
 paul ginisty, la marquise de sade, .] 
the attempt to define sadism strictly and penetrate to its roots in de
sade's personal temperament reveals a certain weakness in the current
conception of this sexual perversion. it is not, as we might infer, both
from the definition usually given and from its probable biological
heredity from primitive times, a perversion due to excessive masculinity.
the strong man is more apt to be tender than cruel, or at all events knows
how to restrain within bounds any impulse to cruelty; the most extreme and
elaborate forms of sadism (putting aside such as are associated with a
considerable degree of imbecility) are more apt to be allied with a
somewhat feminine organization. montaigne, indeed, observed long ago that
cruelty is usually accompanied by feminine softness.
in the same way it is a mistake to suppose that the very feminine
 woman is not capable of sadistic tendencies. even if we take into
 account the primitive animal conditions of combat, the male must
 suffer as well as inflict pain, and the female must not only
 experience subjection to the male, but also share in the emotions
 of her partner's victory over his rivals. as bearing on these
 points, i may quote the following remarks written by a lady: "it
 is said that, the weaker and more feminine a woman is, the
 greater the subjection she likes. i don't think it has anything
 at all to do with the general character, but depends entirely on
 whether the feeling of constraint and helplessness affects her
 sexually. in men i have several times noticed that those who were
 most desirous of subjection to the women they loved had, in
 ordinary life, very strong and determined characters. i know of
 others, too, who with very weak characters are very imperious
 toward the women they care for. among women i have often been
 surprised to see how a strong, determined woman will give way to
 a man she loves, and how tenacious of her own will may be some
 fragile, clinging creature who in daily life seems quite unable
 to act on her own responsibility. a certain amount of passivity,
 a desire to have their emotions worked on, seems to me, so far as
 my small experience goes, very common among ordinary, presumably
 normal men. a good deal of stress is laid on femininity as an
 attraction in a woman, and this may be so to very strong natures,
 but, so far as i have seen, the women who obtain extraordinary
 empire over men are those with a certain virility in their
 character and passions. if with this virility they combine a
 fragility or childishness of appearance which appeals to a man in
 another way at the same time, they appear to be irresistible."
 i have noted some of the feminine traits in de sade's temperament
 and appearance. the same may often be noted in sadists whose
 crimes were very much more serious and brutal than those of de
 sade. a man who stabbed women in the streets at st. louis was a
 waiter with a high-pitched, effeminate voice and boyish
 appearance. reidel, the sadistic murderer, was timid, modest, and
 delicate; he was too shy to urinate in the presence of other
 people. a sadistic zoöphilist, described by a. marie, who
 attempted to strangle a woman fellow-worker, had always been very
 timid, blushed with much facility, could not look even children
 in the eyes, or urinate in the presence of another person, or
 make sexual advances to women.
 kiernan and moyer are inclined to connect the modesty and
 timidity of sadists with a disgust for normal coitus. they were
 called upon to examine an inverted married woman who had
 inflicted several hundred wounds, mostly superficial, with forks,
 scissors, etc., on the genital organs and other parts of a girl
 whom she had adopted from a "home." this woman was very prominent
 in church and social matters in the city in which she lived, so
 that many clergymen and local persons of importance testified to
 her chaste, modest, and even prudish character; she was found to
 be sane at the time of the acts. (moyer, alienist and
 neurologist, may, , and private letter from dr. kiernan.) 
we are thus led to another sexual perversion, which is usually considered
the opposite of sadism. masochism is commonly regarded as a peculiarly
feminine sexual perversion, in women, indeed, as normal in some degree,
and in man as a sort of inversion of the normal masculine emotional
attitude, but this view of the matter is not altogether justified, for
definite and pronounced masochism seems to be much rarer in women than
sadism.[] krafft-ebing, whose treatment of this phenomenon is, perhaps,
his most valuable and original contribution to sexual psychology, has
dealt very fully with the matter and brought forward many cases. he thus
defines this perversion: "by masochism i understand a peculiar perversion
of the psychical vita sexualis in which the individual affected, in
sexual feeling and thought, is controlled by the idea of being completely
and unconditionally subject to the will of a person of the opposite sex,
of being treated by this person as by a master, humiliated and abused.
this idea is colored by sexual feeling; the masochist lives in fancies in
which he creates situations of this kind, and he often attempts to realize
them."[]
in a minor degree, not amounting to a complete perversion of the sexual
instinct, this sentiment of abnegation, the desire to be even physically
subjected to the adored woman, cannot be regarded as abnormal. more than
two centuries before krafft-ebing appeared, robert burton, who was no mean
psychologist, dilated on the fact that love is a kind of slavery. "they
are commonly slaves," he wrote of lovers, "captives, voluntary servants;
amator amicæ mancipium, as castilio terms him; his mistress's servant,
her drudge, prisoner, bondman, what not?"[] before burton's time the
legend of the erotic servitude of aristotle was widely spread in europe,
and pictures exist of the venerable philosopher on all fours ridden by a
woman with a whip.[] in classic times various masochistic phenomena are
noted with approval by ovid. it has been pointed out by moll[] that
there are traces of masochistic feeling in some of goethe's poems,
especially "lilis park" and "erwin und elmire." similar traces have been
found in the poems of heine, platen, hamerling, and many other poets.[]
the poetry of the people is also said to contain many such traces. it may,
indeed, be said that passion in its more lyric exaltations almost
necessarily involves some resort to masochistic expression. a popular lady
novelist in a novel written many years ago represents her hero, a robust
soldier, imploring the lady of his love, in a moment of passionate
exaltation, to trample on him, certainly without any wish to suggest
sexual perversion. if it is true that the antonio of otway's venice
preserved is a caricature of shaftesbury, then it would appear that one
of the greatest of english statesmen was supposed to exhibit very
pronounced and characteristic masochistic tendencies; and in more recent
days masochistic expressions have been noted as occurring in the
love-letters of so emphatically virile a statesman as bismarck.
thus a minor degree of the masochistic tendency may be said to be fairly
common, while its more pronounced manifestations are more common than
pronounced sadism.[] it very frequently affects persons of a sensitive,
refined, and artistic temperament. it may even be said that this tendency
is in the line of civilization. krafft-ebing points out that some of the
most delicate and romantic love-episodes of the middle ages are distinctly
colored by masochistic emotion.[] the increasing tendency to masochism
with increasing civilization becomes explicable if we accept colin scott's
"secondary law of courting" as accessory to the primary law that the male
is active, and the female passive and imaginatively attentive to the
states of the excited male. according to the secondary law, "the female
develops a superadded activity, the male becoming relatively passive and
imaginatively attentive to the psychical and bodily states of the
female."[] we may probably agree that this "secondary law of courting"
does really represent a tendency of love in individuals of complex and
sensitive nature, and the outcome of such a receptive attitude on the part
of the male is undoubtedly in well-marked cases a desire of submission to
the female's will, and a craving to experience in some physical or psychic
form, not necessarily painful, the manifestations of her activity.
when we turn from vague and unpronounced forms of the masochistic tendency
to the more definite forms in which it becomes an unquestionable sexual
perversion, we find a very eminent and fairly typical example in rousseau,
an example all the more interesting because here the subject has himself
portrayed his perversion in his famous confessions. it is, however, the
name of a less eminent author, the austrian novelist, sacher-masoch, which
has become identified with the perversion through the fact that
krafft-ebing fixed upon it as furnishing a convenient counterpart to the
term "sadism." it is on the strength of a considerable number of his
novels and stories, more especially of die venus im pelz, that
krafft-ebing took the scarcely warrantable liberty of identifying his
name, while yet living, with a sexual perversion. 
sacher-masoch's biography has been written with intimate
 knowledge and much candor by c. f. von schlichtegroll
 (sacher-masoch und der masochismus, ) and, more indirectly,
 by his first wife wanda von sacher-masoch in her autobiography
 (meine lebensbeichte, ; french translation, confession de
 ma vie, ). schlichtegroll's book is written with a somewhat
 undue attempt to exalt his hero and to attribute his misfortunes
 to his first wife. the autobiography of the latter, however,
 enables us to form a more complete picture of sacher-masoch's
 life, for, while his wife by no means spares herself, she clearly
 shows that sacher-masoch was the victim of his own abnormal
 temperament, and she presents both the sensitive, refined,
 exalted, and generous aspects of his nature, and his morbid,
 imaginative, vain aspects.
 leopold von sacher-masoch was born in  at lemberg in galicia.
 he was of spanish, german, and more especially slavonic race. the
 founder of the family may be said to be a certain don matthias
 sacher, a young spanish nobleman, in the sixteenth century, who
 settled in prague. the novelist's father was director of police
 in lemberg and married charlotte von masoch, a little russian
 lady of noble birth. the novelist, the eldest child of this
 union, was not born until after nine years of marriage, and in
 infancy was so delicate that he was not expected to survive. he
 began to improve, however, when his mother gave him to be suckled
 to a robust russian peasant woman, from whom, as he said later,
 he gained not only health, but "his soul"; from her he learned
 all the strange and melancholy legends of her people and a love
 of the little russians which never left him. while still a child
 young sacher-masoch was in the midst of the bloody scenes of the
 revolution which culminated in . when he was  the family
 migrated to prague, and the boy, though precocious in his
 development, then first learned the german language, of which he
 attained so fine a mastery. at a very early age he had found the
 atmosphere, and even some of the most characteristic elements, of
 the peculiar types which mark his work as a novelist.
 it is interesting to trace the germinal elements of those
 peculiarities which so strongly affected his imagination on the
 sexual side. as a child, he was greatly attracted by
 representations of cruelty; he loved to gaze at pictures of
 executions, the legends of martyrs were his favorite reading, and
 with the onset of puberty he regularly dreamed that he was
 fettered and in the power of a cruel woman who tortured him. it
 has been said by an anonymous author that the women of galicia
 either rule their husbands entirely and make them their slaves or
 themselves sink to be the wretchedest of slaves. at the age of
 , according to schlichtegroll's narrative, the child leopold
 witnessed a scene in which a woman of the former kind, a certain
 countess xenobia x., a relative of his own on the paternal side,
 played the chief part, and this scene left an undying impress on
 his imagination. the countess was a beautiful but wanton
 creature, and the child adored her, impressed alike by her beauty
 and the costly furs she wore. she accepted his devotion and
 little services and would sometimes allow him to assist her in
 dressing; on one occasion, as he was kneeling before her to put
 on her ermine slippers, he kissed her feet; she smiled and gave
 him a kick which filled him with pleasure. not long afterward
 occurred the episode which so profoundly affected his
 imagination. he was playing with his sisters at hide-and-seek and
 had carefully hidden himself behind the dresses on a clothes-rail
 in the countess's bedroom. at this moment the countess suddenly
 entered the house and ascended the stairs, followed by a lover,
 and the child, who dared not betray his presence, saw the
 countess sink down on a sofa and begin to caress her lover. but a
 few moments later the husband, accompanied by two friends, dashed
 into the room. before, however, he could decide which of the
 lovers to turn against the countess had risen and struck him so
 powerful a blow in the face with her fist that he fell back
 streaming with blood. she then seized a whip, drove all three men
 out of the room, and in the confusion the lover slipped away. at
 this moment the clothes-rail fell and the child, the involuntary
 witness of the scene, was revealed to the countess, who now fell
 on him in anger, threw him to the ground, pressed her knee on his
 shoulder, and struck him unmercifully. the pain was great, and
 yet he was conscious of a strange pleasure. while this
 castigation was proceeding the count returned, no longer in a
 rage, but meek and humble as a slave, and kneeled down before her
 to beg forgiveness. as the boy escaped he saw her kick her
 husband. the child could not resist the temptation to return to
 the spot; the door was closed and he could see nothing, but he
 heard the sound of the whip and the groans of the count beneath
 his wife's blows.
 it is unnecessary to insist that in this scene, acting on a
 highly sensitive and somewhat peculiar child, we have the key to
 the emotional attitude which affected so much of sacher-masoch's
 work. as his biographer remarks, woman became to him, during a
 considerable part of his life, a creature at once to be loved and
 hated, a being whose beauty and brutality enabled her to set her
 foot at will on the necks of men, and in the heroine of his first
 important novel, the emissär, dealing with the polish
 revolution, he embodied the contradictory personality of countess
 xenobia. even the whip and the fur garments, sacher-masoch's
 favorite emotional symbols, find their explanation in this early
 episode. he was accustomed to say of an attractive woman: "i
 should like to see her in furs," and, of an unattractive woman:
 "i could not imagine her in furs." his writing-paper at one time
 was adorned with the figure of a woman in russian boyar costume,
 her cloak lined with ermine, and brandishing a scourge. on his
 walls he liked to have pictures of women in furs, of the kind of
 which there is so magnificent an example by rubens in the gallery
 at munich. he would even keep a woman's fur cloak on an ottoman
 in his study and stroke it from time to time, finding that his
 brain thus received the same kind of stimulation as schiller
 found in the odor of rotten apples.[]
 at the age of , in the revolution of , young sacher-masoch
 received his baptism of fire; carried away in the popular
 movement, he helped to defend the barricades together with a
 young lady, a relative of his family, an amazon with a pistol in
 her girdle, such as later he loved to depict. this episode was,
 however, but a brief interruption of his education; he pursued
 his studies with brilliance, and on the higher side his education
 was aided by his father's esthetic tastes. amateur theatricals
 were in special favor at his home, and here even the serious
 plays of goethe and gogol were performed, thus helping to train
 and direct the boy's taste. it is, perhaps, however, significant
 that it was a tragic event which, at the age of , first brought
 to him the full realization of life and the consciousness of his
 own power. this was the sudden death of his favorite sister. he
 became serious and quiet, and always regarded this grief as a
 turning-point in his life.
 at the universities of prague and graz he studied with such zeal
 that when only  he took his doctor's degree in law and shortly
 afterward became a privatdocent for german history at graz.
 gradually, however, the charms of literature asserted themselves
 definitely, and he soon abandoned teaching. he took part,
 however, in the war of  in italy, and at the battle of
 solferino he was decorated on the field for bravery in action by
 the austrian field-marshal. these incidents, however, had little
 disturbing influence on sacher-masoch's literary career, and he
 was gradually acquiring a european reputation by his novels and
 stories.
 a far more seriously disturbing influence had already begun to be
 exerted on his life by a series of love-episodes. some of these
 were of slight and ephemeral character; some were a source of
 unalloyed happiness, all the more so if there was an element of
 extravagance to appeal to his quixotic nature. he always longed
 to give a dramatic and romantic character to his life, his wife
 says, and he spent some blissful days on an occasion when he ran
 away to florence with a russian princess as her private
 secretary. most often these episodes culminated in deception and
 misery. it was after a relationship of this kind from which he
 could not free himself for four years that he wrote die
 geschiedene frau, passionsgeschichte eines idealisten, putting
 into it much of his own personal history. at one time he was
 engaged to a sweet and charming young girl. then it was that he
 met a young woman at graz, laura rümelin,  years of age,
 engaged as a glove-maker, and living with her mother. though of
 poor parentage, with little or no knowledge of the world, she had
 great natural ability and intelligence. schlichtegroll represents
 her as spontaneously engaging in a mysterious intrigue with the
 novelist. her own detailed narrative renders the circumstances
 more intelligible. she approached sacher-masoch by letter,
 adopting for disguise the name of his heroine wanda von dunajev,
 in order to recover possession of some compromising letters which
 had been written to him, as a joke, by a friend of hers.
 sacher-masoch insisted on seeing his correspondent before
 returning the letters, and with his eager thirst for romantic
 adventure he imagined that she was a married woman of the
 aristocratic world, probably a russian countess, whose simple
 costume was a disguise. not anxious to reveal the prosaic facts,
 she humored him in his imaginations and a web of mystification
 was thus formed. a strong attraction grew up on both sides and,
 though for some time laura rümelin maintained the mystery and
 held herself aloof from him, a relationship was formed and a
 child born. thereupon, in , they married. before long,
 however, there was disillusion on both sides. she began to detect
 the morbid, chimerical, and unpractical aspects of his character,
 and he realized that not only was his wife not an aristocrat,
 but, what was of more importance to him, she was by no means the
 domineering heroine of his dreams. soon after marriage, in the
 course of an innocent romp in which the whole of the small
 household took part, he asked his wife to inflict a whipping on
 him. she refused, and he thereupon suggested that the servant
 should do it; the wife failed to take this idea seriously; but he
 had it carried out, with great satisfaction at the severity of
 the castigation he received. when, however, his wife explained to
 him that, after this incident, it was impossible for the servant
 to stay, sacher-masoch quite agreed and she was at once
 discharged. but he constantly found pleasure in placing his wife
 in awkward or compromising circumstances, a pleasure she was too
 normal to share. this necessarily led to much domestic
 wretchedness. he had persuaded her, against her wish, to whip him
 nearly every day, with whips which he devised, having nails
 attached to them. he found this a stimulant to his literary work,
 and it enabled him to dispense in his novels with his stereotyped
 heroine who is always engaged in subjugating men, for, as he
 explained to his wife, when he had the reality in his life he was
 no longer obsessed by it in his imaginative dreams. not content
 with this, however, he was constantly desirous for his wife to be
 unfaithful. he even put an advertisement in a newspaper to the
 effect that a young and beautiful woman desired to make the
 acquaintance of an energetic man. the wife, however, though she
 wished to please her husband, was not anxious to do so to this
 extent. she went to an hotel by appointment to meet a stranger
 who had answered this advertisement, but when she had explained
 to him the state of affairs he chivalrously conducted her home.
 it was some time before sacher-masoch eventually succeeded in
 rendering his wife unfaithful. he attended to the minutest
 details of her toilette on this occasion, and as he bade her
 farewell at the door he exclaimed: "how i envy him!" this episode
 thoroughly humiliated the wife, and from that moment her love for
 her husband turned to hate. a final separation was only a
 question of time. sacher-masoch formed a relationship with hulda
 meister, who had come to act as secretary and translator to him,
 while his wife became attached to rosenthal, a clever journalist
 later known to readers of the figaro as "jacques st.-cère," who
 realized her painful position and felt sympathy and affection for
 her. she went to live with him in paris and, having refused to
 divorce her husband, he eventually obtained a divorce from her;
 she states, however, that she never at any time had physical
 relationships with rosenthal, who was a man of fragile
 organization and health. sacher-masoch united himself to hulda
 meister, who is described by the first wife as a prim and faded
 but coquettish old maid, and by the biographer as a highly
 accomplished and gentle woman, who cared for him with almost
 maternal devotion. no doubt there is truth in both descriptions.
 it must be noted that, as wanda clearly shows, apart from his
 abnormal sexual temperament, sacher-masoch was kind and
 sympathetic, and he was strongly attached to his eldest child.
 eulenburg also quotes the statement of a distinguished austrian
 woman writer acquainted with him that, "apart from his sexual
 eccentricities, he was an amiable, simple, and sympathetic man
 with a touchingly tender love for his children." he had very few
 needs, did not drink or smoke, and though he liked to put the
 woman he was attached to in rich furs and fantastically gorgeous
 raiment he dressed himself with extreme simplicity. his wife
 quotes the saying of another woman that he was as simple as a
 child and as naughty as a monkey.
 in  sacher-masoch and hulda meister settled in lindheim, a
 village in germany near the taunus, a spot to which the novelist
 seems to have been attached because in the grounds of his little
 estate was a haunted and ruined tower associated with a tragic
 medieval episode. here, after many legal delays, sacher-masoch
 was able to render his union with hulda meister legitimate; here
 two children were in due course born, and here the novelist spent
 the remaining years of his life in comparative peace. at first,
 as is usual, treated with suspicion by the peasants,
 sacher-masoch gradually acquired great influence over them; he
 became a kind of tolstoy in the rural life around him, the friend
 and confidant of all the villagers (something of tolstoy's
 communism is also, it appears, to be seen in the books he wrote
 at this time), while the theatrical performances which he
 inaugurated, and in which his wife took an active part, spread
 the fame of the household in many neighboring villages. meanwhile
 his health began to break up; a visit to nauheim in  was of
 no benefit, and he died march , . 
a careful consideration of the phenomena of sadism and masochism may be
said to lead us to the conclusion that there is no real line of
demarcation. even de sade himself was not a pure sadist, as bloch's
careful definition is alone sufficient to indicate; it might even be
argued that de sade was really a masochist; the investigation of histories
of sadism and masochism, even those given by krafft-ebing (as, indeed,
colin scott and féré have already pointed out), constantly reveals traces
of both groups of phenomena in the same individual. they cannot,
therefore, be regarded as opposed manifestations. this has been felt by
some writers, who have, in consequence, proposed other names more clearly
indicating the relationship of the phenomena. féré speaks of sexual
algophily[]; he only applies the term to masochism; it might equally
well be applied to sadism. schrenck-notzing, to cover both sadism and
masochism, has invented the term algolagnia (ἄλγος, pain, and
λάγνος sexually excited), and calls the former active, the latter
passive, algolagnia.[] eulenburg has also emphasized the close
connection between these groups of perverted sexual manifestations, and
has adopted the same terms, adding the further group of ideal
(illusionary) algolagnia, to cover the cases in which the mere
autosuggestive representation of pain, inflicted or suffered, suffices to
give sexual gratification.[]
a brief discussion of the terms "sadism" and "masochism" has imposed
itself upon us at this point because as soon as, in any study of the
relationship between love and pain, we pass over the limits of normal
manifestations into a region which is more or less abnormal, these two
conceptions are always brought before us, and it was necessary to show on
what grounds they are here rejected as the pivots on which the discussion
ought to turn. we may accept them as useful terms to indicate two groups
of clinical phenomena; but we cannot regard them as of any real scientific
value. having reached this result, we may continue our consideration of
the love-bite, as the normal manifestation of the connection between love
and pain which most naturally leads us across the frontier of the
abnormal.
the result of the love-bite in its extreme degree is to shed blood. this
cannot be regarded as the direct aim of the bite in its normal
manifestations, for the mingled feelings of close contact, of passionate
gripping, of symbolic devouring, which constitute the emotional
accompaniments of the bite would be too violently discomposed by actual
wounding and real shedding of blood. with some persons, however, perhaps
more especially women, the love-bite is really associated with a conscious
desire, even if more or less restrained, to draw blood, a real delight in
this process, a love of blood. probably this only occurs in persons who
are not absolutely normal, but on the borderland of the abnormal. we have
to admit that this craving has, however, a perfectly normal basis. there
is scarcely any natural object with so profoundly emotional an effect as
blood, and it is very easy to understand why this should be so.[]
moreover, blood enters into the sphere of courtship by virtue of the same
conditions by which cruelty enters into it; they are both accidents of
combat, and combat is of the very essence of animal and primitive human
courtship, certainly its most frequent accompaniment. so that the
repelling or attracting fascination of blood may be regarded as a
by-product of normal courtship, which, like other such by-products, may
become an essential element of abnormal courtship.[]
normally the fascination of blood, if present at all during sexual
excitement, remains more or less latent, either because it is weak or
because the checks that inhibit it are inevitably very powerful.
occasionally it becomes more clearly manifest, and this may happen early
in life. féré records the case of a man of anglo-saxon origin, of sound
heredity so far as could be ascertained and presenting no obvious stigmata
of degeneration, who first experienced sexual manifestations at the age of
 when a boy cousin was attacked by bleeding at the nose. it was the first
time he had seen such a thing and he experienced erection and much
pleasure at the sight. this was repeated the next time the cousin's nose
bled and also whenever he witnessed any injuries or wounds, especially
when occurring in males. a few years later he began to find pleasure in
pinching and otherwise inflicting slight suffering. this sadism was not,
however, further developed, although a tendency to inversion
persisted.[] 
somewhat similar may have been the origin of the attraction of
 blood in a case which has been reported to me of a youth of ,
 the youngest of a large family who are all very strong and
 entirely normal. he is himself, however, delicate, overgrown,
 with a narrow chest, a small head, and babyish features, while
 mentally he is backward, with very defective memory and scant
 powers of assimilation. he is intensely nervous, peevish, and
 subject to fits of childish rage. he takes violent fancies to
 persons of his own sex. but he appears to have only one way of
 obtaining sexual excitement and gratification. it is his custom
 to get into a hot bath and there to produce erection and
 emission, not by masturbation, but by thinking of flowing blood.
 he does not associate himself with the causation of this
 imaginary flow of blood; he is merely the passive but pleased
 spectator. he is aware of his peculiarity and endeavors to shake
 it off, but his efforts to obtain normal pleasure by thinking of
 a girl are vain.
 i may here narrate a case which has been communicated to me of
 algolagnia in a woman, combined with sexual hyperesthesia.
 r. d., aged , married, and of good social position; she is a
 small and dark woman, restless and alert in manner. she has one
 child.
 she has practised masturbation from an early age—ever since she
 can remember—by the method of external friction and pressure.
 from the age of  she was able (and is still) to produce the
 orgasm almost without effort, by calling up the image of any man
 who had struck her fancy. she has often done so while seated
 talking to such a man, even when he is almost a stranger; in
 doing it, she says, a tightening of the muscles of the thighs and
 the slightest movement are sufficient. ugly men (if not
 deformed), as well as men with the reputation of being roués,
 greatly excite her sexually, more especially if of good social
 position, though this is not essential.
 at the age of  she became hysterical, probably, she herself
 believes, in consequence of a great increase at that time of
 indulgence in masturbation. the doctors, apparently suspecting
 her habits, urged her parents to get her married early. she
 married, at the age of , a man about twice her own age.
 as a child (and in a less degree still) she was very fond of
 watching dog-fights. this spectacle produced strong sexual
 feelings and usually orgasm, especially if much blood was shed
 during the fight. clean cuts and wounds greatly attract her,
 whether on herself or a man. she has frequently slightly cut or
 scratched herself "to see the blood," and likes to suck the
 wound, thinking the taste "delicious." this produces strong
 sexual feelings and often orgasm, especially if at the time she
 thinks of some attractive man and imagines that she is sucking
 his blood. the sight of injury to a woman only very slightly
 affects her, and that, she thinks, only because of an involuntary
 association of ideas. nor has the sight of suffering in illness
 any exciting effects, only that which is due to violence, and
 when there is a visible cause for the suffering, such as cuts and
 wounds. (bruises, from the absence of blood, have only a slight
 effect.) the excitement is intensified if she imagines that she
 has herself inflicted the injury. she likes to imagine that the
 man wished to rape her, and that she fought him in order to make
 him more greatly value her favor, so wounding him.
 impersonal ideas of torture also excite her. she thinks fox's
 book of martyrs "lovely," and the more horrible and bloody the
 tortures described the greater is the sexual excitement produced.
 the book excites her from the point of view of the torturer, not
 that of the victim. she has frequently masturbated while reading
 it.
 so far as practicable she has sought to carry out these ideas in
 her relations with her husband. she has several times bitten him
 till the blood came and sucked the bite during coitus. she likes
 to bite him enough to make him wince. the pleasure is greatly
 heightened by thinking of various tortures, chiefly by cutting.
 she likes to have her husband talk to her, and she to him, of all
 the tortures they could inflict on each other. she has, however,
 never actually tried to carry out these tortures. she would like
 to, but dares not, as she is sure he could not endure them. she
 has no desire for her husband to try them on her, although she
 likes to hear him talk about it.
 she is at the same time fond of normal coitus, even to excess.
 she likes her husband to remain entirely passive during
 connection, so that he can continue in a state of strong erection
 for a long time. she can thus, she says, procure for herself the
 orgasm a number of times in succession, even nine or ten, quite
 easily. on one occasion she even had the orgasm twenty-six times
 within about one and a quarter hours, her husband during this
 time having two orgasms. (she is quite certain about the accuracy
 of this statement.) during this feat much talk about torture was
 indulged in, and it took place after a month's separation from
 her husband, during which she was careful not to masturbate, so
 that she might have "a real good time" when he came back. she
 acknowledges that on this occasion she was a "complete wreck" for
 a couple of days afterward, but states that usually ten or a
 dozen orgasms (or spasms, as she terms them) only make her "feel
 lively." she becomes frenzied with excitement during intercourse
 and insensible to everything but the pleasure of it.
 she has never hitherto allowed anyone (except her husband after
 marriage) to know of her sadistic impulses, nor has she carried
 them out with anyone, though she would like to, if she dared. nor
 has she allowed any man but her husband to have connection with
 her or to take any liberties. 
outbursts of sadism may occur episodically in fairly normal persons. thus,
coutagne describes the case of a lad of —always regarded as quite
normal, and without any signs of degeneracy, even on careful examination,
or any traces of hysteria or alcoholism, though there was insanity among
his cousins—who had had occasional sexual relations for a year or two,
and on one occasion, being in a state of erection, struck the girl three
times on the breast and abdomen with a kitchen knife bought for the
purpose. he was much ashamed of his act immediately afterward, and, all
the circumstances being taken into consideration, he was acquitted by the
court.[] here we seem to have the obscure and latent fascination of
blood, which is almost normal, germinating momentarily into an active
impulse which is distinctly abnormal, though it produced little beyond
those incisions which vatsyayana disapproved of, but still regarded as a
part of courtship. one step more and we are amid the most outrageous and
extreme of all forms of sexual perversion: with the heroes of de sade's
novels, who, in exemplification of their author's most cherished ideals,
plan scenes of debauchery in which the flowing of blood is an essential
element of coitus; with the marshall gilles de rais and the hungarian
countess bathory, whose lust could only be satiated by the death of
innumerable victims.
this impulse to stab—with no desire to kill, or even in most
 cases to give pain, but only to draw blood and so either
 stimulate or altogether gratify the sexual impulse—is no doubt
 the commonest form of sanguinary sadism. these women-stabbers
 have been known in france as piqueurs for nearly a century, and
 in germany are termed stecher or messerstecher (they have
 been studied by näcke, "zur psychologie der sadistischen
 messerstecher," archiv für kriminal-anthropologie, bd. ,
 ). a case of this kind where a man stabbed girls in the
 abdomen occurred in paris in the middle of the eighteenth
 century, and in  or  there seems to have been an epidemic
 of piqueurs in paris; as we learn from a letter of charlotte
 von schiller's to knebel; the offenders (though perhaps there was
 only one) frequented the boulevards and the palais royal and
 stabbed women in the buttocks or thighs; they were never caught.
 about the same time similar cases of a slighter kind occurred in
 london, brussels, hamburg, and munich.
 stabbers are nearly always men, but cases of the same perversion
 in women are not unknown. thus dr. kiernan informs me of an irish
 woman, aged , and at the beginning of the menopause, who, in
 new york in , stabbed five men with a hatpin. the motive was
 sexual and she told one of the men that she stabbed him because
 she "loved" him.
 gilles de rais, who had fought beside joan of arc, is the classic
 example of sadism in its extreme form, involving the murder of
 youths and maidens. bernelle considers that there is some truth
 in the contention of huysmans that the association with joan of
 arc was a predisposing cause in unbalancing gilles de rais.
 another cause was his luxurious habit of life. he himself, no
 doubt rightly, attached importance to the suggestions received in
 reading suetonius. he appears to have been a sexually precocious
 child, judging from an obscure passage in his confessions. he was
 artistic and scholarly, fond of books, of the society of learned
 men, and of music. bernelle sums him up as "a pious warrior, a
 cruel and keen artist, a voluptuous assassin, an exalted mystic,"
 who was at the same time unbalanced, a superior degenerate, and
 morbidly impulsive. (the best books on gilles de rais are the
 abbé bossard's gilles de rais, in which, however, the author,
 being a priest, treats his subject as quite sane and abnormally
 wicked; huysmans's novel, la-bas, which embodies a detailed
 study of gilles de rais, and f. h. bernelle's thèse de paris, la
 psychose de gilles de rais, .)
 the opinion has been hazarded that the history of gilles de rais
 is merely a legend. this view is not accepted, but there can be
 no doubt that the sadistic manifestations which occurred in the
 middle ages were mixed up with legendary and folk-lore elements.
 these elements centered on the conception of the werwolf,
 supposed to be a man temporarily transformed into a wolf with
 blood-thirsty impulses. (see, e.g., articles "werwolf" and
 "lycanthropy" in encyclopædia britannica.) france, especially,
 was infested with werwolves in the sixteenth century. in ,
 however, it was decided at bordeaux, in a trial involving a
 werwolf, that lycanthropy was only an insane delusion. dumas
 ("les loup-garous," journal de psychologie normale et
 pathologique, may-june, ) argues that the medieval werwolves
 were sadists whose crimes were largely imaginative, though
 sometimes real, the predecessor of the modern jack the ripper.
 the complex nature of the elements making up the belief in the
 werwolf is emphasized by ernest jones, der alptraum, .
 related to the werwolf, but distinct, was the vampire, supposed
 to be a dead person who rose from the dead to suck the blood of
 the living during sleep. by way of reprisal the living dug up,
 exorcised, and mutilated the supposed vampires. this was called
 vampirism. the name vampire was then transferred to the living
 person who had so treated a corpse. all profanation of the
 corpse, whatever its origin, is now frequently called vampirism
 (epaulow, vampirisme, thèse de lyon, ; id., "le vampire
 du muy," archives d'anthropologie criminelle, sept., ). the
 earliest definite reference to necrophily is in herodotus, who
 tells (bk. ii, ch. lxxxix) of an egyptian who had connection with
 the corpse of a woman recently dead. epaulow gives various old
 cases and, at full length, the case which he himself
 investigated, of ardisson, the "vampire du muy." w. a. f. browne
 also has an interesting article on "necrophilism" (journal of
 mental science, jan., ) which he regards as atavistic. when
 there is, in addition, mutilation of the corpse, the condition is
 termed necrosadism. there seems usually to be no true sadism in
 either necrosadism or necrophilism. (see, however, bloch,
 beiträge, vol. ii, p.  et seq.)
 it must be said also that cases of rape followed by murder are
 quite commonly not sadistic. the type of such cases is
 represented by soleilland, who raped and then murdered children.
 he showed no sadistic perversion. he merely killed to prevent
 discovery, as a burglar who is interrupted may commit murder in
 order to escape. (e. dupré, "l'affaire soleilland," archives
 d'anthropologie criminelle, jan.-feb., .)
 a careful and elaborate study of a completely developed sadist
 has been furnished by lacassagne, rousset, and papillon
 ("l'affaire reidal," archives d'anthropologie criminelle,
 oct.-nov., ). reidal, a youth of , a seminarist, was a
 congenital sanguinary sadist who killed another youth and was
 finally sent to an asylum. from the age of  he had voluptuous
 ideas connected with blood and killing, and liked to play at
 killing with other children. he was of infantile physical
 development, with a pleasant, childish expression of face, very
 religious, and hated obscenity and immorality. but the love of
 blood and murder was an irresistible obsession and its
 gratification produced immense emotional relief.
 sadism generally has been especially studied by lacassagne,
 vacher l'eventreur et les crimes sadiques, . zoösadism, or
 sadism toward animals, has been dealt with by p. thomas, "le
 sadisme sur les animaux," archives d'anthropologie criminelle,
 sept., . auto-sadism, or "auto-erotic cruelty," that is to
 say, injuries inflicted on a person by himself with a sexual
 motive, has been investigated by g. bach (sexuelle verrirungen
 des menschen und der nature, p. ); this condition seems,
 however, a form of algolagnia more masochistic than sadistic in
 character.
 with regard to the medico-legal aspects, kiernan ("responsibility
 in active algophily," medicine, april, ) sets forth the
 reasons in favor of the full and complete responsibility of
 sadists, and harold moyer comes to the same conclusion ("is
 sexual perversion insanity?" alienist and neurologist, may,
 ). see also thoinot's medico-legal aspects of moral
 offenses (edited by weysse, ), ch. xviii. while we are
 probably justified in considering the sadist as morally not
 insane in the technical sense, we must remember that he is, for
 the most part, highly abnormal from the outset. as gaupp points
 out (sexual-probleme, oct., , p. ), we cannot measure
 the influences which create the sadist and we must not therefore
 attempt to "punish" him, but we are bound to place him in a
 position where he will not injure society. 
it is enough here to emphasize the fact that there is no solution of
continuity in the links that bind the absolutely normal manifestations of
sex with the most extreme violations of all human law. this is so true
that in saying that these manifestations are violations of all human law
we cannot go on to add, what would seem fairly obvious, that they are
violations also of all natural law. we have but to go sufficiently far
back, or sufficiently far afield, in the various zoölogical series to find
that manifestations which, from the human point of view, are in the
extreme degree abnormally sadistic here become actually normal. among very
various species wounding and rending normally take place at or immediately
after coitus; if we go back to the beginning of animal life in the
protozoa sexual conjugation itself is sometimes found to present the
similitude, if not the actuality, of the complete devouring of one
organism by another. over a very large part of nature, as it has been
truly said, "but a thin veil divides love from death."[] 
there is, indeed, on the whole, a point of difference. in that abnormal
sadism which appears from time to time among civilized human beings it is
nearly always the female who becomes the victim of the male. but in the
normal sadism which occurs throughout a large part of nature it is nearly
always the male who is the victim of the female. it is the male spider who
impregnates the female at the risk of his life and sometimes perishes in
the attempt; it is the male bee who, after intercourse with the queen,
falls dead from that fatal embrace, leaving her to fling aside his
entrails and calmly pursue her course.[] if it may seem to some that
the course of our inquiry leads us to contemplate with equanimity, as a
natural phenomenon, a certain semblance of cruelty in man in his relations
with woman, they may, if they will, reflect that this phenomenon is but a
very slight counterpoise to that cruelty which has been naturally exerted
by the female on the male long even before man began to be.
[] krafft-ebing, psychopathia sexualis, english translation
of tenth german edition, pp. , . it should be added that the object
of the sadistic impulse is not necessarily a person of the opposite sex.
[] a. moll, die konträre sexualempfindung, third edition,
, p. .
[] féré, l'instinct sexuel, p. .
[] p. garnier, "des perversions sexuelles," thirteenth
international congress of medicine, section of psychiatry, paris, .
[] e. dühren, der marquis de sade und seine zeit, third
edition, , p. .
[] see, for instance, bloch's beiträge zur ætiologie der
psychopathia sexualis, part ii, p. .
[] krafft-ebing, psychopathia sexualis, english translation
of tenth german edition, p. . stefanowsky, who also discussed this
condition (archives de l'anthropologie criminelle, may, , and
translation, with notes by kiernan, alienist and neurologist, oct.,
), termed it passivism.
[] anatomy of melancholy, part iii, section , mem. iii,
subs, .
[] "aristoteles als masochist," geschlecht und gesellschaft,
bd. ii, ht. .
[] die konträre sexualempfindung, third edition, p. .
cf. c. f. von schlichtegroll, sacher-masoch und der masochismus, p.
[] see c. f. von schlichtegroll, loc. cit., p.  et seq.
[] iwan bloch considers that it is the commonest of all sexual
perversions, more prevalent even than homosexuality.
[] it has no doubt been prominent in earlier civilization. a
very pronounced masochist utterance may be found in an ancient egyptian
love-song written about  b.c.: "oh! were i made her porter, i should
cause her to be wrathful with me. then when i did but hear her voice, the
voice of her anger, a child shall i be for fear." (wiedemann, popular
literature in ancient egypt, p. .) the activity and independence of the
egyptian women at the time may well have offered many opportunities to the
ancient egyptian masochist.
[] colin scott, "sex and art," american journal of
psychology, vol. vii, no. , p. .
[] it must not be supposed that the attraction of fur or of the
whip is altogether accounted for by such a casual early experience as in
sacher-masoch's case served to evoke it. the whip we shall have to
consider briefly later on. the fascination exerted by fur, whether
manifesting itself as love or fear, would appear to be very common in many
children, and almost instinctive. stanley hall, in his "study of fears"
(american journal of psychology, vol. viii, p. ) has obtained as many
as  well-developed cases of fear of fur, or, as he terms it,
doraphobia, in some cases appearing as early as the age of  months, and
he gives many examples. he remarks that the love of fur is still more
common, and concludes that "both this love and fear are so strong and
instinctive that they can hardly be fully accounted for without recourse
to a time when association with animals was far closer than now, or
perhaps when our remote ancestors were hairy." (cf. "erotic symbolism,"
iv, in the fifth volume of these studies.)
[] féré, l'instinct sexuel, p. .
[] schrenck-notzing, zeitschrift für hypnotismus, bd. ix, ht.
[] eulenburg, sadismus und masochismus, second edition,
, p. .
[] i have elsewhere dealt with this point in discussing the
special emotional tone of red (havelock ellis, "the psychology of red,"
popular science monthly, august and september, ).
[] it is probable that the motive of sexual murders is nearly
always to shed blood, and not to cause death. leppmann (bulletin
internationale de droit pénal, vol. vi, , p. ) points out that
such murders are generally produced by wounds in the neck or mutilation of
the abdomen, never by wounds of the head. t. claye shaw, who terms the
lust for blood hemothymia, has written an interesting and suggestive paper
("a prominent motive in murder," lancet, june , ) on the natural
fascination of blood. blumröder, in , seems to have been the first who
definitely called attention to the connection between lust and blood.
[] féré, revue de chirurgie, march , .
[] h. coutagne, "cas de perversion sanguinaire de l'instinct
sexuel," annales médico-psychologiques, july and august, . d. s.
booth (alienist and neurologist, aug., ) describes the case of a man
of neurotic heredity who slightly stabbed a woman with a penknife when on
his way to a prostitute.
[] kiernan appears to have been the first to suggest the
bearing of these facts on sadism, which he would regard as the abnormal
human form of phenomena which may be found at the very beginning of animal
life, as, indeed, the survival or atavistic reappearance of a primitive
sexual cannibalism. see his "psychological aspects of the sexual
appetite," alienist and neurologist, april, , and "responsibility in
sexual perversion," chicago medical recorder, march, . penta has
also independently developed the conception of the biological basis of
sadism and other sexual perversions (i pervertimenti sessuali, ). it
must be added that, as remy de gourmont points out (promenades
philosophiques, d series, p. ), this sexual cannibalism exerted by
the female may have, primarily, no erotic significance: "she eats him
because she is hungry and because when exhausted he is an easy prey."
[] in the chapter entitled "le vol nuptial" of his charming
book on the life of bees maeterlinck has given an incomparable picture of
the tragic courtship of these insects.
flagellation as a typical illustration of algolagnia—causes of connection
between sexual emotion and whipping—physical causes—psychic causes
probably more important—the varied emotional associations of
whipping—its wide prevalence.
the whole problem of love and pain, in its complementary sadistic and
masochistic aspects, is presented to us in connection with the pleasure
sometimes experienced in whipping, or in being whipped, or in witnessing
or thinking about scenes of whipping. the association of sexual emotion
with bloodshed is so extreme a perversion, it so swiftly sinks to phases
that are obviously cruel, repulsive, and monstrous in an extreme degree,
that it is necessarily rare, and those who are afflicted by it are often
more or less imbecile. with whipping it is otherwise. whipping has always
been a recognized religious penance; it is still regarded as a beneficial
and harmless method of chastisement; there is nothing necessarily cruel,
repulsive, or monstrous in the idea or the reality of whipping, and it is
perfectly easy and natural for an interest in the subject to arise in an
innocent and even normal child, and thus to furnish a germ around which,
temporarily at all events, sexual ideas may crystallize. for these reasons
the connection between love and pain may be more clearly brought out in
connection with whipping than with blood.
there is, by no means, any necessary connection between flagellation and
the sexual emotions. if there were, this form of penance would not have
been so long approved or at all events tolerated by the church.[] 
as a matter of fact, indeed, it was not always approved or even tolerated.
pope adrian iv in the eighth century forbade priests to beat their
penitents, and at the time of the epidemic of flagellation in the
thirteenth century, which was highly approved by many holy men, the abuses
were yet so frequent that clement vi issued a bull against these
processions. all such papal prohibitions remained without effect. the
association of religious flagellation with perverted sexual motives is
shown by its condemnation in later ages by the inquisition, which was
accustomed to prosecute the priests who, in prescribing flagellation as a
penance, exerted it personally, or caused it to be inflicted on the
stripped penitent in his presence, or made a woman penitent discipline
him, such offences being regarded as forms of "solicitation."[] there
seems even to be some reason to suppose that the religious flagellation
mania which was so prevalent in the later middle ages, when processions of
penitents, male and female, eagerly flogged themselves and each other, may
have had something to do with the discovery of erotic flagellation,[]
which, at all events in europe, seems scarcely to have been known before
the sixteenth century. it must, in any case, have assisted to create a
predisposition. the introduction of flagellation as a definitely
recognized sexual stimulant is by eulenburg, in his interesting book,
sadismus und masochismus, attributed to the arabian physicians. it would
appear to have been by the advice of an arabian physician that the duchess
leonora gonzaga, of mantua, was whipped by her mother to aid her in
responding more warmly to her husband's embraces and to conceive.
whatever the precise origin of sexual flagellation in europe, there can be
no doubt that it soon became extremely common, and so it remains at the
present day. those who possess a special knowledge of such matters declare
that sexual flagellation is the most frequent of all sexual perversions
in england.[] this belief is, i know, shared by many people both inside
and outside england. however this may be, the tendency is certainly
common. i doubt if it is any or at all less common in germany, judging by
the large number of books on the subject of flagellation which have been
published in german. in a catalogue of "interesting books" on this and
allied subjects issued by a german publisher and bookseller, i find that,
of fifty-five volumes, as many as seventeen or eighteen, all in german,
deal solely with the question of flagellation, while many of the other
books appear to deal in part with the same subject.[] it is, no doubt,
true that the large part which the rod has played in the past history of
our civilization justifies a considerable amount of scientific interest in
the subject of flagellation, but it is clear that the interest in these
books is by no means always scientific, but very frequently sexual.
it is remarkable that, while the sexual associations of whipping,
 whether in slight or in marked degrees, are so frequent in modern
 times, they appear to be by no means easy to trace in ancient
 times. "flagellation," i find it stated by a modern editor of the
 priapeia, "so extensively practised in england as a provocation
 to venery, is almost entirely unnoticed by the latin erotic
 writers, although, in the satyricon of petronius (ch.
 cxxxviii), encolpius, in describing the steps taken by œnothea
 to undo the temporary impotence to which he was
 subjected, says: 'next she mixed nasturtium-juice with southern
 wood, and, having bathed my foreparts, she took a bunch of green
 nettles, and gently whipped my belly all over below the navel.'"
 it appears also that many ancient courtesans dedicated to venus
 as ex-votos a whip, a bridle, or a spur as tokens of their skill
 in riding their lovers. the whip was sometimes used in antiquity,
 but if it aroused sexual emotions they seem to have passed
 unregarded. "we naturally know nothing," eulenburg remarks
 (sadismus und masochismus, p. ), "of the feelings of the
 priestess of artemis at the flagellation of spartan youths; or
 what emotions inspired the priestess of the syrian goddess under
 similar circumstances; or what the roman pontifex maximus felt
 when he castigated the exposed body of a negligent vestal (as
 described by plutarch) behind a curtain, and the 'plagosus
 orbilius' only practised on children."
 it was at the renaissance that cases of abnormal sexual pleasure
 in flagellation began to be recorded. the earliest distinct
 reference to a masochistic flagellant seems to have been made by
 pico della mirandola, toward the end of the fifteenth century, in
 his disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem, bk. iii,
 ch. xxvii. cœlius rhodiginus in , again, narrated
 the case of a man he knew who liked to be severely whipped, and
 found this a stimulant to coitus. otto brunfels, in his
 onomasticon (), art. "coitus," refers to another case of a
 man who could not have intercourse with his wife until he had
 been whipped. then, a century later, in , meibomius wrote de
 usu flagrorum in re venerea, the earliest treatise on this
 subject, narrating various cases. numerous old cases of pleasure
 in flagellation and urtication were brought together by schurig
 in  in his spermatologia, pp. -.
 the earliest definitely described medical case of sadistic
 pleasure in the sight of active whipping which i have myself come
 across belongs to the year , and occurs in a letter in which
 nesterus seeks the opinion of garmann. he knows intimately, he
 states, a very learned man—whose name, for the honor he bears
 him, he refrains from mentioning—who, whenever in a school or
 elsewhere he sees a boy unbreeched and birched, and hears him
 crying out, at once emits semen copiously without any erection,
 but with great mental commotion. the same accident frequently
 happens to him during sleep, accompanied by dreams of whipping.
 nesterus proceeds to mention that this "laudatus vir" was also
 extremely sensitive to the odor of strawberries and other fruits,
 which produced nausea. he was evidently a neurotic subject.
 (l. c. f. garmanni et aliorum virorum clarissimorum, epistolarum
 centuria, rostochi et lipsiæ, .)
 in england we find that toward the end of the sixteenth century
 one of marlowe's epigrams deals with a certain francus who before
 intercourse with his mistress "sends for rods and strips himself
 stark naked," and by the middle of the seventeenth century the
 existence of an association between flagellation and sexual
 pleasure seems to have been popularly recognized. in , in a
 vulgar "tragicomedy" entitled the presbyterian lash, we find:
 "i warrant he thought that the tickling of the wench's buttocks
 with the rod would provoke her to lechery." that whipping was
 well known as a sexual stimulant in england in the eighteenth
 century is sufficiently indicated by the fact that in one of
 hogarth's series representing the "harlot's progress" a birch rod
 hangs over the bed. the prevalence of sexual flagellation in
 england at the end of that century and the beginning of the
 nineteenth is discussed by dühren (iwan bloch) in his
 geschlechtsleben in england (-), especially vol. ii, ch.
 vi.
 while, however, the evidence regarding sexual flagellation is
 rare, until recent times whipping as a punishment was extremely
 common. it is even possible that its very prevalence, and the
 consequent familiarity with which it was regarded, were
 unfavorable to the development of any mysterious emotional state
 likely to act on the sexual sphere, except in markedly neurotic
 subjects. thus, the corporal chastisement of wives by husbands
 was common and permitted. not only was this so to a proverbial
 extent in eastern europe, but also in the extreme west and among
 a people whose women enjoyed much freedom and honor. cymric law
 allowed a husband to chastise his wife for angry speaking, such
 as calling him a cur; for giving away property she was not
 entitled to give away; or for being found in hiding with another
 man. for the first two offenses she had the option of paying him
 three kine. when she accepted the chastisement she was to receive
 "three strokes with a rod of the length of her husband's forearm
 and the thickness of his long finger, and that wheresoever he
 might will, excepting on the head"; so that she was to suffer
 pain only, and not injury. (r. b. holt, "marriage laws and customs
 of the cymri," journal of the anthropological institute,
 august-november, , p. .)
 "the cymric law," writes a correspondent, "seems to have survived
 in popular belief in the eastern and middle states of the united
 states. in police-courts in new york, for example, it has been
 unsuccessfully pleaded that a man is entitled to beat his wife
 with a stick no thicker than his thumb. in pennsylvania actual
 acquittals have been rendered."
 among all classes children were severely whipped by their parents
 and others in authority over them. it may be recalled that in the
 twelfth century when abelard became tutor to heloise, then about
  years of age, her uncle authorized him to beat her, if
 negligent in her studies. even in the sixteenth century jeanne
 d'albert, who became the mother of henry iv of france, at the
 age of ½ was married to the duke of cleves, and to overcome her
 resistance to this union the queen, her mother, had her whipped
 to such an extent that she thought she would die of it. the whip
 on this occasion was, however, only partially successful, for the
 duke never succeeded in consummating the marriage, which was, in
 consequence, annulled. (cabanès brings together numerous facts
 regarding the prevalence of flagellation as a chastisement in
 ancient france in the interesting chapter on "la flagellation a
 la cour et à la ville" in his indiscretions de l'histoire,
 as to the prevalence of whipping in england evidence is furnished
 by andrews, in the chapter on "whipping and whipping posts," in
 his book on ancient punishments. it existed from the earliest
 times and was administered for a great variety of offenses, to
 men and women alike, for vagrancy, for theft, to the fathers and
 mothers of illegitimate children, for drunkenness, for insanity,
 even sometimes for small-pox. at one time both sexes were whipped
 naked, but from queen elizabeth's time only from the waist
 upward. in  the whipping of female vagrants ceased by law.
 (w. andrews, bygone punishments, .)
 it must, however, be remarked that law always lags far behind
 social feeling and custom, and flagellation as a common
 punishment had fallen into disuse or become very perfunctory long
 before any change was made in the law, though it is not
 absolutely extinct, even by law, today. there is even an ignorant
 and retrograde tendency to revive it. thus, even in severe
 commonwealth days, the alleged whipping with rods of a
 servant-girl by her master, though with no serious physical
 injury, produced a great public outcry, as we see by the case of
 the rev. zachary crofton, a distinguished london clergyman, who
 was prosecuted in  on the charge of whipping his
 servant-girl, mary cadman, because she lay in bed late in the
 morning and stole sugar. this incident led to several pamphlets.
 in the presbyterian, lash or noctroff's maid whipt (), a
 satire on crofton, we read: "it is not only contrary to gospel
 but good manners to take up a wench's petticoats, smock and all";
 and in the doggerel ballad of "bo-peep," which was also written
 on the same subject, it is said that crofton should have left his
 wife to chastise the maid. crofton published two pamphlets, one
 under his own name and one under that of alethes noctroff (),
 in which he elaborately dealt with the charge as both false and
 frivolous. in one passage he offers a qualified defense of such
 an act: "i cannot but bewail the exceeding rudeness of our times
 to suffer such foolery to be prosecuted as of some high and
 notorious crime. suppose it were (as it is not) true, may not
 some eminent congregational brother be found guilty of the same
 act? is it not much short of drinking an health naked on a
 signpost? may it not be as theologically defended as the
 husband's correction of his wife?" this passage, and the whole
 episode, show that feeling in regard to this matter was at that
 time in a state of transition.
 flagellation as a penance, whether inflicted by the penitent
 himself or by another person, was also extremely common in
 medieval and later days. according to walsingham ("master of the
 rolls' collection," vol. i, p. ), in england, in the middle of
 the fourteenth century, penitents, sometimes men of noble birth,
 would severely flagellate themselves, even to the shedding of
 blood, weeping or singing as they did so; they used cords with
 knots containing nails.
 at a later time the custom of religious flagellation was more
 especially preserved in spain. the countess d'aulnoy, who visited
 spain in , has described the flagellations practised in
 public at madrid. after giving an account of the dress worn by
 these flagellants, which corresponds to that worn in spain in
 holy week at the present time by the members of the cofradias,
 the face concealed by the high sugar-loaf head-covering, she
 continues: "they attach ribbons to their scourges, and usually
 their mistresses honor them with their favors. in gaining public
 admiration they must not gesticulate with the arm, but only move
 the wrist and hand; the blows must be given without haste, and
 the blood must not spoil the costume. they make terrible wounds
 on their shoulders, from which the blood flows in streams; they
 march through the streets with measured steps; they pass before
 the windows of their mistresses, where they flagellate themselves
 with marvelous patience. the lady gazes at this fine sight
 through the blinds of her room, and by a sign she encourages him
 to flog himself, and lets him understand how much she likes this
 sort of gallantry. when they meet a good-looking woman they
 strike themselves in such a way that the blood goes on to her;
 this is a great honor, and the grateful lady thanks them.... all
 this is true to the letter."
 the countess proceeds to describe other and more genuine
 penitents, often of high birth, who may be seen in the street
 naked above the waist, and with naked feet on the rough and sharp
 pavement; some had swords passed through the skin of their body
 and arms, others heavy crosses that weighed them down. she
 remarks that she was told by the papal nuncio that he had
 forbidden confessors to impose such penances, and that they were
 due to the devotion of the penitents themselves. (relation du
 voyage d'espagne, , vol. ii, pp. -.)
 the practice of public self-flagellation in church during lent
 existed in spain and portugal up to the early years of the
 nineteenth century. descriptions of it will often be met with in
 old volumes of travel. thus, i find a traveler through spain in
  describing how, at barcelona, he was present when, in lent,
 at a miserere in the convent church of san felipe neri on friday
 evening the doors were shut, the lights put out, and in perfect
 darkness all bared their backs and applied the discipline,
 singing while they scourged themselves, ever louder and harsher
 and with ever greater vehemence until in twenty minutes' time the
 whole ended in a deep groan. it is mentioned that at malaga,
 after such a scene, the whole church was in the morning sprinkled
 with blood. (joseph townsend, a journey through spain in ,
 vol. i, p. ; vol. iii, p. .)
 even to our own day religious self-flagellation is practised by
 spaniards in the azores, in the darkened churches during lent,
 and the walls are often spotted and smeared with blood at this
 time. (o. h. howarth, "the survival of corporal punishment,"
 journal anthropological institute, feb., .) in remote
 districts of spain (as near haro in rioja) there are also
 brotherhoods who will flagellate themselves on good friday, but
 not within the church. (dario de regoyos, españa negra, ,
 p. .) 
when we glance over the history of flagellation and realize that, though
whipping as a punishment has been very widespread and common, there have
been periods and lands showing no clear knowledge of any sexual
association of whipping, it becomes clear that whipping is not necessarily
an algolagnic manifestation. it seems evident that there must be special
circumstances, and perhaps a congenital predisposition, to bring out
definitely the relationship of flagellation to the sexual impulse. thus,
löwenfeld considers that only about  per cent, of people can be sexually
excited by flagellation of the buttocks,[] and näcke also is decidedly
of opinion that there can be no sexual pleasure in flagellation without
predisposition, which is rare.[] on these grounds many are of opinion
that physical chastisement, provided it is moderate, seldom applied, and
only to children who are quite healthy and vigorous, need not be
absolutely prohibited.[] but, however rare and abnormal a sexual
response to actual flagellation may be in adults, we shall see that the
general sexual association of whipping in the minds of children, and
frequently of their elders, is by; no means rare and scarcely abnormal.
what is the cause of the connection between sexual emotion and whipping? a
very simple physical cause has been believed by some to account fully for
the phenomena. it is known that strong stimulation of the gluteal region
may, especially under predisposing conditions, produce or heighten sexual
excitement, by virtue of the fact that both regions are supplied by
branches of the same nerve.
there is another reason why whipping should exert a sexual influence. as
féré especially has pointed out, in moderate amount it has a tonic effect,
and as such has a general beneficial result in stimulating the whole body.
this fact was, indeed, recognized by the classic physicians, and galen
regarded flagellation as a tonic.[] thus, not only must it be said that
whipping, when applied to the gluteal region, has a direct influence in
stimulating the sexual organs, but its general tonic influence must
naturally extend to the sexual system.
it is possible that we must take into account here a biological
 factor, such as we have found involved in other forms of sadism
 and masochism. in this connection a lady writes to me: "with
 regard to the theory which connects the desire for whipping with
 the way in which animals make love, where blows or pressure on
 the hindquarters are almost a necessary preliminary to pleasure,
 have you ever noticed the way in which stags behave? their does
 seem as timid as the males are excitable, and the blows inflicted
 on them by the horns of their mates to reduce them to submission
 must be, i should think, an exact equivalent to being beaten with
 a stick."
 it is remarkable that in some cases the whip would even appear to
 have a psychic influence in producing sexual excitement in
 animals accustomed to its application as a stimulant to action.
 thus, professor cornevin, of lyons, describes the case of a
 hungarian stallion, otherwise quite potent, in whom erection
 could only be produced in the presence of a mare in heat when a
 whip was cracked near him, and occasionally applied gently to his
 legs. (cornevin, archives d'anthropologie criminelle, january,
here, undoubtedly, we have a definite anatomical and physiological
relationship which often serves as a starting-point for the turning of the
sexual feelings in this direction, and will sometimes support the
perversion when it has otherwise arisen. but this relationship, even if we
regard it as a fairly frequent channel by which sexual emotion is aroused,
will not suffice to account for most, or even many, of the cases in which
whipping exerts a sexual fascination. in many, if not most, cases it is
found that the idea of whipping asserts its sexual significance quite
apart from any personal experience, even in persons who have never been
whipped;[] not seldom also in persons who have been whipped and who
feel nothing but repugnance for the actual performance, attractive as it
may be in imagination.
it is evident that we have to seek the explanation of this phenomenon
largely in psychic causes. whipping, whether inflicted or suffered, tends
to arouse, vaguely but massively, the very fundamental and primitive
emotions of anger and fear, which, as we have seen, have always been
associated with courtship, and it tends to arouse them at an age when the
sexual emotions have not become clearly defined, and under circumstances
which are likely to introduce sexual associations. from their earliest
years children have been trained to fear whipping, even when not actually
submitted to it, and an unjust punishment of this kind, whether inflicted
on themselves or others, frequently arouses intense anger, nervous
excitement, or terror in the sensitive minds of children.[] moreover,
as has been pointed out to me by a lady who herself in early life was
affected by the sexual associations of whipping, a child only sees the
naked body of elder children when uncovered for whipping, and its sexual
charm may in part be due to this cause. we further have to remark that the
spectacle of suffering itself is, to some extent and under some
circumstances, a stimulant of sexual emotion. it is evident that a number
of factors contribute to surround whipping at a very early age with
powerful emotional associations, and that these associations are of such a
character that in predisposed subjects they are very easily led into a
sexual channel.[] various lines of evidence support this conclusion.
thus, from several reliable quarters i learn that the sight of a boy being
caned at school may produce sexual excitement in the boys who look on. the
association of sexual emotion with whipping is, again, very liable to show
itself in schoolmasters, and many cases have been recorded in which the
flogging of boys, under the stress of this impulse, has been carried to
extreme lengths. an early and eminent example is furnished by udall, the
humanist, at one time headmaster of eton, who was noted for his habit of
inflicting frequent corporal punishment for little or no cause, and who
confessed to sexual practices with the boys under his care.[]
sanitchenko has called attention to the case of a russian functionary, a
school inspector, who every day had some fifty pupils flogged in his
presence, as evidence of a morbid pleasure in such scenes. even when no
sexual element can be distinctly traced, scenes of whipping sometimes
exert a singular fascination on some persons of sensitive emotional
temperament. a friend, a clergyman, who has read many novels tells me that
he has been struck by the frequency with which novelists describe such
scenes with much luxury of detail; his list includes novels by well-known
religious writers of both sexes. in some of these cases there is reason to
believe that the writers felt this sexual association of whipping.
it is natural that an interest in whipping should be developed very early
in childhood, and, indeed, it enters very frequently into the games of
young children, and constitutes a much relished element of such games,
more especially among girls. i know of many cases in which young girls
between  and  years of age took great pleasure in games in which the
chief point consisted in unfastening each other's drawers and smacking
each other, and some of these girls, when they grew older, realized that
there was an element of sexual enjoyment in their games. it has indeed, it
seems, always been a child's game, and even an amusement of older persons,
to play at smacking each other's nates. in the presbyter's lash in 
a young woman is represented as stating that she had done this as a child,
and in ancient france it was a privileged custom on innocents' day
(december th) to smack all the young people found lying late in bed; it
was a custom which, as clement marot bears witness, was attractive to
lovers.
if we turn to the histories i have brought together in appendix b
 we find various references to whipping more or less clearly
 connected with the rudimentary sexual feelings of childhood.
 i am acquainted with numerous cases in which the idea of
 whipping, or the impulse to whip or be whipped, distinctly
 exists, though usually, when persisting to adult life, only in a
 rudimentary form. history i in the appendix b presents a
 well-marked instance. i may quote the remarks in another case of
 a lady regarding her early feelings: "as a child the idea of
 being whipped excited me, but only in connection with a person i
 loved, and, moreover, one who had the right to correct me. on one
 occasion i was beaten with the back of a brush, and the pain was
 sufficient to overcome any excitement; so that, ever after, this
 particular form of whipping left me unaffected, though the
 excitement still remained connected with forms of which i had no
 experience."
 another lady states that when a little girl of  or  the
 servants used to smack her nates with a soft brush to amuse
 themselves (undoubtedly, as she now believes, this gave them a
 kind of sexual pleasure); it did not hurt her, but she disliked
 it. her father used to whip her severely on the nates at this age
 and onward to the age of , but this never gave her any
 pleasure. when, however, she was about  she began in waking
 dreams to imagine that she was whipping somebody, and would
 finish by imagining that she was herself being whipped. she would
 make up stories of which the climax was a whipping, and felt at
 the same time a pleasurable burning sensation in her sexual
 parts; she used to prolong the preliminaries of the story to
 heighten the climax; she felt more pleasure in the idea of being
 whipped than of whipping, although she never experienced any
 pleasure from an actual whipping. these day-dreams were most
 vivid when she was at school, between the ages of  and . they
 began to fade with the growth of affection for real persons. but
 in dreams, even in adult life, she occasionally experienced
 sexual excitement accompanied by images of smacking.
 another correspondent, this time a man, writes: "i experienced
 the connection between sexual excitement and whipping long before
 i knew what sexuality meant or had any notion regarding the
 functions of the sexual organs. what i now know to be distinct
 sexual feeling used to occur whenever the idea of whipping arose
 or the mention of whipping was made in a way to arrest my
 attention. i well remember the strange, mysterious fascination it
 had, even apart from any actual physical excitement. i have been
 told by many men and a few women that it was the same with them.
 even now the feeling exists sometimes, especially when reading
 about whipping."
 the following confession, which i find recorded by a german
 manufacturer's wife, corresponds with those i have obtained in
 england: "when about  years old i was playing with a little girl
 friend in the park. our governesses sat on a bench talking. for
 some reason—perhaps because we had wandered away too far and
 failed to hear a call to return—my friend aroused the anger of
 the governess in charge of her. that young lady, therefore, took
 her aside, raised her dress, and vigorously smacked her with the
 flat hand. i looked on fascinated, and possessed by an
 inexplicable feeling to which i naïvely gave myself up. the
 impression was so deep that the scene and the persons concerned
 are still clearly present to my mind, and i can even recall the
 little details of my companion's underclothing." when sexual
 associations are permanently brought into play through such an
 early incident it is possible that a special predisposition
 exists. (gesellschaft und geschlecht, bd. ii, ht. , p. .) 
it would certainly seem that we must look upon this association as coming
well within the normal range of emotional life in childhood, although
after puberty, when the sexual feelings become clearly defined, the
attraction of whipping normally tends to be left behind as a piece of
childishness, only surviving in the background of consciousness, if at
all, to furnish a vaguely sexual emotional tone to the subject of
whipping, but not affecting conduct, sometimes only emerging in erotic
dreams.
this, however, is not invariably the case in persons who are organically
abnormal. in such cases, and especially, it would seem, in highly
sensitive and emotional children, the impress left by the fact or the
image of whipping may be so strong that it affects not only definitely,
but permanently, the whole subsequent course of development of the sexual
impulse. régis has recorded a case which well illustrates the
circumstances and hereditary conditions under which the idea of whipping
may take such firm root in the sexual emotional nature of a child as to
persist into adult life; at the same time the case shows how a sexual
perversion may, in an intelligent person, take on an intellectual
character, and it also indicates a rational method of treatment.
jules p., aged , of good heredity on father's side, but bad on
 that of mother, who is highly hysterical, while his grandmother
 was very impulsive and sometimes pursued other women with a
 knife. he has one brother and one sister, who are somewhat morbid
 and original. he is himself healthy, intelligent, good looking,
 and agreeable, though with slightly morbid peculiarities. at the
 age of  or  he suddenly opened a door and saw his sister, then
 a girl of  or , kneeling, with her clothes raised and her
 head on her governess's lap, at the moment of being whipped for
 some offense. this trivial incident left a profound impression on
 his mind, and he recalls every detail of it, especially the sight
 of his sister's buttocks,—round, white, and enormous as they
 seemed to his childish eyes,—and that momentary vision gave a
 permanent direction to the whole of his sexual life. always after
 that he desired to touch and pat his sister's gluteal regions. he
 shared her bed, and, though only a child, acquired great skill in
 attaining his ends without attracting her attention, lifting her
 night-gown when she slept and gently caressing the buttocks, also
 contriving to turn her over on to her stomach and then make a
 pillow of her hips. this went on until the age of , when he
 began to play with two little girls of the neighborhood, the
 eldest of whom was ; he liked to take the part of the father
 and whip them. the older girl was big for her age, and he would
 separate her drawers and smack her with much voluptuous emotion;
 so that he frequently sought opportunities to repeat the
 experience, to which the girl willingly lent herself, and they
 were constantly together in dark corners, the girl herself
 opening her drawers to enable him to caress her thighs and
 buttocks with his hand until he became conscious of an erection.
 sometimes he would gently use a whip. on one occasion she asked
 him if he would not now like to see her in front, but he
 declined.
 one day, when  or  years old, being with a boy companion, he
 came upon a picture of a monk being flagellated, and thereupon
 persuaded his companion to let himself be whipped; the boy
 enjoyed the experience, which was therefore often repeated. jules
 p. himself, however, never took the slightest pleasure in playing
 the passive part. these practices were continued even after the
 friend became a conscript, when, however, they became very rare.
 only once or twice has he ever done anything of this kind to
 girls who were strangers to him. nor has he ever masturbated or
 had any desire for sexual intercourse. he contents himself with
 the pleasure of being occasionally able to witness scenes of
 whipping in public places—parks and gardens—or of catching
 glimpses of the thighs and buttocks of young girls or, if
 possible, women.
 his principal enjoyment is in imagination. from the first he has
 loved to invent stories in which whippings were the climax, and
 at  such stories produced the first spontaneous emission. thus,
 he imagines, for instance, a young girl from the country who
 comes up to paris by train; on the way a lady is attracted by
 her, takes an interest in her, brings her home to dinner, and at
 last can no longer resist the temptation to take the girl in her
 arms and whip her amorously. he writes out these scenes and
 illustrates them with drawings, many of which régis reproduces.
 he has even written comedies in which whipping plays a prominent
 part. he has, moreover, searched public libraries for references
 to flagellation, inserted queries in the intermédiare des
 chercheurs et des curieux, and thus obtained a complete
 bibliography of flagellation which is of considerable value.
 régis is acquainted with these archives de la fessée, and
 states that they are carried on with great method and care. he is
 especially interested in the whipping of women by women. he
 considers that the pleasure of whippings should always be shared
 by the person whipped, and he is somewhat concerned to find that
 he has an increasing inclination to imagine an element of cruelty
 in the whipping. emissions are somewhat frequent. according to
 the latest information, he is much better; he has entered into
 sexual relationship with a woman who is much in love with him,
 and to whom he has confided his peculiarities. with her aid and
 suggestions he has been able to have intercourse with her, at the
 moment of coitus whipping her with a harmless india-rubber tube.
 (e. régis, "un cas de perversion sexuelle, a forme sadique,"
 archives d'anthropologie criminelles, july, .)
 in a case also occurring in a highly educated man (narrated by
 marandon de montyel) a doctor of laws, brilliantly intellectual
 and belonging to a family in which there had been some insanity,
 when at school at the age of , saw for the first time a
 schoolfellow whipped on the nates, and experienced a new pleasure
 and emotion. he was never himself whipped at school, but would
 invent games with his sisters and playfellows in which whipping
 formed an essential part. at the age of  he teased a young
 woman, a cook, until she seized him and whipped him. he put his
 arms around her and experienced his first voluptuous spasm of
 sex. the love of flagellation temporarily died out, however, and
 gave place to masturbation and later to a normal attraction to
 women. but at the age of  the old ideas were aroused anew by a
 story his mistress told him. he suffered from various obsessions
 and finally committed suicide. (marandon de montyel, "obsessions
 et vie sexuelle," archives de neurologie, oct., .)
 in a case that has been reported to me, somewhat similar ideas
 played a part. the subject is a tall, well-developed man, aged
 , delicate in childhood, but now normal in health and physical
 condition, though not fond of athletics. his mental ability is
 much above the average, especially in scientific directions; he
 was brought up in narrow and strict religious views, but at an
 early age developed agnostic views of his own.
 from the age of , and perhaps earlier, he practised masturbation
 almost every night. this was a habit which he carried on in all
 innocence. it was as invariable a preliminary, he states, to
 going to sleep as was lying down, and at this period he would
 have felt no hesitation in telling all about it had the question
 been asked. at the age of  or  he recognized the habit as
 abnormal, and fear of ridicule then caused him to keep silence
 and to avoid observation. in carrying it out he would lie on his
 stomach with the penis directed downward, and not up, and the
 thumb resting on the region above the root of the penis. there
 was desire for micturition after the act, and when that was
 satisfied sound sleep followed. when he realized that the habit
 was abnormal he began to make efforts to discontinue it, and
 these efforts have been continued up to the present. the chief
 obstacle has been the difficulty of sleep without carrying out
 the practice. emissions first began to occur at the age of  and
 at first caused some alarm. during the six following years
 indulgence was irregular, sometimes occurring every other night
 and sometimes with a week's intermission. then at the age of 
 the habit was broken for a year, during which nocturnal emissions
 took place during sleep about every three weeks. since this,
 shorter periods of non-indulgence have occurred, these periods
 always coinciding with unusual mental or physical strain, as of
 examinations. he has some degree of attraction for women; this is
 strongest during cessation from masturbation and tends to
 disappear when the habit is resumed. he has never had sexual
 intercourse because he prefers his own method of gratification
 and feels great abhorrence for professional prostitutes; he could
 not afford to marry. any indecency or immorality, except (he
 observes) his own variety, disgusts him.
 at the earliest period no mental images accompanied the act of
 masturbation. at about the age of , however, sexual excitement
 began to be constantly associated with ideas of being whipped. at
 or soon after this age only the fear of disgrace prevented him
 from committing serious childish offenses likely to be punished
 by a good whipping. parents and masters, however, seem to have
 used corporal punishment very sparingly.
 at first this desire was for whipping in general, without
 reference to the operator. soon after the age of , however, he
 began to wish that certain boy friends should be the operators.
 at about the same time definite desire arose for closer contact
 with these friends and later for definite indecent acts which,
 however, the subject failed to specify; he probably meant mutual
 masturbation. these desires were under control, and the fear of
 ridicule seems to have been the chief restraining cause. at about
 the age of  he began to realize that such acts might be
 considered morally bad and wrong, and this led to reticence and
 careful concealment. up to the age of  there were four definite
 attachments to persons of his own sex. there was a tendency,
 sometimes, to regard women as possible whippers, and this became
 stronger at , the images of the two sexes then mingling in his
 thoughts of flagellation. latterly the mental accompaniments of
 masturbation have been less personal, lapsing into the mental
 picture of being whipped by an unknown and vague somebody. when
 definite it has always been a man, and preferably of the type of
 a schoolmaster. his desire has been for punishment by whips,
 canes, or birches, especially upon the buttocks. he has always
 shrunk from the thought of the production of blood or bruises. he
 wishes, in mental contemplation, for a punishment sufficiently
 severe to make him anxious to stop it, and yet not able to stop
 it. he also takes pleasure in the idea of being tied up so as to
 be unable to move.
 he has at times indulged in self-whipping, of no great severity.
 in the preceding case we see a tendency to erotic
 self-flagellation which in a minor degree is not uncommon.
 occasionally it becomes highly developed. max marcuse has
 presented such a case in elaborate detail (zeitschrift für die
 gesamte neurologie, , ht. , fully summarized in
 sexual-probleme, nov., , pp. -). this is the case of
 a catholic priest of highly neurotic heredity, who spontaneously
 began to whip himself at the age of , this self-flagellation
 being continued and accompanied by masturbation after the age of
 . other associated perversions were narcissism and nates
 fetichism, as well as homosexual phantasies. he experienced a
 certain pleasure (with erection, not ejaculation) in punishing
 his boy pupils. it is not uncommon for all forms of erotic
 flagellation to be associated with a homosexual element. i have
 elsewhere brought forward a case of this kind (the case of a. f.,
 vol. ii of these studies).
 significant is rousseau's account of the origin of his own
 masochistic pleasure in whipping at the age of : "mademoiselle
 lambercier showed toward me a mother's affection and also a
 mother's authority, which she sometimes carried so far as to
 inflict on us the usual punishment of children when we had
 deserved it. for a long time she was content with the threat, and
 that threat of a chastisement which for me was quite new seemed
 very terrible; but after it had been executed i found the
 experience less terrible than the expectation had been; and,
 strangely enough, this punishment increased my affection for her
 who had inflicted it. it needed all my affection and all my
 natural gentleness to prevent me from seeking a renewal of the
 same treatment by deserving it, for i had found in the pain and
 even in the shame of it an element of sensuality which left more
 desire than fear of receiving the experience again from the same
 hand. it is true that, as in all this a precocious sexual element
 was doubtless mixed, the same chastisement if inflicted by her
 brother would not have seemed so pleasant." he goes on to say
 that the punishment was inflicted a second time, but that that
 time was the last, mademoiselle lambercier having apparently
 noted the effects it produced, and, henceforth, instead of
 sleeping in her room, he was placed in another room and treated
 by her as a big boy. "who would have believed," he adds, "that
 this childish punishment, received at the age of  from the hand
 of a young woman of , would have determined my tastes, my
 desires, my passions, for the rest of my life?" he remarks that
 this strange taste drove him almost to madness, but maintained
 the purity of his morals, and the joys of love existed for him
 chiefly in imagination. (j. j. rousseau, les confessions, partie
 i, livre i.) it will be seen how all the favoring conditions of
 fear, shame, and precocious sexuality were here present in an
 extremely sensitive child destined to become the greatest
 emotional force of his century, and receptive to influences which
 would have had no permanent effect on any ordinary child. (when,
 as occasionally happens, the first sexual feelings are
 experienced under the stimulation of whipping in normal children,
 no permanent perversion necessarily follows; moll mentions that
 he knows such cases, zeitschrift für pädagogie, psychiatrie, und
 pathologie, .) it may be added that it is, perhaps, not
 fanciful to see a certain inevitableness in the fact that on
 rousseau's highly sensitive and receptive temperament it was a
 masochistic germ that fell and fructified, while on régis's
 subject, with his more impulsive ancestral antecedents, a
 sadistic germ found favorable soil.
 it may be noted that in régis's sadistic case the little girl who
 was the boy's playmate found scarcely less pleasure in the
 passive part of whipping than he found in the active. there is
 ample evidence to show that this is very often the case, and that
 the attractiveness of the idea of being whipped often even arises
 spontaneously in children. lombroso (la donna delinquente, p.
 ) refers to a girl of  who had voluptuous pleasure in being
 whipped, and hammer (monatschrift für harnkrankheiten, , p.
 ) speaks of a young girl who similarly experienced pleasure in
 punishment by whipping. krafft-ebing records the case of a girl
 of between  and  years of age, never at that time having been
 whipped or seen anyone else whipped, who spontaneously
 acquired—how she did not know—the desire to be castigated in
 this manner. it gave her very great pleasure to imagine a woman
 friend doing this to her. she never desired to be whipped by a
 man, though there was no trace of inversion, and she never
 masturbated until the age of , when a marriage engagement was
 broken off. at the age of  this longing passed away before it
 was ever actually realized. (krafft-ebing, psychopathia
 sexualis, eighth edition, p. .)
 in the case of another young woman described by
 krafft-ebing—where there was neurasthenia with other minor
 morbid conditions in the family, but the girl herself appears to
 have been sound—the desire to be whipped existed from a very
 early age. she traced it to the fact that when she was  years
 old a friend of her father's playfully placed her across his
 knees and pretended to whip her. since then she has always longed
 to be caned, but to her great regret the wish has never been
 realized. she longs to be the slave of a man whom she loves:
 "lying in fancy before him, he puts one foot on my neck while i
 kiss the other. i revel in the idea of being whipped by him and
 imagine different scenes in which he beats me. i take the blows
 as so many tokens of love; he is at first extremely kind and
 tender, but then in the excess of his love he beats me. i fancy
 that to beat me for love's sake gives him the highest pleasure."
 sometimes she imagines that she is his slave, but not his female
 slave, for every woman may be her husband's slave. she is of
 proud and independent nature in all other matters, and to imagine
 herself a man who consents to be a slave gives her a more
 satisfying sense of humiliation. she does not understand that
 these manifestations are of a sexual nature. (krafft-ebing,
 psychopathia sexualis, english translation of tenth edition, p.
 sometimes a woman desires to take the active part in whipping.
 thus marandon de montyel records the case of a girl of ,
 hereditarily neuropathic (her father was alcoholic), but very
 intelligent and good-hearted, who had never been whipped or seen
 anyone whipped. at this age, however, she happened to visit a
 married friend who was just about to punish her boy of  by
 whipping him with a wet towel. the girl spectator was much
 interested, and though the boy screamed and struggled she
 experienced a new sensation she could not define. "at every
 stroke," she said, "a strange shiver went through all my body
 from my brain to my heels." she would like to have whipped him
 herself and felt sorry when it was over. she could not forget the
 scene and would dream of herself whipping a boy. at last the
 desire became irresistible and she persuaded a boy of , whom
 she was very fond of, and who was much attached to her, to let
 her whip him on the naked nates. she did this so ferociously that
 he at last fainted. she was overcome by grief and remorse.
 (marandon de montyel, archives d'anthropologie criminelle,
 jan., , p. .)
 although masochism in a pronounced degree may be said to be rare
 in women, the love of active flagellation, and sadistic impulses
 generally are not uncommon among them. bloch believes they are
 especially common among english women. cases occur from time to
 time of extreme harshness, cruelty, degrading punishment, and
 semi-starvation inflicted upon children. the accused are most
 usually women, and when a man and woman in conjunction are
 accused it appears generally to have been the woman who played
 the more active part. but it is rarely demonstrated in these
 cases that the cruelty exercised had a definite sexual origin.
 there is nothing, for instance, to indicate true sadism in the
 famous english case in the eighteenth century of mrs. brownrigg
 (bloch, geschlechtsleben in england, vol. ii, p. ). it may
 well be, however, in many of these cases that the real motive is
 sexual, although latent and unconscious. the normal sexual
 impulse in women is often obscured and disguised, and it would
 not be surprising if the perverse instinct is so likewise.
 it is noteworthy that a passion for whipping may be aroused by
 contact with a person who desires to be whipped. this is
 illustrated by the following case which has been communicated to
 me: "k. is a jew, about  years of age, apparently normal.
 nothing is known of his antecedents. he is a manufacturer with
 several shops. s., an englishwoman, aged , entered his service;
 she is illegitimate, believed to have been reared in a brothel
 kept by her mother, is prepossessing in appearance. on entering
 k.'s service s. was continually negligent and careless. this so
 provoked k. that on one occasion he struck her. she showed great
 pleasure and confessed that her blunder had been deliberately
 intended to arouse him to physical violence. at her suggestion k.
 ultimately consented to thrash her. this operation took place in
 k.'s office, s. stripping for the purpose, and the leather
 driving band from a sewing-machine was used. s. manifested
 unmistakable pleasure during the flagellation, and connection
 occurred after it. these thrashings were repeated at frequent
 intervals, and k. found a growing liking for the operation on his
 own part. once, at the suggestion of s., a girl of  employed by
 k. was thrashed by both k. and s. alternately. the child
 complained to her parents and k. made a money payment to them to
 avoid scandal, the parents agreeing to keep silence. other women
 (jewish tailoresses) employed by k. were subsequently thrashed by
 him. he asserts that they enjoyed the experience. mrs. k.,
 discovering her husband's infatuation for s., commenced divorce
 proceedings. s. consented to leave the country at k.'s request,
 but returned almost immediately and was kept in hiding until the
 decree was granted. the mutual infatuation of k. and s.
 continues, though k. asserts that he cares less for her than
 formerly. flagellation has, however, now become a passion with
 him, though he declares that the practice was unknown to him
 before he met s. his great fear is that he will kill s. during
 one of these operations. he is convinced that s. is not an
 isolated case, and that all women enjoy flagellation. he claims
 that the experiences of the numerous women whom he has now
 thrashed bear out this opinion; one of them is a wealthy woman
 separated from her husband, and is now infatuated with k."
 flagellation, more especially in its masochistic form, is
 sometimes associated with true inversion. moll presents the case
 of a young inverted woman of , showing, indeed, many other
 minor sexual anomalies, who is sexually excited when beaten with
 a switch. a whip would not do, and the blows must only be on the
 nates; she cannot imagine being beaten by a small woman. she has
 often in this way been beaten by a friend, who should be naked at
 the time, and must submit afterward to cunnilinctus. (moll,
 konträre sexualempfindung third edition, p. .)
 in the preceding case there were no masochistic ideas; it is
 likely that in such a case beating is desired largely on account
 of that purely physical effect to which attention has already
 been called. in the same way self-beating with a switch or whip
 has sometimes been spontaneously discovered as a method of
 self-excitement preliminary to masturbation. i am acquainted with
 a lady of much intellectual ability, sexually normal, who made
 this discovery at the age of , and practised it for a time.
 professor reverdin, also, speaks of the case of a young girl
 under his care who, after having exhausted all the resources of
 her intelligence, finally discovered that the climax of enjoyment
 was best reached by violently whipping her own buttocks and
 thighs. she had invented for this purpose a whip composed of
 twelve cords each of which terminated in a large chestnut-burr
 provided with its spines. (a. reverdin, revue médicale de la
 suisse romande, january , , p. .) 
[] the discipline or scourge was classed with fasting as a
method of mastering the flesh and of penance. see, e.g., lea, history
of auricular confession, vol. ii, p. . for many centuries bishops and
priests used themselves to apply the discipline to their penitents. at
first it was applied to the back; later, especially in the case of female
penitents, it was frequently applied to the nates. moreover, partial or
complete nudity came to be frequently demanded, the humiliation thereby
caused being pleasant in the sight of god.
[] dulaure, des divinités génératrices, ch. xv; lea,
history of sacerdotal celibacy, d ed., vol. ii, p. ; kiernan,
"asceticism as an auto-erotism," alienist and neurologist, aug., .
[] this is the opinion of löwenfeld, ueber die sexuelle
konstitution, p. .
[] thus, dühren (iwan bloch) remarks (der marquis de sade und
seine zeit, , p. ): "it is well known that england is today the
classic land of sexual flagellation." see the same author's
geschlechtsleben in england, vol. ii, ch. vi. in america it appears also
to be common, and kiernan mentions that in advertisements of chicago
"massage shops" there often appears the announcement: "flagellation a
specialty." the reports of police inspectors in eighteenth century france
show how common flagellation then was in paris. it may be added that
various men of distinguished intellectual ability of recent times and
earlier are reported as addicted to passive flagellation; this was the
case with helvétius.
[] a full bibliography of flagellation would include many
hundred items. the more important works on this subject, in connection
with the sexual impulse, are enumerated by eulenburg, in his sadismus und
masochismus. an elaborate history of flagellation generally is now being
written by georg collas, geschichte des flagellantismus, vol. i, .
[] löwenfeld, ueber die sexuelle konstitution, p. .
[] archiv für kriminal-anthropologie, , p. . he
brings forward the evidence of a reliable and cultured man who at one time
sought to obtain the pleasures of passive sexual flagellation. but in
spite of his expectation and good will the only result was to disperse
every trace of sexual desire.
[] e.g., kiefer, zeitschrift für sexualwissenschaft, aug.,
[] féré, revue de médecine, august, . in this paper féré
brings together many interesting facts concerning flagellation in ancient
times.
[] schmidt-heuert (monatschrift für harnkrankheiten, ,
ht. ) argues that it is not so much the actual use of the rod as playful,
threatening and mysterious suggestions playing around it which nowadays
gives it sexual fascination.
[] moll (untersuchungen über die libido sexualis, bd. , p.
) points out that these emotions frequently suffice to cause sexual
emissions in schoolboys.
[] as eulenburg truly points out, the circumstances attending
the whipping of a woman may be sexually attractive, even in the absence of
any morbid impulse. such circumstances are "the sight of naked feminine
charms and especially—in the usual mode of flagellation—of those parts
which possess for the sexual epicure a peculiar esthetic attraction; the
idea of treating a loved, or at all events desired, person as a child, of
having her in complete subjection and being able to dispose of her
despotically; and finally the immediate results of whipping: the changes
in skin-color, the to and fro movements which simulate or anticipate the
initial phenomena of coitus." (eulenburg, sexuale neuropathie, p. .)
[] see the article on udall in the dictionary of national
biography.
the impulse to strangle the object of sexual desire—the wish to be
strangled—respiratory disturbance the essential element in this group of
phenomena—the part played by respiratory excitement in the process of
courtship—swinging and suspension—the attraction exerted by the idea of
being chained and fettered.
there is another impulse which it may be worth while to consider briefly
here, for the sake of the light it throws on the relationship between love
and pain. i allude to the impulse to strangle the object of sexual desire,
and to the corresponding craving to be strangled. cases have been recorded
in which this impulse was so powerful that men have actually strangled
women at the moment of coitus.[] such cases are rare; but, as a mere
idea, the thought of strangling a woman appears to be not infrequently
associated with sexual emotion. we must probably regard it as, in the
main,—with whatever subsidiary elements,—an aspect of that physical
seizure, domination, and forcible embrace of the female which is one of
the primitive elements of courtship.[]
the corresponding idea—the pleasurable connection of the thought of being
strangled with sexual emotion—appears to occur still more frequently,
perhaps especially in women. here we seem to have, as in the case of
whipping, a combination of a physical with a psychic element. not only is
the idea attractive, but, as a matter of fact, strangulation, suffocation,
or any arrest of respiration, even when carried to the extent of producing
death, may actually provoke emission, as is observed after death by
hanging.[] it is noteworthy that, as eulenburg remarks, the method of
treating diseases of the spinal cord by suspension—a method much in vogue
a few years ago—often produced sexual excitement.[] in brothels, it is
said, some of the clients desire to be suspended vertically by a cord
furnished with pads.[] a playful attempt to throttle her on the part of
her lover is often felt by a woman as pleasurable, though it may not
necessarily produce definite sexual excitement. sometimes, however, this
feeling becomes so strong that it must be regarded as an actual
perversion, and i have been told of a woman who is indifferent to the
ordinary sexual embrace; her chief longing is to be throttled, and she
will do anything to have her neck squeezed by her lover till her eyeballs
bulge.[]
"i think if i could be left my present feelings," a lady writes,
 "and be changed into a male imbecile,—that is, given a man's
 strength, but deprived, to a large extent, of reasoning power,—i
 might very likely act in the apparently cruel way they do. and
 this partly because many of their actions appeal to me on the
 passive side. the idea of being strangled by a person i love
 does. the great sensitiveness of one's throat and neck come in
 here as well as the loss of breath. once when i was about to be
 separated from a man i cared for i put his hands on my throat and
 implored him to kill me. it was a moment of madness, which helps
 me to understand the feelings of a person always insane. even now
 that i am cool and collected i know that if i were deeply in love
 with a man who i thought was going to kill me, especially in that
 way, i would make no effort to save myself beforehand, though, of
 course, in the final moments nature would assert herself without
 my volition. what makes the horror of such cases in insanity is
 the fact of the love being left out. but i think i find no
 greater difficulty in picturing the mental attitude of a sadistic
 lunatic than that of a normal man who gets pleasure out of women
 for whom he has no love." 
the imagined pleasure of being strangled by a lover brings us to a group
of feelings which would seem to be not unconnected with respiratory
elements. i refer to the pleasurable excitement experienced by some in
suspension, swinging, restraint, and fetters. strangulation is the extreme
and most decided type of this group of imagined or real situations, in all
of which a respiratory disturbance seems to be an essential element.[]
in explaining these phenomena we have to remark that respiratory
excitement has always been a conspicuous part of the whole process of
tumescence and detumescence, of the struggles of courtship and of its
climax, and that any restraint upon respiration, or, indeed, any restraint
upon muscular and emotional activity generally, tends to heighten the
state of sexual excitement associated with such activity.
i have elsewhere, when studying the spontaneous solitary
 manifestation of the sexual instinct (auto-erotism, in vol. i
 of these studies), referred to the pleasurably emotional, and
 sometimes sexual, effects of swinging and similar kinds of
 movement. it is possible that there is a certain significance in
 the frequency with which the eighteenth-century french painters,
 who lived at a time when the refinements of sexual emotion were
 carefully sought out, have painted women in the act of swinging.
 fragonard mentions that in  a gentleman invited him into the
 country, with the request to paint his mistress, especially
 stipulating that she should be depicted in a swing. the same
 motive was common among the leading artists of that time. it may
 be said that this attitude was merely a pretext to secure a
 vision of ankles, but that result could easily have been attained
 without the aid of the swing.
 i may here quote, as bearing on this and allied questions, a
 somewhat lengthy communication from a lady to whom i am indebted
 for many subtle and suggestive remarks on the whole of this group
 of manifestations:—
 "with regard to the connection between swinging and suspension,
 perhaps the physical basis of it is the loss of breath. temporary
 loss of breath with me produces excitement. swinging at a height
 or a fall from a height would cause loss of breath; in a state of
 suspension the imagination would suggest the idea of falling and
 the attendant loss of breath. people suffering from lung disease
 are often erotically inclined, and anesthetics affect the
 breathing. men also seem to like the idea of suspension, but from
 the active side. one man used to put his wife on a high swinging
 shelf when she displeased him, and my husband told me once he
 would like to suspend me to a crane we were watching at work,
 though i have never mentioned my own feeling on this point to
 him. suspension is often mentioned in descriptions of torture.
 beatrice cenci was hung up by her hair and the recently murdered
 queen of korea was similarly treated. in tolstoi's my husband
 and i the girl says she would like her husband to hold her over
 a precipice. that passage gave me great pleasure.[]
 "the idea of slipping off an inclined plane gives me the same
 sensation. i always feel it on seeing michael angelo's 'night,'
 though the slipping look displeases me artistically. i remember
 that when i saw the 'night' first i did feel excited and was
 annoyed, and it seemed to me it was the slipping-off look that
 gave it; but i think i am now less affected by that idea. certain
 general ideas seem to excite one, but the particular forms under
 which they are presented lose their effect and have to be varied.
 the sentence mentioned in tolstoi leaves me now quite cold, but
 if i came across the same idea elsewhere, expressed differently,
 then it would excite me. i am very capricious in the small
 things, and i think women are so more than men. the idea of
 slipping down a plank formerly produced excitement with me; now
 it has a less vivid effect, though the idea of loss of breath
 still produces excitement. the idea of the plank does not now
 affect me unless there is a certain amount of drapery. i think,
 therefore, that the feeling must come in part from the
 possibility of the drapery catching on some roughness of the
 surface of the slope, and so producing pressure on the sexual
 organs. the effect is still produced, however, even without any
 clothing, if the slope is supposed to end in a deep drop, so that
 the idea of falling is strongly presented. i cannot recollect any
 early associations that would tend to explain these feelings,
 except that jumping from a height, which i used frequently to do
 as a child, has a tendency to create excitement.
 "with me, i may add, it is when i cannot express myself, or am
 trying to understand what i feel is beyond my grasp, that the
 first stage of sexual excitement results. for instance, i never
 get excited in thinking over sexual questions, because my ideas,
 correct or incorrect, are fairly clear and definite. but i often
 feel sexually excited over that question of the inheritance of
 acquired characteristics, not because i can't decide between the
 two sets of evidence, but because i don't feel confident of
 having fully grasped the true significance of either. this
 feeling of want of power, mental or physical, always has the same
 effect. i feel it if my eyes are blindfolded or my hands tied. i
 don't like to see the washington post dance, in which the man
 stands behind the woman and holds her hands, on that account. if
 he held her wrists the feeling would be stronger, as her apparent
 helplessness would be increased. the nervous irritability that is
 caused by being under restraint seems to manifest itself in that
 way, while in the case of mental disability the excitement, which
 should flow down a mental channel, being checked, seems to take a
 physical course instead.
 "possibly this would help to explain masochistic sexual feelings.
 a physical cause working in the present would be preferable as an
 explanation to a psychological cause to be traced back through
 heredity to primitive conditions. i believe such feelings are
 very common in men as well as in women, only people do not care
 to admit them, as a rule." 
the idea of being chained and fettered appears to be not uncommonly
associated with pleasurable sexual feelings, for i have met with numerous
cases in both men and women, and it not infrequently coexists with a
tendency to inversion. it often arises at a very early age, and it is of
considerable interest because we cannot account for its frequency by any
chance association nor by any actual experiences. it would appear to be a
purely psychic fantasia founded on the elementary physical fact that
restraint of emotion, like suspension, produces a heightening of emotion.
in any case the spontaneous character of such ideas and emotions in
children of both sexes suffices to show that they must possess a very
definite organic basis.
in one of the histories (x) contained in appendix b at the end of
 the present volume a lady describes how, as a child, she reveled
 in the idea of being chained and tortured, these ideas appearing
 to rise spontaneously. in another case, that of a. n. (for the
 most part reproduced in "erotic symbolism," in vol. v of these
 studies), whose ideals are inverted and who is also affected by
 boot-fetichism, the idea of fetters is very attractive. in this
 case self-excitement was produced at a very early age, without
 the use of the hands, by strapping the legs together. we can,
 however, scarcely explain away the idea of fetters in this case
 as merely the result of an early association, for it may well be
 argued that the idea led to this method of self-excitement. "the
 mere idea of fetters," this subject writes, "produces the
 greatest excitement, and the sight of pictures representing such
 things is a temptation. the reading of books dealing with prison
 life, etc., anywhere where physical restraint is treated of, is a
 temptation. the temptation is aggravated when the picture
 represents the person booted. i suppose all this will have been
 intensified in my case by my practices as a child. but why should
 a child of  do such things unless it were a natural instinct in
 him? nobody showed me; i have never mentioned such things to
 anyone. i used to read historical romances for the pleasure of
 reading of people being put in prison, in fetters, and tortured,
 and always envied them. i feel now that i should like to undergo
 the sensation. if i could get anyone to humor me without losing
 their self-respect, i should jump at the opportunity. i have been
 most powerfully excited by visiting an old australian
 convict-ship, where all the means of restraint are shown; i have
 been attracted to it night after night, wanting, but not daring
 to ask, to be allowed to have a practical experience."
 stcherbak, of warsaw, has recorded a case which resembles that of
 a. n., but there was no inversion and the attraction of fetters
 was active rather than passive; the subject desired to fetter and
 not to be fettered. it is possible that this difference is not
 fundamental, though stcherbak regards the case as one of
 fetichism of sadistic origin ("contribution à l'etude des
 perversions sexuelles," archives de neurologie, oct., ).
 the subject was a highly intelligent though neurasthenic youth,
 who from the age of  had been deeply interested in criminals who
 were fettered and sent to prison. the fate of siberian prisoners
 was a frequent source of prolonged meditations. it was the
 fettering which alone interested him, and he spent much time in
 trying to imagine the feelings of the fettered prisoners, and he
 often imagined that he was himself a prisoner in fetters. (this
 seems to indicate that the impulse was in its origin masochistic
 as much as sadistic, and better described as algolagnia than as
 sadism.) he delighted in stories and pictures of fettered
 persons. at the age of  the sex of the fettered person became
 important and he was interested chiefly in fettered women. a new
 element also appeared; he was attracted to well-dressed women and
 especially to those wearing elegant shoes, delighting to imagine
 them fettered. he fastened his own feet together with chains,
 attempting to walk about his room in this condition, but
 experienced comparatively little pleasure in this way. at the age
 of  he met a lady  years older than himself and of great
 intelligence. as he began to know her more intimately she allowed
 him to take liberties with her; he fastened her hands behind her
 back, and this caused him a violent but delicious emotion which
 he had never experienced before. next time he fastened her feet
 together as well as her hands; as he did so her shoes slightly
 touched his sexual organs; this caused erection and ejaculation,
 accompanied by the most acute sexual pleasure he had ever felt.
 he had no wish to see her naked or to uncover himself, and as
 long as this relationship lasted he had no abnormal thoughts at
 other times, or in connection with other people. he never
 masturbated, and his sexual dreams were of fettered men or women.
 stcherbak discusses the case at length and considers that it is
 essentially an example of sadism, on the ground that the impulse
 of fettering was prompted by the desire to humiliate. there is,
 however, no evidence of any such desire, and, as a matter of
 fact, no humiliation was effected. the primary and fundamental
 element in this and similar cases is an almost abstract sexual
 fascination in the idea of restraint, whether endured, inflicted,
 or merely witnessed or imagined; the feet become the chief focus
 of this fascination, and the basis on which a foot-fetichism or
 shoe-fetichism tends to arise, because restraint of the feet
 produces a more marked effect than restraint of the hands. 
[] an attenuated and symbolic form of this impulse is seen in
the desire to strangle birds with the object of stimulating or even
satisfying sexual desire. prostitutes are sometimes acquainted with men
who bring a live pigeon with them to be strangled just before intercourse.
lanphear, of st. louis (alienist and neurologist, may, , p. )
knew a woman, having learned masturbation in a convent school, who was
only excited and not satisfied by coitus with her husband, and had to rise
from bed, catch and caress a chicken, and finally wring its neck,
whereupon orgasm occurred.
[] even young girls, however, may experience pleasure in the
playful attempt to strangle. thus a lady speaking of herself at the time
of puberty, when she was in the habit of masturbating, writes
(sexual-probleme, aug., , p. ): "i acquired a desire to seize
people, especially girls, by the throat, and i enjoyed their way of
screaming out."
[] godard observed that when animals are bled, or felled, as
well as strangled, there is often abundant emission, rich in spermatozoa,
but without erection, though accompanied by the same movements of the tail
as during copulation. robin (art. "fécondation," dictionnaire
encyclopédique des sciences médicales), who quotes this observation, has
the following remarks on this subject: "ejaculation occurring at the
moment when the circulation, maintained artificially, stops is a fact of
significance. it shows how congestive conditions—or inversely anemic
conditions—constitute organic states sufficient to set in movement the
activity of the nerve-centers, as is the case for muscular
contractility.... everything leads us to believe that at the moment when
the motor nervous action takes place the corresponding sensitive centers
also come into play." it must be added that minovici, in his elaborate
study of death by hanging ("etude sur la pendaison," archives
d'anthropologie criminelle, , especially p.  et seq.), concludes
that the turgescence of penis and flow of spermatic fluid (sometimes only
prostatic secretion) usually observed in these cases is purely passive and
generally, though not always, of post-mortem occurrence. there is,
therefore, no sexual pleasure in death by hanging, and persons who have
been rescued at the last moment have experienced no voluptuous sensations.
this was so even in the case, referred to by minovici, of a man who hanged
himself solely with the object of producing sexual pleasure.
[] eulenburg, sexuale neuropathie, p. .
[] bernaldo de quirós and llanos aguilaniedo (la mala vida en
madrid, p. ) knew the case of a man who found pleasure in lying back
on an inclined couch while a prostitute behind him pulled at a slipknot
until he was nearly suffocated; it was the only way in which he could
attain sexual gratification.
[] arrest of respiration, it may be noted, may accompany
strong sexual excitement, as it may some other emotional states; one
recalls passages in the arabian nights in which we are told of ladies
who at the sight of a very beautiful youth "felt their reason leave them,
yearned to embrace the marvelous youth, and ceased breathing." inhibited
respiration is indeed, as stevens shows ("study of attention," american
journal of psychology, oct., ), a characteristic of all active
attention.
[] the exact part played by the respiration and even the
circulation in constituting emotional states is still not clear, although
various experiments have been made; see, e.g., angell and thompson, "a
study of the relations between certain organic processes and
consciousness," psychological review, january, . a summary statement
of the relations of the respiration and circulation to emotional states
will be found in külpe's outlines of psychology, part i, section , §
[] the words alluded to by my correspondent are as follows: "i
needed a struggle; what i needed was that feeling should guide life, and
not that life should guide feeling. i wanted to go with him to the edge of
an abyss and say: 'here a step and i will throw myself over; and here a
motion and i have gone to destruction'; and for him, turning pale, to
seize me in his strong arms, hold me back over it till my heart grew cold
within me, and then carry me away wherever he pleased." the whole of the
passage in which these lines occur is of considerable psychological
interest. in one english translation the story is entitled family
happiness.
pain, and not cruelty, the essential element in sadism and masochism—pain
felt as pleasure—does the sadist identify himself with the feelings of
his victim?—the sadist often a masochist in disguise—the spectacle of
pain or struggle as a sexual stimulant.
in the foregoing rapid survey of the great group of manifestations in
which the sexual emotions come into intimate relationship with pain, it
has become fairly clear that the ordinary division between "sadism" and
"masochism," convenient as these terms may be, has a very slight
correspondence with facts. sadism and masochism may be regarded as
complementary emotional states; they cannot be regarded as opposed
states.[] even de sade himself, we have seen, can scarcely be regarded
as a pure sadist. a passage in one of his works expressing regret that
sadistic feeling is rare among women, as well as his definite recognition
of the fact that the suffering of pain may call forth voluptuous emotions,
shows that he was not insensitive to the charm of masochistic experience,
and it is evident that a merely blood-thirsty vampire, sane or insane,
could never have retained, as de sade retained, the undying devotion of
two women so superior in heart and intelligence as his wife and
sister-in-law. had de sade possessed any wanton love of cruelty, it would
have appeared during the days of the revolution, when it was safer for a
man to simulate blood-thirstiness, even if he did not feel it, than to
show humanity. but de sade distinguished himself at that time not merely
by his general philanthropic activities, but by saving from the scaffold,
at great risk to himself, those who had injured him. it is clear that,
apart from the organically morbid twist by which he obtained sexual
satisfaction in his partner's pain,—a craving which was, for the most
part, only gratified in imaginary visions developed to an inhuman extent
under the influence of solitude,—de sade was simply, to those who knew
him, "un aimable mauvais sujet" gifted with exceptional intellectual
powers. unless we realize this we run the risk of confounding de sade and
his like with men of whom judge jeffreys was the sinister type.
it is necessary to emphasize this point because there can be no doubt that
de sade is really a typical instance of the group of perversions he
represents, and when we understand that it is pain only, and not cruelty,
that is the essential in this group of manifestations we begin to come
nearer to their explanation. the masochist desires to experience pain, but
he generally desires that it should be inflicted in love; the sadist
desires to inflict pain, but in some cases, if not in most, he desires
that it should be felt as love. how far de sade consciously desired that
the pain he sought to inflict should be felt as pleasure it may not now be
possible to discover, except by indirect inference, but the confessions of
sadists show that such a desire is quite commonly essential.
i am indebted to a lady for the following communication on the
 foregoing aspect of this question: "i believe that, when a person
 takes pleasure in inflicting pain, he or she imagines himself or
 herself in the victim's place. this would account for the
 transmutability of the two sets of feelings. this might be
 particularly so in the case of men. a man may not care to lower
 his dignity and vanity by putting himself in subjection to a
 woman, and he might fear she would feel contempt for him. by
 subduing her and subjecting her to passive restraint he would
 preserve, even enhance, his own power and dignity, while at the
 same time obtaining a reflected pleasure from what he imagined
 she was feeling.
 "i think that when i get pleasure out of the idea of subduing
 another it is this reflected pleasure i get. and if this is so
 one could thus feel more kindly to persons guilty of cruelty,
 which has hitherto always seemed the one unpardonable sin. even
 criminals, if it is true that they are themselves often very
 insensitive, may, in the excitement of the moment, imagine that
 they are only inflicting trifling pain, as it would be to them,
 and that their victim's feelings are really pleasurable. the men
 i have known most given to inflicting pain are all particularly
 tender-hearted when their passions are not in question. i cannot
 understand how (as in a case mentioned by krafft-ebing) a man
 could find any pleasure in binding a girl's hands except by
 imagining what he supposed were her feelings, though he would
 probably be unconscious that he put himself in her place.
 "as a child i exercised a good deal of authority and influence
 over my youngest sister. it used to give me considerable pleasure
 to be somewhat arbitrary and severe with her, but, though i never
 admitted it to myself or to her, i knew instinctively that she
 took pleasure in my treatment. i used to give her childish
 lessons, over which i was very strict. i invented catechisms and
 chapters of the bible in which elder sisters were exhorted to
 keep their juniors under discipline, and younger sisters were
 commanded to give implicit submission and obedience. some parts
 of the imitation lent themselves to this sort of parody, which
 never struck me as in any way irreverent. i used to give her
 arbitrary orders to 'exercise her in obedience,' as i told her,
 and i used to punish her if she disobeyed me. in all this i was,
 though only half consciously, guided through my own feelings as
 to what i should have liked in her place. for instance, i would
 make her put down her playthings and come and repeat a lesson;
 but, though she was in appearance having her will subdued to
 mine, i always chose a moment when i foresaw she would soon be
 tired of play. there was sufficient resistance to make restraint
 pleasurable, not enough to render it irksome. in my punishments i
 acted on a similar principle. i used to tie her hands behind her
 (like the man in krafft-ebing's case), but only for a few
 moments; i once shut her in a sort of cupboard-room, also for a
 very short time. on two or three occasions i completely undressed
 her, made her lie down on the bed, tied her hands and feet to the
 bedstead, and gave her a slight whipping. i did not wish to hurt
 her, only to inflict just enough pain to produce the desire to
 move or resist. my pleasure, a very keen one, came from the
 imagined excitement produced by the thwarting of this desire.
 (are not your own words—that 'emotion' is 'motion in a more or
 less arrested form'—an epigrammatic summary of all this, though
 in a somewhat different connection?) i did not undress her from
 any connection of nakedness with sexual feeling, but simply to
 enhance her feeling of helplessness and defenselessness under my
 hands. if i were a man and the woman i loved were refractory i
 should undress her before finding fault with her. a woman's dress
 symbolizes to her the protection civilization affords to the weak
 and gives her a fictitious strength. naked, she is face to face
 with primitive conditions, her weakness opposed to the man's
 power. besides, the sense of shame at being naked under the eyes
 of a man who regarded her with displeasure would extend itself to
 her offense and give him a distinct, though perhaps unfair,
 advantage. i used the bristle side of a brush to chastise her
 with, as suggesting the greatest amount of severity with the
 least possible pain. in fact, my idea was to produce the maximum
 of emotion with the minimum of actual discomfort.
 "you must not, however, suppose that at the time i reasoned about
 it at all in this way. i was very fond of her, and honestly
 believed i was doing it for her good. had i realized then, as i
 do now, that my sole aim and object was physical pleasure, i
 believe my pleasure would have ceased; in any case i should not
 have felt justified in so treating her. do i at all persuade you
 that my pleasure was a reflection of hers? that it was, i think,
 is clear from the fact that i only obtained it when she was
 willing to submit. any real resistance or signs that i was
 overpassing the boundary of pleasure in her and urging on pain
 without excitement caused me to desist and my own pleasure to
 cease.
 "i disclaim all altruism in my dealings with my sister. what
 occurs appears to me to be this: a situation appeals to one in
 imagination and one at once desires to transfer it to the realms
 of fact, being one's self one of the principal actors. if it is
 the passive side which appeals to one, one would prefer to be
 passive; but if that is not obtainable then one takes the active
 part as next best. in either case, however, it is the
 realization of the imagined situation that gives the pleasure,
 not the other person's pleasure as such, although his or her
 supposed pleasure creates the situation. if i were a man it would
 afford me great delight to hold a woman over a precipice, even if
 she disliked it. the idea appeals to me so strongly that i could
 not help imagining her pleasure, though i might know she got
 none, and even though she made every demonstration of fear and
 dislike of it. the situation so often imagined would have become
 a fact. it seems to me i have to say a thing is and is not in the
 same breath, but the confusion is only in the words.
 "let me give you another example: i have a tame pigeon which has
 a great affection for me. it sits on my shoulder and squats down
 with its wings out as birds do when courting, pecking me to make
 me take notice of it, and flickering its wings. i like to hold it
 so that it can't move its wings, because i imagine this increases
 its excitement. if it struggles, or seems to dislike my holding
 it, i let it go.
 "in an early engagement (afterward broken off) my fiancé used
 to take an evident pleasure in telling me how he would punish me
 if i disobeyed him when we were married. though we had but little
 in common mentally, i was frequently struck with the similarity
 between his ideas and what my own had been in regard to my
 sister. he used his authority over me most capriciously. on one
 occasion he would not let me have any supper at a dance. on
 another he objected to my drinking black coffee. no day passed
 without a command or prohibition on some trifling point. whenever
 he saw, though, that i really disliked the interference or made
 any decided resistance, which happened very seldom, he let me
 have my own way at once. i cannot but think, when i recall the
 various circumstances, that he got a certain pleasure, as i had
 done with my sister, by an almost unconscious transference of my
 feelings to himself.
 "i find, too, that, when i want a man to say or do to me what
 would cause me pleasure and he does not gratify me, i feel an
 intense longing to change places, to be the man and make him, as
 the woman, feel what i want to feel. combined with this is a
 sense of irritation at not being gratified and a desire to punish
 him for my deprivation, for his stupidity in not saying or doing
 the right thing. i don't feel any anger at a man not caring for
 me, but only for not divining my feelings when he does care.
 "now let me take another case: that of the man who used to
 experience pleasure when surprising a woman making water. (cf.
archives d'anthropologie criminelle, nov. , .) here the
 woman's embarrassment appears to be a factor; but it seems to me
 there must be more than this, as confusion might be produced in
 so many other ways, as if she were found bathing, or undressed,
 though it might not be so acute. in reality, i fancy she would be
 checked in what she was doing, and that the man, perhaps
 unconsciously, imagined this check and a resulting excitement.
 that such a check does sometimes produce excitement i know from
 experience in traveling. if the bladder is not emptied before
 connection the pleasure is often more intense. long before i
 understood these things at all i was struck by this quotation:
 'cette volupté que ressentent les bords de la mer, d'être
 toujours pleins sans jamais déborder?' what would be the effect
 on a man of a sudden check at the supreme moment of sexual
 pleasure? in reality, i suppose, pain, as the nerves would be at
 their full tension and unable to respond to any further stimulus;
 but, in imagination, one's nerves are not at their highest
 tension, and one imagines an increase or, at any rate, a
 prolongation of the pleasurable sensations. something of all
 this, some vague reflection of the woman's possible sensations,
 seems to enter in the man's feelings in surprising the woman. in
 any case his pleasure in her confusion seems to me a reflection
 of her feelings, for the sense of shame and embarrassment before
 a man is very exciting, and doubly so if one realizes that the
 man enjoys it. ouida speaks of the 'delicious shame' experienced
 by 'folle farine.'
 "it seems to me that whenever we are affected by another's
 emotion we do practically, though unconsciously, put ourselves in
 his place; but we are not always able to gauge accurately its
 intensity or to allow for differences between ourselves and
 another, and, in the case of pain, it is doubly difficult, as we
 can never recall the pain itself, but only the mental effects
 upon us of the pain. we cannot even recall the feeling of heat
 when we are cold, or vice versâ, with any degree of vividness.
 "a woman tells me of a man who frequently asks her if she would
 not like him to whip her. he is greatly disappointed when she
 says she gets no pleasure from it, as it would give him so much
 to do it. he cannot believe she experiences none, because he
 would enjoy being whipped so keenly if he were a girl. in another
 case the man thinks the woman must enjoy suffering, because
 he would get intense pleasure from inflicting it! why is this,
 unless he would like it if a woman, and confuses in his mind the
 two personalities? all the men i know who are sadistically
 inclined admit that if they were women they would like to be
 harshly treated.
 "of course, i quite see there may be many complications; a man's
 natural anger at resistance may come in, and also simple, not
 sexual, pleasure in acts of crushing, etc. i always feel inclined
 to crush anything very soft or a person with very pretty thick
 hair, to rub together two shining surfaces, two bits of satin,
 etc., apart from any feelings of excitement. my explanation only
 refers to that part of sadism which is sexual enjoyment of
 another's pain."
 that the foregoing view holds good as regards the traces of
 sadism found within the normal limits of sexual emotion has
 already been stated. we may also believe that it is true in many
 genuinely perverse cases. in this connection reference may be
 made to an interesting case, reported by moll, of a married lady
  years of age, with pronounced sadistic feelings. she belongs
 to a normal family and is herself apparently quite healthy, a
 tall and strongly built person, of feminine aspect, fond of music
 and dancing, of more than average intelligence. her perverse
 inclinations commenced obscurely about the age of , when she
 began to be dominated by the thought of the pleasure it would be
 to strike and torture a man, but were not clearly defined until
 the age of , while at an early age she was fond of teasing and
 contradicting men, though she never experienced the same impulse
 toward women. she has never, except in a very slight degree,
 actually carried her ideas into practice, either with her husband
 or anyone else, being restrained, she says, by a feeling of
 shame. coitus, though frequently practised, gives her no
 pleasure, seems, indeed, somewhat disgusting to her, and has
 never produced orgasm. her own ideas, also, though very
 pleasurable to her, have not produced definite sexual excitement,
 except on two or three occasions, when they had been combined
 with the influence of alcohol. she frankly regrets that modern
 social relationship makes it impossible for her to find sexual
 satisfaction in the only way in which such satisfaction would be
 possible to her.
 her chief delight would be to torture the man she was attached to
 in every possible way; to inflict physical pain and mental pain
 would give her equal pleasure. "i would bite him till the blood
 came, as i have often done to my husband. at that moment all
 sympathy for him would disappear." she frequently identifies her
 imaginary lover with a real man to whom she feels that she could
 be much more attracted than she is to her husband. she imagines
 to herself that she makes appointments with this lover, and that
 she reaches the rendezvous in her carriage, but only after her
 lover has been waiting for her a very long time in the cold. then
 he must feel all her power, he must be her slave with no will of
 his own, and she would torture him with various implements as
 seemed good to her. she would use a rod, a riding-whip, bind him
 and chain him, and so on. but it is to be noted that she declares
 "this could, in general, only give me enjoyment if the man
 concerned endured such torture with a certain pleasure. he must,
 indeed, writhe with pain, but at the same time be in a state of
 sexual ecstasy, followed by satisfaction." his pleasure must not,
 however, be so great that it overwhelms his pain; if it did, her
 own pleasure would vanish, and she has found witty her husband
 that when in kissing him her bites have given him much pleasure
 she has at once refrained.
 it is further noteworthy that only the pain she herself had
 inflicted would give her pleasure. if the lover suffered pain
 from an accident or a wound she is convinced that she would be
 full of sympathy for him. outside her special sexual perversion
 she is sympathetic and very generous. (moll, konträre
 sexualempfindung, , pp. -.)
 this case is interesting as an uncomplicated example of almost
 purely ideal sadism. it is interesting to note the feelings of
 the sadist subject toward her imaginary lover's feelings. it is
 probably significant that, while his pleasure is regarded as
 essential, his pain is regarded as even more essential, and the
 resulting apparent confusion may well be of the very essence of
 the whole phenomenon. the pleasure of the imaginary lover must be
 secured or the manifestation passes out of the sexual sphere; but
 his pleasure must, at all costs, be conciliated with his pain,
 for in the sadist's eyes the victim's pain has become a vicarious
 form of sexual emotion. that, at the same time, the sadist
 desires to give pleasure rather than pain finds confirmation in
 the fact that he often insists on pleasure being feigned even
 though it is not felt. some years ago a rich jewish merchant
 became notorious for torturing girls with whom he had
 intercourse; his performances acquired for him the title of
 "l'homme qui pique," and led to his prosecution. it was his
 custom to spend some hours in sticking pins into various parts of
 the girl's body, but it was essential that she should wear a
 smiling face throughout the proceedings. (hamon, la france
 sociale et politique, , p.  et seq.) 
we have thus to recognize that sadism by no means involves any love of
inflicting pain outside the sphere of sexual emotion, and is even
compatible with a high degree of general tender-heartedness. we have also
to recognize that even within the sexual sphere the sadist by no means
wishes to exclude the victim's pleasure, and may even regard that pleasure
as essential to his own satisfaction. we have, further, to recognize that,
in view of the close connection between sadism and masochism, it is highly
probable that in some cases the sadist is really a disguised masochist and
enjoys his victim's pain because he identifies himself with that pain.
but there is a further group of cases, and a very important group, on
account of the light it throws on the essential nature of these phenomena,
and that is the group in which the thought or the spectacle of pain acts
as a sexual stimulant, without the subject identifying himself clearly
either with the inflicter or the sufferer of the pain. such cases are
sometimes classed as sadistic; but this is incorrect, for they might just
as truly be called masochistic. the term algolagnia might properly be
applied to them (and eulenburg now classes them as "ideal algolagnia"),
for they reveal an undifferentiated connection between sexual excitement
and pain not developed into either active or passive participation. such
feelings may arise sporadically in persons in whom no sadistic or
masochistic perversion can be said to exist, though they usually appear in
individuals of neurotic temperament. casanova describes an instance of
this association which came immediately under his own eyes at the torture
and execution of damiens in .[] w. g. stearns knew a man (having
masturbated and had intercourse to excess) who desired to see his wife
delivered of a child, and finally became impotent without this idea. he
witnessed many deliveries and especially obtained voluptuous gratification
at the delivery of a primipara when the suffering was greatest.[] a
very trifling episode may, however, suffice. in one case known to me a
man, neither sadistic nor masochistic in his tendencies, when sitting
looking out of his window saw a spider come out of its hole to capture and
infold a fly which had just been caught in its web; as he watched the
process he became conscious of a powerful erection, an occurrence which
had never taken place under such circumstances before.[] under favoring
conditions some incident of this kind at an early age may exert a decisive
influence on the sexual life. tambroni, of ferrara, records the case of a
boy of  who first felt voluptuous emotions on seeing in an illustrated
journal the picture of a man trampling on his daughter; ever afterward he
was obliged to evoke this image in masturbation or coitus.[] an
instructive case has been recorded by féré. in this case a lady of
neurotic heredity on one side, and herself liable to hysteria, experienced
her first sexual crisis at the age of , not long after menstruation had
become established, and when she had just recovered from an attack of
chorea. her old nurse, who had remained in the service of the family, had
a ne'er-do-well son who had disappeared for some years and had just now
suddenly returned and thrown himself, crying and sobbing, at the knees of
his mother, who thrust him away. the young girl accidentally witnessed
this scene. the cries and the sobs provoked in her a sexual excitement she
had never experienced before. she rushed away in surprise to the next
room, where, however, she could still hear the sobs, and soon she was
overcome by a sexual orgasm. she was much troubled at this occurrence, and
at the attraction which she now experienced for a man she had never seen
before and whom she had always looked upon as a worthless vagabond.
shortly afterward she had an erotic dream concerning a man who sobbed at
her knees. later she again saw the nurse's son, but was agreeably
surprised to find that, though a good-looking youth, he no longer caused
her any emotion, and he disappeared from her mind, though the erotic
dreams concerning an unknown sobbing man still occurred rather frequently.
during the next ten years she suffered from various disorders of more or
less hysterical character, and, although not disinclined to the idea of
marriage, she refused all offers, for no man attracted her. at the age of
, when staying in the pyrenees, she made an excursion into spain, and
was present at a bull-fight. she was greatly excited by the charges of the
bull, especially when the charge was suddenly arrested.[] she felt no
interest in any of the men who took part in the performance or were
present; no man was occupying her imagination. but she experienced sexual
sensations and accompanying general exhilaration, which were highly
agreeable. after one bull had charged successively several times the
orgasm took place. she considered the whole performance barbarous, but
could not resist the desire to be present at subsequent bull-fights, a
desire several times gratified, always with the same results, which were
often afterward repeated in dreams. from that time she began to take an
interest in horse-races, which she now found produced the same effect,
though not to the same degree, especially when there was a fall. she
subsequently married, but never experienced sexual satisfaction except
under these abnormal circumstances or in dreams.[]
as the foregoing case indicates, horses, and especially running or
struggling horses, sometimes have the same effect in stimulating the
sexual emotions, especially on persons predisposed by neurotic heredity,
as we have found that the spectacle of pain possesses. a medical
correspondent in new zealand tells me of a patient of his own, a young
carpenter of , not in good health, who had never masturbated or had
connection with a woman. he lived in a room overlooking a livery-stable
yard where was kept, among other animals, a large black horse. nearly
every night he had a dream in which he seemed to be pursuing this large
black horse, and when he caught it, which he invariably did, there was a
copious emission. a holiday in the country and tonic treatment dispelled
the dreams and reduced the nocturnal emissions to normal frequency. féré
has recorded a case of a boy, of neuropathic heredity, who, when  years
of age, was one day about to practise mutual masturbation with another boy
of his own age. they were seated on a hillside overlooking a steep road,
and at this moment a heavy wagon came up the road drawn by four horses,
which struggled painfully up, encouraged by the cries and the whip of the
driver. this sight increased the boy's sexual excitement, which reached
its climax when one of the horses suddenly fell. he had never before
experienced such intense excitement, and always afterward a similar
spectacle of struggling horses produced a similar effect.[]
in this connection reference may be made to the frequency with which
dreams of struggling horses occur in connection with disturbance or
disease of the heart. in such cases it is clear that the struggling horses
seem to dream-consciousness to embody and explain the panting struggles to
which the heart is subjected. they become, as it were, a visual symbol of
the cardiac oppression. in much the same way, it would appear, under the
influence of sexual excitement, in which cardiac disturbance is one of the
chief constituent elements, the struggling horses became a sexual symbol,
and, having attained that position, they are henceforth alone adequate to
produce sexual excitement.
[] this opinion appears to be in harmony with the conclusions
of eulenburg, who has devoted special study to de sade, and points out
that the ordinary conception of "sadism" is much too narrow. (eulenburg,
sexuale neuropathie, , p.  et seq.)
[] casanova, mémoires, vol. viii, pp. -. goncourt in his
journal, under date of april,  (vol. ii, p. ), tells a story of an
englishman who engaged a room overlooking a scaffold where a murderer was
to be hanged, proposing to take a woman with him and to avail himself of
the excitement aroused by the scene. this scheme was frustrated by the
remission of the death penalty.
[] alienist and neurologist, may, , p. .
[] this spectacle of the spider and the fly seems indeed to be
specially apt to exert a sexual influence. i have heard of a precisely
similar case in a man of intellectual distinction, and another in a lady
who acknowledged to a feeling of "exquisite pleasure," on one occasion, at
the mere sound of the death agony of a fly in a spider's web.
[] quoted by obici and marchesini, le amicizie di collegio,
p. .
[] it may be noted that we have already several times
encountered this increase of excitement produced by arrest of movement.
the effect is produced whether the arrest is witnessed or is actually
experienced. "a man can increase a woman's excitement," a lady writes, "by
forbidding her to respond in any way to his caresses. it is impossible to
remain quite passive for more than a few seconds, but, during these few,
excitement is considerably augmented." in a similar way i have been told
of a man of brilliant intellectual ability who very seldom has connection
with a woman without getting her to compress with her hand the base of the
urethral canal to such an extent as to impede the passage of the semen. on
withdrawal of the hand copious emission occurs, but it is the shock of the
arrest caused by the constriction which gives him supreme pleasure. he has
practised this method for years without evil results.
[] féré, "le sadisme aux courses de taureaux," revue de
médecine, august, .
[] féré, l'instinct sexuel, p. .
why is pain a sexual stimulant?—it is the most effective method of
arousing emotion—anger and fear the most powerful emotions—their
biological significance in courtship—their general and special effects in
stimulating the organism—grief as a sexual stimulant—the physiological
mechanism of fatigue renders pain pleasurable.
we have seen that the distinction between "sadism" and "masochism" cannot
be maintained; not only was even de sade himself something of a masochist
and sacher-masoch something of a sadist, but between these two extreme
groups of phenomena there is a central group in which the algolagnia is
neither active nor passive. "sadism" and "masochism" are simply convenient
clinical terms for classes of manifestations which quite commonly occur in
the same person. we have further found that—as might have been
anticipated in view of the foregoing result—it is scarcely correct to use
the word "cruelty" in connection with the phenomena we have been
considering. the persons who experience these impulses usually show no
love of cruelty outside the sphere of sexual emotion; they may even be
very intolerant of cruelty. even when their sexual impulses come into play
they may still desire to secure the pleasure of the persons who arouse
their sexual emotions, even though it may not be often true that those who
desire to inflict pain at these moments identify themselves with the
feelings of those on whom they inflict it. we have thus seen that when we
take a comprehensive survey of all these phenomena a somewhat general
formula will alone cover them. our conclusion so far must be that under
certain abnormal circumstances pain, more especially the mental
representation of pain, acts as a powerful sexual stimulant.
the reader, however, who has followed the discussion to this point will be
prepared to take the next and final step in our discussion and to reach a
more definite conclusion. the question naturally arises: by what process
does pain or its mental representation thus act as a sexual stimulant? the
answer has over and over again been suggested by the facts brought forward
in this study. pain acts as a sexual stimulant because it is the most
powerful of all methods for arousing emotion.
the two emotions most intimately associated with pain are anger and fear.
the more masculine and sthenic emotion of anger, the more passive and
asthenic emotion of fear, are the fundamental animal emotions through
which, on the psychic side, the process of natural selection largely
works. every animal in some degree owes its survival to the emotional
reaction of anger against weaker rivals, to the emotional reaction of fear
against stronger rivals. to this cause we owe it that these two emotions
are so powerfully and deeply rooted in the whole zoölogical series to
which we belong. but anger and fear are not less fundamental in the sexual
life. courtship on the male's part is largely a display of combativity,
and even the very gestures by which the male seeks to appeal to the female
are often those gestures of angry hostility by which he seeks to
intimidate enemies. on the female's part courtship is a skillful
manipulation of her own fears, and, as we have seen elsewhere, when
studying the phenomena of modesty, that fundamental attitude of the female
in courtship is nothing but an agglomeration of fears.
the biological significance of the emotions is now well
 recognized. "in general," remarks one of the shrewdest writers on
 animal psychology, "we may say that emotional states are, under
 natural conditions, closely associated with behavior of
 biological value—with tendencies that are beneficial in
 self-preservation and race preservation—with actions that
 promote survival, and especially with the behavior which clusters
 round the pairing and parental instincts. the value of the
 emotions in animals is that they are an indirect means of
 furthering survival." (lloyd morgan, animal behavior, p. .)
 emotional aptitudes persist not only by virtue of the fact that
 they are still beneficial, but because they once were; that is to
 say, they may exist as survivals. in this connection i may quote
 from a suggestive paper on "teasing and bullying," by f. l. burk;
 at the conclusion of this study, which is founded on a large
 body of data concerning american children, the author asks:
 "accepting for the moment the theories of spencer and ribot upon
 the transmission of rudimentary instincts, is it possible that
 the movements which comprise the chief elements of bullying,
 teasing, and the egotistic impulses in general of the classes
 cited—pursuing, throwing down, punching, striking, throwing
 missiles, etc.—are, from the standpoint of consciousness, broken
 neurological fragments, which are parts of old chains of activity
 involved in the pursuit, combat, capture, torture, and killing of
 men and enemies?... is not this hypothesis of transmitted
 fragments of instincts in accord with the strangely anomalous
 fact that children are at one moment seemingly cruel and at the
 next affectionate and kind, vibrating, as it were, between two
 worlds, egotistic and altruistic, without conscious sense of
 incongruity?" (f. l. burk, "teasing and bullying," pedagogical
 seminary, april, .)
 the primitive connection of the special emotions of anger and
 fear with the sexual impulse has been well expressed by colin
 scott in his remarkable study of "sex and art": "if the higher
 forms of courting are based on combat, among the males at least
 anger must be intimately associated with love. and below both of
 these lies the possibility of fear. in combat the animal is
 defeated who is first afraid. competitive exhibition of prowess
 will inspire the less able birds with a deterring fear. young
 grouse and woodcock do not enter the lists with the older birds,
 and sing very quietly. it is the same with the very oldest birds.
 audubon says that the old maids and bachelors of the canada goose
 move off by themselves during the courting of the younger birds.
 in order to succeed in love, fear must be overcome in the male as
 well as in the female. courage is the essential male virtue, love
 is its outcome and reward. the strutting, crowing, dancing, and
 singing of male birds and the preliminary movements generally of
 animals must gorge the neuromotor and muscular systems with blood
 and put them in better fighting trim. the effects of this upon
 the feelings of the animal himself must be very great. hereditary
 tendencies swell his heart. he has 'the joy that warriors feel.'
 he becomes regardless of danger, and sometimes almost oblivious
 of his surroundings. this intense passionateness must react
 powerfully on the whole system, and more particularly on those
 parts which are capable, such as the brain, of using up a great
 surplus of blood, and on the naturally erethic functions of sex.
 the flood of anger or fighting instinct is drained off by the
 sexual desires, the antipathy of the female is overcome, and
 sexual union successfully ensues.... courting and combat shade
 into one another, courting tending to take the place of the more
 basal form of combat. the passions which thus come to be
 associated with love are those of fear and anger, both of which,
 by arousing the whole nature and stimulating the nutritive
 sources from which they flow, come to increase the force of the
 sexual passion to which they lead up and in which they culminate
 and are absorbed," (colin scott, "sex and art," american journal
 of psychology, vol. vii, no. , pp.  and .)
 it must be remembered that fear is an element liable to arise in
 all courtship on one side or the other. it is usually on the side
 of the female, but not invariably. among spiders, for instance,
 it is usually the male who feels fear, and very reasonably, for
 he is much weaker than the female. "courtship by the male spider"
 says t. h. montgomery ("the courtship of araneads," american
 naturalist, march, , p. ), "results from a combination of
 the state of desire for and fear of the female." it is by his
 movements of fear that he advertises himself to the female as a
 male, and it is by the same movements that he is unconsciously
 impelled to display prominently his own ornamentation. 
we are thus brought to those essential facts of primitive courtship with
which we started. but we are now able to understand more clearly how it is
that alien emotional states became abnormally associated with the sexual
life. normally the sexual impulse is sufficiently reinforced by the
ordinary active energies of the organism which courtship itself arouses,
energies which, while they may be ultimately in part founded on anger and
fear, rarely allow these emotions to be otherwise than latent. motion, it
may be said, is more prominent than emotion.
even normally a stimulant to emotional activities is pleasurable, just as
motion itself is pleasurable. it may even be useful, as was noted long ago
by erasmus darwin; he tells of a friend of his who, when painfully
fatigued by riding, would call up ideas arousing indignation, and thus
relieve the fatigue, the indignation, as darwin pointed out, increasing
muscular activity.[]
it is owing to this stimulating action that discomfort, even pain, may be
welcomed on account of the emotional waves they call up, because they
"lash into movement the dreary calm of the sea's soul," and produce that
alternation of pain and enjoyment for which faust longed. groos, who
recalls this passage in his very thorough and profound discussion of the
region wherein tragedy has its psychological roots, points out that it is
the overwhelming might of the storm itself, and not the peace of calm
after the storm, which appeals to us. in the same way, he observes, even
surprise and shock may also be pleasurable, and fear, though the most
depressing of emotional states, by virtue of the joy produced by strong
stimuli is felt as attractive; we not only experience an impulse of
pleasure in dominating our environment, but also have pleasure in being
dominated and rendered helpless by a higher power.[] hirn, again, in
his work on the origins of art, has an interesting chapter on "the
enjoyment of pain," a phenomenon which he explains by its resultant
reactions in increase of outward activity, of motor excitement. anger, he
observes elsewhere, is "in its active stage a decidedly pleasurable
emotion. fear, which in its initial stage is paralyzing and depressing,
often changes in time when the first shock has been relieved by motor
reaction.... anger, fear, sorrow, notwithstanding their distinctly painful
initial stage, are often not only not avoided, but even deliberately
sought."[]
in the ordinary healthy organism, however, although the stimulants of
strong emotion may be vaguely pleasurable, they do not have more than a
general action on the sexual sphere, nor are they required for the due
action of the sexual mechanism. but in a slightly abnormal
organism—whether the anomaly is due to a congenital neuropathic
condition, or to a possibly acquired neurasthenic condition, or merely to
the physiological inadequacy of childhood or old age—the balance of
nervous energy is less favorable for the adequate play of the ordinary
energies in courtship. the sexual impulse is itself usually weaker, even
when, as often happens, its irritability assumes the fallacious appearance
of strength. it has become unusually sensitive to unusual stimuli and
also, it is possible,—perhaps as a result of those conditions,—more
liable to atavistic manifestations. an organism in this state becomes
peculiarly apt to seize on the automatic sources of energy generated by
emotion. the parched sexual instinct greedily drinks up and absorbs the
force it obtains by applying abnormal stimuli to its emotional apparatus.
it becomes largely, if not solely, dependent on the energy thus secured.
the abnormal organism in this respect may become as dependent on anger or
fear, and for the same reason, as in other respects it may become
dependent on alcohol.
we see the process very well illustrated by the occasional action of the
emotion of anger. in animals the connection between love and anger is so
close that even normally, as groos points out, in some birds the sight of
an enemy may call out the gestures of courtship.[] as krafft-ebing
remarks, both love and anger "seek their object, try to possess themselves
of it, and naturally exhaust themselves in a physical effect on it; both
throw the psychomotor sphere into the most intense excitement, and by
means of this excitement reach their normal expression."[] féré has
well remarked that the impatience of desire may itself be regarded as a
true state of anger, and stanley hall, in his admirable study of anger,
notes that "erethism of the breasts or sexual parts" was among the
physical manifestations of anger occurring in some of his cases, and in
one case a seminal emission accompanied every violent outburst.[] thus
it is that anger may be used to reinforce a weak sexual impulse, and
cases have been recorded in which coitus could only be performed when the
man had succeeded in working himself up into an artificial state of
anger.[] on the other hand, féré has recorded a case in which the
sexual excitement accompanying delayed orgasm was always transformed into
anger, though without any true sadistic manifestations.[]
as a not unexpected complementary phenomenon to this connection of anger
and sexual emotion in the male, it is sometimes found that the spectacle
of masculine anger excites pleasurable emotion in women. the case has been
recorded of a woman who delighted in arousing anger for the pleasure it
gave her, and who advised another woman to follow her example and excite
her husband's anger, as nothing was so enjoyable as to see a man in a fury
of rage[]; lombroso mentions a woman who was mostly frigid, but
experienced sexual feelings when she heard anyone swearing; and a medical
friend tells me of a lady considerably past middle age who experienced
sexual erethism after listening to a heated argument between her husband
and a friend on religious topics. the case has also been recorded of a
masochistic man who found sexual satisfaction in masturbating while a
woman, by his instructions, addressed him in the lowest possible terms of
abuse.[] such a feeling doubtless underlies that delight in teasing men
which is so common among young women. stanley hall, referring to the
almost morbid dread of witnessing manifestations of anger felt by many
women, remarks: "in animals, females are often described as watching with
complacency the conflict of rival males for their possession, and it seems
probable that the intense horror of this state, which many females
report, is associated more or less unconsciously with the sexual rage
which has followed it."[] the dread may well be felt at least as much
as regards the emotional state in themselves as in the males.
even when the emotion aroused is disgust it may still act as a sexual
stimulant. stcherbak has narrated the instructive case of a very
intelligent and elegant married lady of rather delicate constitution, an
artist of some talent, who never experienced any pleasure in sexual
intercourse, but ever since sexual feelings first began to be manifested
at all (at the age of ) has only experienced them in relation to
disgusting things. anything that is repulsive, like vomit, etc., causes
vague but pleasurable feelings which she gradually came to recognize as
sexual. the sight of a crushed frog will cause very definite sexual
sensations. she has had many admirers and she has observed that a
declaration of love by a disagreeable or even repulsive man sexually
excites her, though she has no desire for sexual intercourse with
him.[]
after all that has gone before it is easy to see how the emotion of fear
may act in an analogous manner to anger. just as anger may reinforce the
active forms of the sexual impulse to which it is allied, so fear may
reinforce the passive forms of that impulse. the following observations,
written by a lady, very well show how we may thus explain the sexual
attractiveness of whipping: "the fascination of whipping, which has always
greatly puzzled me, seems to be a sort of hankering after the stimulus of
fear. in a wild state animals live in constant fear. in civilized life one
but rarely feels it. a woman's pleasure in being afraid of a husband or
lover may be an equivalent of a man's love of adventure; and the fear of
children for their parents may be the dawning of the love of adventure. in
a woman this desire of adventure receives a serious check when she begins
to realize what she might be subjected to by a man if she gratified it.
excessive fear is demoralizing, but it seems to me that the idea of being
whipped gives a sense of fear which is not excessive. it is almost the
only kind of pain (physical) which is inflicted on children or women by
persons whom they can love and trust, and with a moral object. any other
kind of bodily ill treatment suggests malignity and may rouse resentment,
and, in extreme cases, an excess of fear which goes beyond the limits of
pleasurable excitement. given a hereditary feeling of this sort, i think
it is helped by the want of actual experience, as the association with
excitement is freed from the idea of pain as such." in his very valuable
and suggestive study of fears, stanley hall, while recognizing the evil of
excessive fear, has emphasized the emotional and even the intellectual
benefits of fear, and the great part played by fear in the evolution of
the race as "the rudimentary organ on the full development and subsequent
reduction of which many of the best things in the soul are dependent."
"fears that paralyze some brains," he remarks, "are a good tonic for
others. in some form and degree all need it always. without the fear
apparatus in us, what a wealth of motive would be lost!"[]
it is on the basis of this tonic influence of fear that in some morbidly
sensitive natures fear acts as a sexual stimulant. cullerre has brought
together a number of cases in both men and women, mostly neurasthenic, in
which fits of extreme anxiety and dread, sometimes of a religious
character and often in highly moral people, terminate in spontaneous
orgasm or in masturbation.[]
professor gurlitt mentions that his first full sexual emission took place
in class at school, when he was absorbed in writing out the life of
aristides and very anxious lest he should not be able to complete it
within the set time.[] 
dread and anxiety not only excite sexual emotion, but in the more extreme
morbid cases they may suppress and replace it. terror, say fliess, is
transmuted coitus, and freud believes that the neurosis of anxiety always
has a sexual cause, while ballet, capgras, löwenfeld, and others, though
not regarding a sexual traumatism as the only cause, still regard it as
frequent.
it is worthy of note that not only fear, but even so depressing an emotion
as grief, may act as a sexual stimulant, more especially in women. this
fact is not sufficiently recognized, though probably everyone can recall
instances from his personal knowledge, such cases being generally regarded
as inexplicable. it is, however, not more surprising that grief should be
transformed into sexual emotion than that (as in a case recorded by
stanley hall) it should manifest itself as anger. in any case we have to
bear in mind the frequency of this psychological transformation in the
presence of cases which might otherwise seem to call for a cynical
interpretation.
the case has been recorded of an english lady of good social
 position who fell in love with an undertaker at her father's
 funeral and insisted on marrying him. it is known that some men
 have been so abnormally excited by the funeral trappings of death
 that only in such surroundings have they been able to effect
 coitus. a case has been recorded of a physician of unimpeachable
 morality who was unable to attend funerals, even of his own
 relatives, on account of the sexual excitement thus aroused.
 funerals, tragedies at the theater, pictures of martyrdom, scenes
 of execution, and trials at the law-courts have been grouped
 together as arousing pleasure in many people, especially women.
 (c. f. von schlichtegroll, sacher-masoch und der masochismus,
 pp. -.) wakes and similar festivals may here find their
 psychological basis, and funerals are an unquestionable source of
 enjoyment among some people, especially of so-called "celtic"
 race. the stimulating reaction after funerals is well known to
 many, and leigh hunt refers to this (in his autobiography) as
 affecting the sincerely devoted friends who had just cremated
 shelley.
 it may well be, as kiernan has argued (alienist and
 neurologist, ; ibid., , p. ), that in the
 disturbance of emotional balance caused by grief the primitive
 instincts become peculiarly apt to respond to stimulus, and that
 in the aboulia of grief the mind is specially liable to become
 the prey to obsessions.
 "when my child died at the age of  months," a correspondent
 writes, "i had a violent paroxysm of weeping and for some days i
 could not eat. when i kissed the dead boy for the last time (i
 had never seen a corpse before) i felt i had reached the depths
 of misery and could never smile or have any deep emotions again.
 yet that night, though my thoughts had not strayed to sexual
 subjects since the child's death, i had a violent erection. i
 felt ashamed to desire carnal things when my dead child was still
 in the house, and explained to my wife. she was sympathetic, for
 her idea was that our common grief had intensified my love for
 her. i feel convinced, however, that my desire was the result of
 a stimulus propagated to the sexual centers from the centers
 affected by my grief, the transference of my emotion from one set
 of nerves to another. i do not perhaps express my meaning
 clearly."
 how far the emotional influence of grief entered into the
 following episode it is impossible to say, for here it is
 probable that we are mainly concerned with one of those almost
 irresistible impulses by which adolescent girls are sometimes
 overcome. the narrative is from the lips of a reliable witness, a
 railway guard, who, some thirty years ago, when a youth of , in
 cornwall, lodged with a man and woman who had a daughter of his
 own age. some months later, when requiring a night's lodging, he
 called at the house, and was greeted warmly by the woman, who
 told him her husband had just died and that she and her daughter
 were very nervous and would be glad if he would stay the night,
 but that as the corpse occupied the other bedroom he would have
 to share their bed ("we don't think very much of that among us,"
 my informant added). he agreed, and went to bed, and when, a
 little later, the two women also came to bed, the girl, at her
 own suggestion, lay next to the youth. nothing happened during
 the night, but in the morning, when the mother went down to light
 the fire, the daughter immediately threw off the bedclothes,
 exposing her naked person, and before the youth had realized what
 was happening she had drawn him over on to her. he was so utterly
 surprised that nothing whatever happened, but the incident made a
 life-long impression on him.
 in this connection reference may be made to the story of the
 ephesian matron in petronius; the story of the widow, overcome by
 grief, who watches by her husband's tomb, and very speedily falls
 into the arms of the soldier who is on guard. this story, in very
 various forms, is found in china and india, and has occurred
 repeatedly in european literature during the last two thousand
 years. the history of the wanderings of this story has been told
 by grisebach (eduard grisebach, die treulose witwe, third
 edition, ). it is not probable, however, that all the stories
 of this type are actually related; in any case it would seem that
 their vitality is due to the fact that they have been found to
 show a real correspondence to life; one may note, for instance,
 the curious tone of personal emotion with which george chapman
 treated this theme in his play, widow's tears. 
it may be added that, in explaining the resort to pain as an emotional
stimulus, we have to take into account not only the biological and
psychological considerations here brought forward, but also the abnormal
physiological conditions under which stimuli usually felt as painful come
specially to possess a sexually exciting influence. the neurasthenic and
neuropathic states may be regarded as conditions of more or less permanent
fatigue. it is true that under the conditions we are considering there may
be an extreme sensitiveness to stimuli not usually felt as of sexual
character, a kind of hyperesthesia; but hyperesthesia, it has well been
said, is nothing but the beginning of anesthesia.[] sergeant bertrand,
the classical example of necrophily,[] began to masturbate at the age
of , stimulating a sexual impulse which may have been congenitally feeble
by accompanying thoughts of ill-treating women. it was not till
subsequently that he began to imagine that the women were corpses. the
sadistic thoughts were only incidents in the emotional evolution, and the
real object throughout was to procure strong emotion and not to inflict
cruelty. some observations of féré's as to the conditions which influence
the amount of muscular work accomplished with the ergograph are
instructive from the present point of view: "although sensibility
diminishes in the course of fatigue," féré found that "there are periods
during which the excitability increases before it disappears. as fatigue
increases, the perception of the intercurrent excitation is retarded; an
odor is perceived as exciting before it is perceived as a differentiated
sensation; the most fetid odors arouse feelings of well-being before being
perceived as odors, and their painful quality only appears afterward, or
is not noticed at all." and after recording a series of results with the
ergograph obtained under the stimulus of unpleasant odors he remarks: "we
are thus struck by two facts: the diminution of work during painful
excitation, and its increase when the excitation has ceased. when the
effects following the excitation have disappeared the diminution is more
rapid than in the ordinary state. when the fatigue is manifested by a
notable diminution, if the same excitation is brought into action again,
no diminution is produced, but a more or less durable increase, exactly as
though there had been an agreeable excitation. moreover, the stimulus
which appears painful in a state of repose loses that painful character
either partially or completely when acting on the same subject in a more
and more fatigued state." féré defines a painful stimulus as a strong
excitation which causes displays of energy which the will cannot utilize;
when, as a result of diminished sensibility, the excitants are attenuated,
the will can utilize them, and so there is no pain.[] these experiments
had no reference to the sexual instinct, but it will be seen at once that
they have an extremely significant bearing on the subject before us, for
they show us the mechanism of the process by which in an abnormal organism
pain becomes a sexual stimulant.
[] erasmus darwin, zoönomia, vol. i, p. .
[] k. groos, spiele der menschen, pp. -.
[] hirn, origins of art, p. . reference may here perhaps
be made to the fact that unpleasant memories persist in women more than in
men (american journal of psychology, , p. ). this had already
been pointed out by coleridge. "it is a remark that i have made many
times," we find it said in one of his fragments (anima poetæ, p. ),
"and many times, i guess, shall repeat, that women are infinitely fonder
of clinging to and beating about, hanging upon and keeping up, and
reluctantly letting fall any doleful or painful or unpleasant subject,
than men of the same class and rank."
[] groos, spiele der thiere, p. . maeder (jahrbuch für
psychoanalytische forschungen, , vol. i, p. ) mentions an
epileptic girl of  who masturbates when she is in a rage with anyone.
[] krafft-ebing, psychopathia sexualis, english translation
of tenth edition, p. .
[] stanley hall, "a study of anger," american journal of
psychology, july, , p. .
[] krafft-ebing refers to such a case as recorded by schulz,
psychopathia sexualis, p. .
[] féré, l'instinct sexuel, p. .
[] c. f. von schlichtegroll, sacher-masoch und der
masochismus, p. .
[] archivio di psichiatria, vol. xv, p. . mention may
also be made of the cases (described as hysterical mixoscopia by kiernan,
alienist and neurologist, may, ) in which young women address to
themselves anonymous letters of an abusive and disgusting character, and
show them to others.
[] stanley hall, loc. cit., p. .
[] archives de neurologie, oct., .
[] g. stanley hall, "a study of fears," american journal of
psychology, vol. viii, no. .
[] a. cullerre, "de l'excitation sexuelle dans les
psychopathies anxieuses," archives de neurologie, feb., .
[] l. gurlitt (die neue generation, july, ). moll
(sexualleben des kindes, p. ) also give examples of the connection
between anxiety and sexual excitement. freud (der wahn und die traüme in
jensen's gradiva, p. ) considers that in dream-interpretation we may
replace "terror" by "sexual excitement." in noting the general sexual
effects of fear, we need not strictly separate the group of cases in which
the sexual effects are physical only, and fail to be circuited through the
brain.
[] see the article on "neurasthenia" by rudolf arndt in tuke's
dictionary of psychological medicine.
[] lunier, annales médico-psychologiques, , p. .
[] féré, comptes-rendus de la société de biologie, december
 and , ; id., année psychologique, seventh year, , pp.
-; more especially the same author's travail et plaisir, .
summary of results reached—the joy of emotional expansion—the
satisfaction of the craving for power—the influence of neurasthenic and
neuropathic conditions—the problem of pain in love largely constitutes a
special case of erotic symbolism.
it may seem to some that in our discussion of the relationships of love
and pain we have covered a very wide field. this was inevitable. the
subject is peculiarly difficult and complex, and if we are to gain a real
insight into its nature we must not attempt to force the facts to fit into
any narrow and artificial formulas of our own construction. yet, as we
have unraveled this seemingly confused mass of phenomena it will not have
escaped the careful reader that the apparently diverse threads we have
disentangled run in a parallel and uniform manner; they all have a like
source and they all converge to a like result. we have seen that the
starting-point of the whole group of manifestations must be found in the
essential facts of courtship among animal and primitive human societies.
pain is seldom very far from some of the phases of primitive courtship;
but it is not the pain which is the essential element in courtship, it is
the state of intense emotion, of tumescence, with which at any moment, in
some shape or another, pain may, in some way or another, be brought into
connection. so that we have come to see that in the phrase "love and pain"
we have to understand by "pain" a state of intense emotional excitement
with which pain in the stricter sense may be associated, but is by no
means necessarily associated. it is the strong emotion which exerts the
irresistible fascination in the lover, in his partner, or in both. the
pain is merely the means to that end. it is the lever which is employed to
bring the emotional force to bear on the sexual impulse. the question of
love and pain is mainly a question of emotional dynamics.
in attaining this view of our subject we have learned that any impulse of
true cruelty is almost outside the field altogether. the mistake was
indeed obvious and inevitable. let us suppose that every musical
instrument is sensitive and that every musical performance involves the
infliction of pain on the instrument. it would then be very difficult
indeed to realize that the pleasure of music lies by no means in the
infliction of pain. we should certainly find would-be scientific and
analytical people ready to declare that the pleasure of music is the
pleasure of giving pain, and that the emotional effects of music are due
to the pain thus inflicted. in algolagnia, as in music, it is not cruelty
that is sought; it is the joy of being plunged among the waves of that
great primitive ocean of emotions which underlies the variegated world of
our everyday lives, and pain—a pain which, as we have seen, is often
deprived so far as possible of cruelty, though sometimes by very thin and
feeble devices—is merely the channel by which that ocean is reached.
if we try to carry our inquiry beyond the point we have been content to
reach, and ask ourselves why this emotional intoxication exerts so
irresistible a fascination, we might find a final reply in the explanation
of nietzsche—who regarded this kind of intoxication as of great
significance both in life and in art—that it gives us the consciousness
of energy and the satisfaction of our craving for power.[] to carry the
inquiry to this point would be, however, to take it into a somewhat
speculative and metaphysical region, and we have perhaps done well not to
attempt to analyze further the joy of emotional expansion. we must be
content to regard the profound satisfaction of emotion as due to a
widespread motor excitement, the elements of which we cannot yet
completely analyze.[]
it is because the joy of emotional intoxication is the end really sought
that we have to regard the supposed opposition between "sadism" and
"masochism" as unimportant and indeed misleading. the emotional value of
pain is equally great whether the pain is inflicted, suffered, witnessed,
or merely exists as a mental imagination, and there is no reason why it
should not coexist in all these forms in the same person, as, in fact, we
frequently find it.
the particular emotions which are invoked by pain to reinforce the sexual
impulse are more especially anger and fear, and, as we have seen, these
two very powerful and primitive emotions are—on the active and passive
sides, respectively—the emotions most constantly brought into play in
animal and early human courtship; so that they naturally constitute the
emotional reservoirs from which the sexual impulse may still most easily
draw. it is not difficult to show that the various forms in which
"pain"—as we must here understand pain—is employed in the service of the
sexual impulse are mainly manifestations or transformations of anger or
fear, either in their simple or usually more complex forms, in some of
which anger and fear may be mingled.
we thus accept the biological origin of the psychological association
between love and pain; it is traceable to the phenomena of animal
courtship. we do not on this account exclude the more direct physiological
factor. it may seem surprising that manifestations that have their origin
in primeval forms of courtship should in many cases coincide with actual
sensations of definite anatomical base today, and still more surprising
that these traditional manifestations and actual sensations should so
often be complementary to each other in their active and passive aspects:
that is to say, that the pleasure of whipping should be matched by the
pleasure of being whipped, the pleasure of mock strangling by the pleasure
of being so strangled, that pain inflicted is not more desirable than pain
suffered. but such coincidence is of the very essence of the whole group
of phenomena. the manifestations of courtship were from the first
conditioned by physiological facts; it is not strange that they should
always tend to run pari passu with physiological facts. the
manifestations which failed to find anchorage in physiological
relationships might well tend to die out. even under the most normal
circumstances, in healthy persons of healthy heredity, the manifestations
we have been considering are liable to make themselves felt. under such
circumstances, however, they never become of the first importance in the
sexual process; they are often little more than play. it is only under
neurasthenic or neuropathic conditions—that is to say, in an organism
which from acquired or congenital causes, and usually perhaps both, has
become enfeebled, irritable, "fatigued"—that these manifestations are
liable to flourish vigorously, to come to the forefront of sexual
consciousness, and even to attain such seriously urgent importance that
they may in themselves constitute the entire end and aim of sexual desire.
under these pathological conditions, pain, in the broad and special sense
in which we have been obliged to define it, becomes a welcome tonic and a
more or less indispensable stimulant to the sexual system.
it will not have escaped the careful reader that in following out our
subject we have sometimes been brought into contact with manifestations
which scarcely seem to come within any definition of pain. this is
undoubtedly so, and the references to these manifestations were not
accidental, for they serve to indicate the real bearings of our subject.
the relationships of love and pain constitute a subject at once of so
much gravity and so much psychological significance that it was well to
devote to them a special study. but pain, as we have here to understand
it, largely constitutes a special case of what we shall later learn to
know as erotic symbolism: that is to say, the psychic condition in which a
part of the sexual process, a single idea or group of ideas, tends to
assume unusual importance, or even to occupy the whole field of sexual
consciousness, the part becoming a symbol that stands for the whole. when
we come to the discussion of this great group of abnormal sexual
manifestations it will frequently be necessary to refer to the results we
have reached in studying the sexual significance of pain.
[] see, for instance, the section "zur physiologie der kunst"
in nietzsche's fragmentary work, der wille zur macht, werke, bd. xv.
groos (spiele der menschen, p. ) refers to the significance of the
fact that nearly all races have special methods of procuring intoxication.
cf. partridge's study of the psychology of alcohol (american journal of
psychology, april, ). "it is hard to imagine," this writer remarks of
intoxicants, "what the religious or social consciousness of primitive man
would have been without them."
[] the muscular element is the most conspicuous in emotion,
though it is not possible, as a careful student of the emotions (h. r.
marshall, pain, pleasure, and æsthetics, p. ) well points out, "to
limit the physical activities involved with the emotions to such effects
of voluntary innervation or alteration of size of blood-vessels or spasm
of organic muscle, as lange seems to think determines them; nor to
increase or decrease of muscle-power, as féré's results might suggest; nor
to such changes, in relation of size of capillaries, in voluntary
innervation, in respiratory and heart functioning, as lehmann has
observed. emotions seem to me to be coincidents of reactions of the whole
organism tending to certain results."
a special and detailed study of the normal characters of the sexual
impulse in men seems unnecessary. i have elsewhere discussed various
aspects of the male sexual impulse, and others remain for later
discussion. but to deal with it broadly as a whole seems unnecessary, if
only because it is predominantly open and aggressive. moreover, since the
constitution of society has largely been in the hands of men, the nature
of the sexual impulse in men has largely been expressed in the written and
unwritten codes of social law. the sexual instinct in women is much more
elusive. this, indeed, is involved at the outset in the organic
psychological play of male and female, manifesting itself in the phenomena
of modesty and courting. the same elusiveness, the same mocking mystery,
meet us throughout when we seek to investigate the manifestations of the
sexual impulse in women. nor is it easy to find any full and authentic
record of a social state clearly founded in sexual matters on the demands
of woman's nature.
an illustration of our ignorance and bias in these matters is
 furnished by the relationship of marriage, celibacy, and divorce
 to suicide in the two sexes. there can be no doubt that the
 sexual emotions of women have a profound influence in determining
 suicide. this is indicated, among other facts, by a comparison of
 the suicide-rate in the sexes according to age; while in men the
 frequency of suicide increases progressively throughout life, in
 women there is an arrest after the age of ; that is to say,
 when the period of most intense sexual emotion has been passed.
 this phenomenon is witnessed among peoples so unlike as the
 french, the prussians, and the italians. now, how do marriage and
 divorce affect the sexual liability to suicide? we are always
 accustomed to say that marriage protects women, and it is even
 asserted that men have self-sacrificingly maintained the
 institution of marriage mainly for the benefit of women.
 professor durkheim, however, who has studied suicide elaborately
 from the sociological standpoint, so far as possible eliminating
 fallacies, has in recent years thrown considerable doubt on the
 current assumption. he shows that if we take the tendency to
 suicide as a test, and eliminate the influence of children, who
 are an undoubted protection to women, it is not women, but men,
 who are protected by marriage, and that the protection of women
 from suicide increases regularly as divorces increase. after
 discussing these points exhaustively, "we reach a conclusion," he
 states, "considerably removed from the current view of marriage
 and the part it plays. it is regarded as having been instituted
 for the sake of the wife and to protect her weakness against
 masculine caprices. monogamy, especially, is very often presented
 as a sacrifice of man's polygamous instincts, made in order to
 ameliorate the condition of woman in marriage. in reality,
 whatever may have been the historical causes which determined
 this restriction, it is man who has profited most. the liberty
 which he has thus renounced could only have been a source of
 torment to him. woman had not the same reasons for abandoning
 freedom, and from this point of view we may say that in
 submitting to the same rule it is she who has made the
 sacrifice." (e. durkheim, le suicide, , pp. -,
 there is possibly some significance in the varying incidence of
 insanity in unmarried men and unmarried women as compared with
 the married. at erlangen, for example, hagen found that among
 insane women the preponderance of the single over the married is
 not nearly so great as among insane men, marriage appearing to
 exert a much more marked prophylactic influence in the case of
 men than of women. (f. w. hagen, statistische untersuchungen über
 geisteskrankheiten, , p. .) the phenomena are here,
 however, highly complex, and, as hagen himself points out, the
 prophylactic influence of marriage, while very probable, is not
 the only or even the chief factor at work.
 it is worth noting that exactly the same sexual difference may be
 traced in england. it appears that, in ratio to similar groups in
 the general population (taking the years -, inclusive),
 the number of admissions to asylums is the same for both sexes
 among married people (i.e., .), but for the single it is
 larger among the men (. to .), as also it is among the
 widowed (. to .) (fifty-sixth annual report of the
 commissioners in lunacy, england and wales, , p. ). this
 would seem to indicate that when living apart from men the
 tendency to insanity is less in women, but is raised to the male
 level when the sexes live together in marriage.
 much the same seems to hold true of criminality. it was long
 since noted by horsley that in england marriage decidedly
 increases the tendency to crime in women, though it decidedly
 decreases it in men. prinzing has shown (zeitschrift für
 sozialwissenschaft, bd. ii, ) that this is also the case in
 germany.
 similarly marriage decreases the tendency of men to become
 habitual drunkards and increases that of women. notwithstanding
 the fact that the average age of the men is greater than that of
 the women, the majority of the men admitted to the inebriate
 reformatories under the english inebriates acts are single; the
 majority of the women are married; of  women so admitted 
 per cent, were single,  per cent, married, and  per cent,
 widows. (british medical journal, sept. , , p. .) 
it thus happens that even the elementary characters of the sexual impulse
in women still arouse, even among the most competent physiological and
medical authorities,—not least so when they are themselves women,—the
most divergent opinions. its very existence even may be said to be
questioned. it would generally be agreed that among men the strength of
the sexual impulse varies within a considerable range, but that it is very
rarely altogether absent, such total absence being abnormal and probably
more or less pathological. but if applied to women, this statement is by
no means always accepted. by many, sexual anesthesia is considered natural
in women, some even declaring that any other opinion would be degrading to
women; even by those who do not hold this opinion it is believed that
there is an unnatural prevalence of sexual frigidity among civilized
women. on these grounds it is desirable to deal generally with this and
other elementary questions of allied character.
the primitive view of women—as a supernatural element in life—as
peculiarly embodying the sexual instinct—the modern tendency to
underestimate the sexual impulse in women—this tendency confined to
recent times—sexual anæsthesia—its prevalence—difficulties in
investigating the subject—some attempts to investigate it—sexual
anesthesia must be regarded as abnormal—the tendency to spontaneous
manifestations of the sexual impulse in young girls at puberty.
from very early times it seems possible to trace two streams of opinion
regarding women: on the one hand, a tendency to regard women as a
supernatural element in life, more or less superior to men, and, on the
other hand, a tendency to regard women as especially embodying the sexual
instinct and as peculiarly prone to exhibit its manifestations.
in the most primitive societies, indeed, the two views seem to be to some
extent amalgamated; or, it should rather be said, they have not yet been
differentiated; and, as in such societies it is usual to venerate the
generative principle of nature and its embodiments in the human body and
in human functions, such a co-ordination of ideas is entirely rational.
but with the development of culture the tendency is for this homogeneous
conception to be split up into two inharmonious tendencies. even apart
from christianity and before its advent this may be noted. it was,
however, to christianity and the christian ascetic spirit that we owe the
complete differentiation and extreme development which these opposing
views have reached. the condemnation of sexuality involved the
glorification of the virgin; and indifference, even contempt, was felt for
the woman who exercised sexual functions. it remained open to anyone,
according to his own temperament, to identify the typical average woman
with the one or with the other type; all the fund of latent sexual emotion
which no ascetic rule can crush out of the human heart assured the
picturesque idealization alike of the angelic and the diabolic types of
woman. we may trace the same influence subtly lurking even in the most
would-be scientific statements of anthropologists and physicians
today.[]
it may not be out of place to recall at this point, once more,
 the fact, fairly obvious indeed, that the judgments of men
 concerning women are very rarely matters of cold scientific
 observation, but are colored both by their own sexual emotions
 and by their own moral attitude toward the sexual impulse. the
 ascetic who is unsuccessfully warring with his own carnal
 impulses may (like the voluptuary) see nothing in women but
 incarnations of sexual impulse; the ascetic who has subdued his
 own carnal impulses may see no elements of sex in women at all.
 thus the opinions regarding this matter are not only tinged by
 elements of primitive culture, but by elements of individual
 disposition. statements about the sexual impulses of women often
 tell us less about women than about the persons who make them.
 the curious manner in which for men women become incarnations of
 the sexual impulse is shown by the tendency of both general and
 personal names for women to become applicable to prostitutes
 only. this is the case with the words "garce" and "fille" in
 french, "mädchen" and "dirne" in german, as well as with the
 french "catin" (catherine) and the german "metze" (mathilde).
 (see, e.g., r. kleinpaul, die räthsel der sprache, , pp.
 at the same time, though we have to recognize the presence of
 elements which color and distort in various ways the judgments of
 men regarding women, it must not be hastily assumed that these
 elements render discussion of the question altogether
 unprofitable. in most cases such prejudices lead chiefly to a
 one-sided solution of facts, against which we can guard. 
while, however, these two opposing currents of opinion are of very ancient
origin, it is only within quite recent times, and only in two or three
countries, that they have led to any marked difference of opinion
regarding the sexual aptitude of women. in ancient times men blamed women
for concupiscence or praised them for chastity, but it seems to have been
reserved for the nineteenth century to state that women are apt to be
congenitally incapable of experiencing complete sexual satisfaction, and
peculiarly liable to sexual anesthesia. this idea appears to have been
almost unknown to the eighteenth century. during the last century,
however, and more especially in england, germany, and italy, this opinion
has been frequently set down, sometimes even as a matter of course, with a
tincture of contempt or pity for any woman afflicted with sexual emotions.
in the treatise on generation (chapter v), which until recent
 times was commonly ascribed to hippocrates, it is stated that men
 have greater pleasure in coitus than women, though the pleasure
 of women lasts longer, and this opinion, though not usually
 accepted, was treated with great respect by medical authors down
 to the end of the seventeenth century. thus a. laurentius (du
 laurens), after a long discussion, decides that men have stronger
 sexual desire and greater pleasure in coitus than women.
 (historia anatomica humani corporis, , lib. viii, quest, ii
 and vii.)
 about half a century ago a book entitled functions and disorders
 of the reproductive organs, by w. acton, a surgeon, passed
 through many editions and was popularly regarded as a standard
 authority on the subjects with which it deals. this extraordinary
 book is almost solely concerned with men; the author evidently
 regards the function of reproduction as almost exclusively
 appertaining to men. women, if "well brought up," are, and should
 be, he states, in england, absolutely ignorant of all matters
 concerning it. "i should say," this author again remarks, "that
 the majority of women (happily for society) are not very much
 troubled with sexual feeling of any kind." the supposition that
 women do possess sexual feelings he considers "a vile aspersion."
 in the article "generation," contained in another medical work
 belonging to the middle of the nineteenth century,—rees's
 cyclopedia,—we find the following statement: "that a mucous
 fluid is sometimes found in coition from the internal organs and
 vagina is undoubted; but this only happens in lascivious women,
 or such as live luxuriously."
 gall had stated decisively that the sexual desires of men are
 stronger and more imperious than those of women. (fonctions du
 cerveau, , vol. iii, pp. -.)
 raciborski declared that three-fourths of women merely endure the
 approaches of men. (de la puberté chez la femme, , p. .)
 "when the question is carefully inquired into and without
 prejudice," said lawson tait, "it is found that women have their
 sexual appetites far less developed than men." (lawson tait,
 "remote effects of removal of the uterine appendages,"
 provincial medical journal, may, .) "the sexual instinct is
 very powerful in man and comparatively weak in women," he stated
 elsewhere (diseases of women, , p. ).
 hammond stated that, leaving prostitutes out of consideration, it
 is doubtful if in one-tenth of the instances of intercourse they
 [women] experience the slightest pleasurable sensation from first
 to last (hammond, sexual impotence, p. ), and he considered
 (p. ) that this condition was sometimes congenital.
 lombroso and ferrero consider that sexual sensibility, as well as
 all other forms of sensibility, is less pronounced in women, and
 they bring forward various facts and opinions which seem to them
 to point in the same direction. "woman is naturally and
 organically frigid." at the same time they consider that, while
 erethism is less, sexuality is greater than in men. (lombroso and
 ferrero, la donna delinquente, la prostituta, e la donna
 normale, , pp. -.)
 "it is an altogether false idea," fehling declared, in his
 rectorial address at the university of basel in , "that a
 young woman has just as strong an impulse to the opposite sex as
 a young man.... the appearance of the sexual side in the love of
 a young girl is pathological." (h. fehling, die bestimmung der
 frau, , p. .) in his lehrbuch der frauenkrankheiten the
 same gynecological authority states his belief that half of all
 women are not sexually excitable.
 krafft-ebing was of opinion that women require less sexual
 satisfaction than men, being less sensual. (krafft-ebing, "ueber
 neurosen und psychosen durch sexuelle abstinenz," jahrbücher für
 psychiatrie, , bd. viii, ht. i and .)
 "in the normal woman, especially of the higher social classes,"
 states windscheid, "the sexual instinct is acquired, not inborn;
 when it is inborn, or awakes by itself, there is abnormality.
 since women do not know this instinct before marriage, they do
 not miss it when they have no occasion in life to learn it." (f.
 windscheid, "die beziehungen zwischen gynäkologie und
 neurologie," zentralblatt für gynäkologie, , no. ; quoted
 by. moll, libido sexualis, bd. i, p. .)
 "the sensuality of men," moll states, "is in my opinion very much
 greater than that of women." (a. moll, die konträre
 sexualempfindung, third edition, , p. .)
 "women are, in general, less sensual than men," remarks näcke,
 "notwithstanding the alleged greater nervous supply of their
 sexual organs." (p. näcke, "kritisches zum kapitel der
 sexualität," archiv für psychiatrie, , p. .)
 löwenfeld states that in normal young girls the specifically
 sexual feelings are absolutely unknown; so that desire cannot
 exist in them. putting aside the not inconsiderable proportion of
 women in whom this absence of desire may persist and be
 permanent, even after sexual relationships have begun, thus
 constituting absolute frigidity, in a still larger number desire
 remains extremely moderate, constituting a state of relative
 frigidity. he adds that he cannot unconditionally support the
 view of fürbringer, who is inclined to ascribe sexual coldness to
 the majority of german married women. (l. löwenfeld, sexualleben
 und nervenleiden, , second edition, p. .)
 adler, who discusses the question at some length, decides that
 the sexual needs of women are less than those of men, though in
 some cases the orgasm in quantity and quality greatly exceeds
 that of men. he believes, not only that the sexual impulse in
 women is absolutely less than in men, and requires stronger
 stimulation to arouse it, but that also it suffers from a latency
 due to inhibition, which acts like a foreign body in the brain
 (analogous to the psychic trauma of breuer and freud in
 hysteria), and demands great skill in the man who is to awaken
 the woman to love. (o. adler, die mangelhafte
 geschlechtsempfindung des weibes, , pp. ,  et seq.;
 also enlarged second edition, ; id., "die frigide frau,"
 sexual-probleme, jan., .) 
it must not, however, be supposed that this view of the natural tendency
of women to frigidity has everywhere found acceptance. it is not only an
opinion of very recent growth, but is confined, on the whole, to a few
countries.
"turn to history," wrote brierre de boismont, "and on every page
 you will be able to recognize the predominance of erotic ideas in
 women." it is the same today, he adds, and he attributes it to
 the fact that men are more easily able to gratify their sexual
 impulses. (des hallucinations, , p. .)
 the laws of manu attribute to women concupiscence and anger, the
 love of bed and of adornment.
 the jews attributed to women greater sexual desire than to men.
 this is illustrated, according to knobel (as quoted by dillmann),
 by genesis, chapter iii, v. .
 in greek antiquity the romance and sentiment of love were mainly
 felt toward persons of the same sex, and were divorced from the
 more purely sexual feelings felt for persons of opposite sex.
 theognis compared marriage to cattle-breeding. in love between
 men and women the latter were nearly always regarded as taking
 the more active part. in all greek love-stories of early date the
 woman falls in love with the man, and never the reverse. æschylus
 makes even a father assume that his daughters will misbehave if
 left to themselves. euripides emphasized the importance of women;
 "the euripidean woman who 'falls in love' thinks first of all:
 'how can i seduce the man i love?"' (e. f. m. benecke, antimachus
 of colophon and the position of women in greek poetry, , pp.
 the most famous passage in latin literature as to the question of
 whether men or women obtain greater pleasure from sexual
 intercourse is that in which ovid narrates the legend of tiresias
 (metamorphoses, iii, -). tiresias, having been both a man
 and a woman, decided in favor of women. this passage was
 frequently quoted down to the eighteenth century.
 in a passage quoted from a lost work of galen by the arabian
 biographer, abu-l-faraj, that great physician says of the
 christians "that they practice celibacy, that even many of their
 women do so." so that in galen's opinion it was more difficult
 for a woman than for a man to be continent.
 the same view is widely prevalent among arabic authors, and there
 is an arabic saying that "the longing of the woman for the penis
 is greater than that of the man for the vulva."
 in china, remarks dr. coltman, "when an old gentleman of my
 acquaintance was visiting me my little daughter,  years old, ran
 into the room, and, climbing upon my knee, kissed me. my visitor
 expressed his surprise, and remarked: 'we never kiss our
 daughters when they are so large; we may when they are very
 small, but not after they are  years old,' said he, 'because it
 is apt to excite in them bad emotions.'" (coltman, the chinese,
 , p. .)
 the early christian fathers clearly show that they regard women
 as more inclined to sexual enjoyment than men. that was, for
 instance, the opinion of tertullian (de virginibus velandis,
 chapter x), and it is clearly implied in some of st. jerome's
 epistles.
 notwithstanding the influence of christianity, among the vigorous
 barbarian races of medieval europe, the existence of sexual
 appetite in women was not considered to be, as it later became, a
 matter to be concealed or denied. thus in  the ecclesiastical
 historian, ordericus vitalis (himself half norman and half
 english), narrates that the wives of the norman knights who had
 accompanied william the conqueror to england two years earlier
 sent over to their husbands to say that they were consumed by the
 fierce names of desire ("sæva libidinis face urebantur"), and
 that if their husbands failed to return very shortly they
 proposed to take other husbands. it is added that this threat
 brought a few husbands back to their wanton ladies ("lascivis
 dominabus suis").
 during the medieval period in europe, largely in consequence, no
 doubt, of the predominance of ascetic ideals set up by men who
 naturally regarded woman as the symbol of sex, the doctrine of
 the incontinence of woman became firmly fixed, and it is
 unnecessary and unprofitable to quote examples. it is sufficient
 to mention the very comprehensive statement of jean de meung (in
 the roman de la rose, ):—
"toutes estes, serés, ou fûtes
de fait ou de volunté putes."
the satirical jean de meung was, however, a somewhat extreme and
 untypical representative of his age, and the fourteenth century
 johannes de sancto amando (jean de st. amand) gives a somewhat
 more scientifically based opinion (quoted by pagel, neue
 litterarische beiträge zur mittelalterlichen medicin, , p.
 ) that sexual desire is stronger in women than in men.
 humanism and the spread of the renaissance movement brought in a
 spirit more sympathetic to women. soon after, especially in italy
 and france, we begin to find attempts at analyzing the sexual
 emotions, which are not always without a certain subtlety. in the
 seventeenth century a book of this kind was written by venette.
 in matters of love, venette declared, "men are but children
 compared to women. in these matters women have a more lively
 imagination, and they usually have more leisure to think of love.
 women are much more lascivious and amorous than men." this is the
 conclusion reached in a chapter devoted to the question whether
 men or women are the more amorous. in a subsequent chapter,
 dealing with the question whether men or women receive more
 pleasure from the sexual embrace, venette concludes, after
 admitting the great difficulty of the question, that man's
 pleasure is greater, but woman's lasts longer. (n. venette, de
 la génération de l'homme ou tableau de l'amour conjugal,
 amsterdam, .)
 at a much earlier date, however, montaigne had discussed this
 matter with his usual wisdom, and, while pointing out that men
 have imposed their own rule of life on women and their own
 ideals, and have demanded from them opposite and contradictory
 virtues,—a statement not yet antiquated,—he argues that women
 are incomparably more apt and more ardent in love than men are,
 and that in this matter they always know far more than men can
 teach them, for "it is a discipline that is born in their veins."
 (montaigne, essais, book iii, chapter v.)
 the old physiologists generally mentioned the appearance of
 sexual desire in girls as one of the normal signs of puberty.
 this may be seen in the numerous quotations brought together by
 schurig, in his parthenologia, cap. ii.
 a long succession of distinguished physicians throughout the
 seventeenth century discussed at more or less length the relative
 amount of sexual desire in men and women, and the relative degree
 of their pleasure in coitus. it is remarkable that, although they
 usually attach great weight to the supposed opinion of
 hippocrates in the opposite sense, most of them decide that both
 desire and pleasure are greater in women.
 plazzonus decides that women have more sources of pleasure in
 coitus than men because of the larger extent of surface excited;
 and if it were not so, he adds, women would not be induced to
 incur the pains and risks of pregnancy and childbirth.
 (plazzonus, de partibus generationi inservientibus, , lib.
 ii, cap. xiii.)
 "without doubt," says ferrand, "woman is more passionate than
 man, and more often torn by the evils of love." (ferrand, de la
 maladie d'amour, , chapter ii.)
 zacchia, mainly on a priori grounds, concludes that women have
 more pleasure in coitus than men. (zacchia, quæstiones
 medico-legales, , lib. iii, quest, vii.)
 sinibaldus, discussing whether men or women have more salacity,
 decides in favor of women. (j. b. sinibaldus, geneanthropeia,
 , lib. ii, tract. ii, cap. v.)
 hornius believed that women have greater sexual pleasure than
 men, though he mainly supported his opinion by the authority of
 classical poets. (hornius, historic naturalis, , lib. iii,
 cap. i.)
 nenter describes what we may now call women's affectability, and
 considers that it makes them more prone than men to the sexual
 emotions, as is shown by the fact that, notwithstanding their
 modesty, they sometimes make sexual advances. this greater
 proneness of women to the sexual impulse is, he remarks, entirely
 natural and right, for the work of generation is mainly carried
 on by women, and love is its basis: "generationis fundamentum est
 amor." (g. p. nenter, theoria hominis sani, , cap. v, memb.
 ii.)
 the above opinions of seventeenth-century physicians are quoted
 from the original sources. schurig, in his gynæcologia, (pp.
 - and -), quotes a number of passages on this subject
 from medical authorities of the same period, on which i have not
 drawn.
 sénancour, in his fine and suggestive book on love, first
 published in , asks: "has sexual pleasure the same power on
 the sex which less loudly demands it? it has more, at all events
 in some respects. the very vigor and laboriousness of men may
 lead them to neglect love, but the constant cares of maternity
 make women feel how important it must ever be to them. we must
 remember also that in men the special emotions of love only have
 a single focus, while in women the organs of lactation are united
 to those of conception. our feelings are all determined by these
 material causes." (sénancour, de l'amour, fourth edition, ,
 vol. i, p. .) a later psychologist of love, this time a woman,
 ellen key, states that woman's erotic demands, though more
 silent than man's, are stronger. (ellen key, ueber liebe und
 ehe, p. .)
 michael ryan considered that sexual enjoyment "is more delicious
 and protracted" in women, and ascribed this to a more sensitive
 nervous system, a finer and more delicate skin, more acute
 feelings, and the fact that in women the mammæ are the seat of a
 vivid sensibility in sympathy with the uterus. (m. ryan,
 philosophy of marriage, , p. .)
 busch was inclined to think women have greater sexual pleasure
 than men. (d. w. h. busch, das geschlechtsleben des weibes, ,
 vol. i, p. .) kobelt held that the anatomical conformation of
 the sexual organs in women led to the conclusion that this must
 be the case.
 guttceit, speaking of his thirty years' medical experience in
 russia, says: "in russia at all events, a girl, as very many have
 acknowledged to me, cannot resist the ever stronger impulses of
 sex beyond the twenty-second or twenty-third year. and if she
 cannot do so in natural ways she adopts artificial ways. the
 belief that the feminine sex feels the stimulus of sex less than
 the male is quite false." (guttceit, dreissig jahre praxis,
 , theil i, p. .)
 in scandinavia, according to vedeler, the sexual emotions are at
 least as strong in women as in men (vedeler, "de impotentia
 feminarum," norsk magazin for laegevidenskaben, march, ).
 in sweden, dr. eklund, of stockholm, remarking that from  to 
 per cent. of the births are illegitimate, adds: "we hardly ever
 hear anyone talk of a woman having been seduced, simply because
 the lust is at the worst in the woman, who, as a rule, is the
 seducing party." (eklund, transactions of the american
 association of obstetricians, philadelphia, , p. .)
 on the opposite side of the baltic, in the königsberg district,
 the same observation has been made. intercourse before marriage
 is the rule in most villages of this agricultural district, among
 the working classes, with or without intention of subsequent
 marriage; "the girls are often the seducing parties, or at least
 very willing; they seek to bind their lovers to them and compel
 them to marriage." in the köslin district of pomerania, where
 intercourse between the girls and youths is common, the girls
 come to the youths' rooms even more frequently than the youths to
 the girls'. in some of the dantzig districts the girls give
 themselves to the youths, and even seduce them, sometimes, but
 not always, with a view of marriage. (wittenberg, die
 geschlechtsittlichen verhalten der landbewohner im deutschen
 reiche, , bd. i, pp. , , .)
 mantegazza devoted great attention to this point in several of
 the works he published during fifty years, and was decidedly of
 the opinion that the sexual emotions are much stronger in women
 than in men, and that women have much more enjoyment in sexual
 intercourse. in his fisiologia del piacere he supports this
 view, and refers to the greater complexity of the genital
 apparatus in women (as well as its larger surface and more
 protected position), to what he considers to be the keener
 sensibility of women generally, to the passivity of women, etc.;
 and he considers that sexual pleasure is rendered more seductive
 to women by the mystery in which it is veiled for them by modesty
 and our social habits. in a more recent work (fisiologia della
 donna, cap. viii) mantegazza returns to this subject, and
 remarks that long experience, while confirming his early opinion,
 has modified it to the extent that he now believes that, as
 compared with men, the sexual emotions of women vary within far
 wider limits. among men few are quite insensitive to the physical
 pleasures of love, while, on the other hand, few are thrown by
 the violence of its emotional manifestations into a state of
 syncope or convulsions. among women, while some are absolutely
 insensitive, others (as in cases with which he was acquainted)
 are so violently excited by the paradise of physical love that,
 after the sexual embrace, they faint or fall into a cataleptic
 condition for several hours.
 "physical sex is a larger factor in the life of the woman.... if
 this be true of the physical element, it is equally true of the
 mental element." (dr. elizabeth blackwell, the human element in
 sex, fifth edition, , p. .)
 "in the female sex," remarks clouston, "reproduction is a more
 dominant function of the organism than in the male, and has far
 larger, if not more intense, relationships to feeling, judgment,
 and volition." (clouston, neuroses of development, .)
 "it may be said," marro states, "that in woman the visceral
 system reacts, if not with greater intensity, certainly in a more
 general manner, to all the impressions, having a sexual basis,
 which dominate the life of woman, if not as sexual emotions
 properly so called, as related emotions closely dependent on the
 reproductive instinct." (a. marro, la pubertà, , p. .)
 forel also believed (die sexuelle frage, p. ) that women are
 more erotic than men.
 the gynecologist kisch states his belief that "the sexual impulse
 is so powerful in women that at certain periods of life its
 primitive force dominates her whole nature, and there can be no
 room left for reason to argue concerning reproduction; on the
 contrary, union is desired even in the presence of the fear of
 reproduction or when there can be no question of it." he regards
 absence of sexual feeling in women as pathological. (kisch,
 sterilität des weibes, second edition, pp. -.) in his
 later work (the sexual life of woman) kisch again asserts that
 sexual impulse always exists in mature women (in the absence of
 organic sexual defect and cerebral disease), though it varies in
 strength and may be repressed. in adolescent girls, however, it
 is weaker than in youths of the same age. after she has had
 sexual experiences, kisch maintains, a woman's sexual emotions
 are just as powerful as a man's, though she has more motives than
 a man for controlling them.
 eulenburg is of the same opinion as kisch, and sharply criticises
 the loose assertion of some authorities who have expressed
 themselves in an opposite sense. (a. eulenburg, sexuale
 neuropathie, pp. -; the same author has dealt with the point
 in the zukunft, december , .)
 kossmann states that the opinion as to the widespread existence
 of frigidity among women is a fable. (kossmann, allgemeine
 gynæcologie, , p. .)
 bloch concludes that "in most cases the sexual coldness of women
 is in fact only apparent, either due to the concealment of
 glowing sexuality beneath the veil of outward reticence
 prescribed by conventional morality, or else to the husband who
 has not succeeded in arousing erotic sensations which are
 complicated and with difficulty awakened.... the sexual
 sensibility of women is certainly different from that of men, but
 in strength it is at least as great." (iwan bloch, das
 sexualleben unserer zeit , ch. v.)
 nyström, also, after devoting a chapter to the discussion of the
 causes of sexual coldness in women, concludes: "my conviction,
 founded on experience, is, that only a small number of women
 would be without sexual feeling if sound views and teaching
 prevailed in respect to the sexual life, if due weight were given
 to inner devotion and tender caresses as the preliminaries of
 love in marriage, and if couples who wish to avoid pregnancy
 would adopt sensible preventive methods instead of coitus
 interruptus." (a. nyström, das geschlichtsleben und seine
 gesetze, eighth edition, , p. .) 
we thus find two opinions widely current: one, of world-wide existence and
almost universally accepted in those ages and centers in which life is
lived most nakedly, according to which the sexual impulse is stronger in
women than in men; another, now widely prevalent in many countries,
according to which the sexual instinct is distinctly weaker in women, if,
indeed, it may not be regarded as normally absent altogether. a third view
is possible: it may be held that there is no difference at all. this
view, formerly not very widely held, is that of the french physiologist,
beaunis, as it is of winckel; while rohleder, who formerly held that
sexual feeling tends to be defective in women, now believes that men and
women are equal in sexual impulse.
at an earlier period, however, donatus (de medica historia
 mirabili, , lib. iv, cap. xvii) held the same view, and
 remarked that sometimes men and sometimes women are the more
 salacious, varying with the individual. roubaud (de
 l'impuissance, , p. ) stated that the question is so
 difficult as to be insoluble. 
in dealing with the characteristics of the sexual impulse in women, it
will be seen, we have to consider the prevalence in them of what is
commonly termed (in its slightest forms) frigidity or hyphedonia, and (in
more complete form) sexual anesthesia or anaphrodism, or erotic blindness,
or anhedonia.[]
many modern writers have referred to the prevalence of frigidity
 among women. shufeldt believes (pacific medical journal, nov.,
 ) that  per cent, of married women in new york are
 afflicted with sexual frigidity, and that it is on the increase;
 it is rare, however, he adds, among jewish women. hegar gives 
 per cent, as the proportion of sexually anesthetic women;
 fürbringer says the majority of women are so. effertz (quoted by
 löwenfeld, sexualleben und nervenleiden, p. , apparently with
 approval) regards  per cent, among women generally as sexually
 anesthetic, but only  per cent, men. moll states (eulenburg's
 encyclopädie, fourth edition, art. "geschlechtstrieb") that the
 prevalence of sexual anesthesia among german women varies,
 according to different authorities, from  to  per cent.
 elsewhere moll (konträre sexualempfindung, third edition, ,
 p. ) emphasizes the statement that "sexual anesthesia in women
 is much more frequent than is generally supposed." he explains
 that he is referring to the physical element of pleasure and
 satisfaction in intercourse, and of desire for intercourse. he
 adds that the psychic side of love is often more conspicuous in
 women than in men. he cannot agree with sollier that this kind of
 sexual frigidity is a symptom of hysteria. féré (l'instinct
 sexuel, second edition, p. ), in referring to the greater
 frequency of sexual anesthesia in women, remarks that it is often
 associated with neuropathic states, as well as with anomalies of
 the genital organs, or general troubles of nutrition, and is
 usually acquired. some authors attribute great importance to
 amenorrhea in this connection; one investigator has found that in
  out of  cases of absolute amenorrhea sexual feeling was
 absent. löwenfeld, again (sexualleben und nervenleiden),
 referring to the common misconception that nervous disorder is
 associated with increased sexual desire, points out that
 nervously degenerate women far more often display frigidity than
 increased sexual desire. elsewhere (ueber die sexuelle
 konstitution) löwenfeld says it is only among the upper classes
 that sexual anesthesia is common. campbell clark, also, showed
 some years ago that, in young women with a tendency to chlorosis
 and a predisposition to insanity, defects of pelvic and mammary
 development are very prevalent. (journal of mental science,
 october, .)
 as regards the older medical authors, schurig (spermatologia,
 , p. , and gynæcologia, , p. ) brought together
 from the literature and from his own knowledge cases of women who
 felt no pleasure in coitus, as well as of some men who had
 erections without pleasure. 
there is, however, much uncertainty as to what precisely is meant by
sexual frigidity or anesthesia. all the old medical authors carefully
distinguish between the heat of sexual desire and the actual presence of
pleasure in coitus; many modern writers also properly separate libido
from voluptas, since it is quite possible to experience sexual desires
and not to be able to obtain their gratification during sexual
intercourse, and it is possible to hold, with mantegazza, that women
naturally have stronger sexual impulses than men, but are more liable than
men to experience sexual anesthesia. but it is very much more difficult
than most people seem to suppose, to obtain quite precise and definite
data concerning the absence of either voluptas or libido in a woman.
even if we accept the statement of the woman who asserts that she has
either or both, the statement of their absence is by no means equally
conclusive and final. as even adler—who discusses this question fully and
has very pronounced opinions about it—admits, there are women who stoutly
deny the existence of any sexual feelings until such feelings are
actually discovered.[] some of the most marked characteristics of the
sexual impulse in women, moreover,—its association with modesty, its
comparatively late development, its seeming passivity, its need of
stimulation,—all combine to render difficult the final pronouncement that
a woman is sexually frigid. most significant of all in this connection is
the complexity of the sexual apparatus in women and the corresponding
psychic difficulty—based on the fundamental principle of sexual
selection—of finding a fitting mate. the fact that a woman is cold with
one man or even with a succession of men by no means shows that she is not
apt to experience sexual emotions; it merely shows that these men have not
been able to arouse them. "i recall two very striking cases," a
distinguished gynecologist, the late dr. engelmann, of boston, wrote to
me, "of very attractive young married women—one having had a child, the
other a miscarriage—who were both absolutely cold to their husbands, as
told me by both husband and wife. they could not understand desire or
passion, and would not even believe that it existed. yet, both these women
with other men developed ardent passion, all the stronger perhaps because
it had been so long latent." in such cases it is scarcely necessary to
invoke adler's theory of a morbid inhibition, or "foreign body in
consciousness," which has to be overcome. we are simply in the presence of
the natural fact that the female throughout nature not only requires much
loving, but is usually fastidious in the choice of a lover. in the human
species this natural fact is often disguised and perverted. women are not
always free to choose the man whom they would prefer as a lover, nor even
free to find out whether the man they prefer sexually fits them; they are,
moreover, very often extremely ignorant of the whole question of sex, and
the victims of the prejudice and false conventions they have been taught.
on the one hand, they are driven into an unnatural primness and austerity;
on the other hand, they rebound to an equally unnatural facility or even
promiscuity. thus it happens that the men who find that a large number of
women are not so facile as they themselves are, and as they have found a
large number of women to be, rush to the conclusion that women tend to be
"sexually anesthetic." if we wish to be accurate, it is very doubtful
whether we can assert that a woman is ever absolutely without the aptitude
for sexual satisfaction.[] she may unquestionably be without any
conscious desire for actual coitus. but if we realize to how large an
extent woman is a sexual organism, and how diffused and even unconscious
the sexual impulses may be, it becomes very difficult to assert that she
has never shown any manifestation of the sexual impulse. all we can assert
with some degree of positiveness in some cases is that she has not
manifested sexual gratification, more particularly as shown by the
occurrence of the orgasm, but that is very far indeed from warranting us
to assert that she never will experience such gratification or still less
that she is organically incapable of experiencing it.[] it is therefore
quite impossible to follow adler when he asks us to accept the existence
of a condition which he solemnly terms anæsthesia sexualis completa
idiopathica, in which there is no mechanical difficulty in the way or
psychic inhibition, but an "absolute" lack of sexual sensibility and a
complete absence of sexual inclination.[]
it is instructive to observe that adler himself knows no "pure" case of
this condition. to find such a case he has to go back nearly two centuries
to madame de warens, to whom he devotes a whole chapter. he has,
moreover, had the courage in writing this chapter to rely entirely on
rousseau's confessions, which were written nearly half a century later
than the episodes they narrated, and are therefore full of inaccuracies,
besides being founded on an imperfect and false knowledge of madame de
warens's earlier life, and written by a man who was, there can be no
doubt, not able to arouse women's passions. adler shows himself completely
ignorant of the historical investigations of de montet, mugnier, ritter,
and others which, during recent years, have thrown a flood of light on the
life and character of madame de warens, and not even acquainted with the
highly significant fact that she was hysterical.[] this is the basis of
"fact" on which we are asked to accept anæsthesia sexualis completa
idiopathica![]
"in dealing with the alleged absence of the sexual impulse," a
 well-informed medical correspondent writes from america, "much
 caution has to be used in accepting statements as to its absence,
 from the fact that most women fear by the admission to place
 themselves in an impure category. i am also satisfied that influx
 of women into universities, etc., is often due to the sexual
 impulse causing restlessness, and that this factor finds
 expression in the prurient prudishness so often presenting itself
 in such women, which interferes with coeducation. this is
 becoming especially noticeable at the university of chicago,
 where prudishness interferes with classical, biological,
 sociological, and physiological discussion in the classroom.
 there have been complaints by such women that a given professor
 has not left out embryological facts not in themselves in any way
 implying indelicacy. i have even been informed that the opinion
 is often expressed in college dormitories that embryological
 facts and discussions should be left out of a course intended for
 both sexes." such prudishness, it is scarcely necessary to
 remark, whether found in women or men, indicates a mind that has
 become morbidly sensitive to sexual impressions. for the healthy
 mind embryological and allied facts have no emotionally sexual
 significance, and there is, therefore, no need to shun them.
 kolischer, of chicago ("sexual frigidity in women," american
 journal of obstetrics, sept., ), points out that it is often
 the failure of the husband to produce sexual excitement in the
 wife which leads to voluntary repression of sexual sensation on
 her part, or an acquired sexual anesthesia. "sexual excitement,"
 he remarks, "not brought to its natural climax, the reaction
 leaves the woman in a very disagreeable condition, and repeated
 occurrences of this kind may even lead to general nervous
 disturbances. some of these unfortunate women learn to suppress
 their sexual sensation so as to avoid all these disagreeable
 sequelæ. such a state of affairs is not only unfortunate, because
 it deprives the female partner of her natural rights, but it is
 also to be deplored because it practically brings down such a
 married woman to the level of the prostitute."
 in illustration of the prevalence of inhibitions of various
 kinds, from without and from within, in suppressing or disguising
 sexual feeling in women, i may quote the following observations
 by an american lady concerning a series of women of her
 acquaintance:—
 "mrs. a. this woman is handsome and healthy. she has never had
 children, much to the grief of herself and her husband. the man
 is also handsome and attractive. mrs. a. once asked me if
 love-making between me and my husband ever originated with me. i
 replied it was as often so as not, and she said that in that
 event she could not see how passion between husband and wife
 could be regulated. when i seemed not to be ashamed of the
 matter, but rather to be positive in my views that it should be
 so, she at once tried to impress me with the fact that she did
 not wish me to think she 'could not be aroused.' this woman
 several times hinted that she had learned a great amount that was
 not edifying at boarding school, and i always felt that, with
 proper encouragement, she would have retailed suggestive stories.
 "mrs. b. this woman lives to please her husband, who is a spoiled
 man. she gave birth to a child soon after marriage, but was left
 an invalid for some years. she told me coition always hurt her,
 and she said it made her sick to see her husband nude. i was
 therefore surprised, years afterward, to hear her say, in reply
 to a remark of another person, 'yes; women are not only as
 passionate as men, i am sure they are more so.' i therefore
 questioned the lack of passion she had on former occasions
 avowed, or else felt convinced her improvement in health had made
 intercourse pleasant.
 "miss c. a teacher. she is emotional and easily becomes
 hysterical. her life has been one of self-sacrifice and her
 rearing most puritanical. she told me she thought women did not
 crave sexual satisfaction unless it had been aroused in them. i
 consider her one who physically is injured by not having it.
 "mrs. d. after being married a few years this person told me she
 thought intercourse 'horrid.' some years after this, however, she
 fell in love with a man not her husband, which caused their
 separation. she always fancied men in love with her, and she told
 me that she and her husband tried to live without intercourse,
 fearing more children, but they could not do it; she also told of
 trying to refrain, for the same purpose, until safe parts of the
 menstrual month, but that 'was just the time she cared least for
 it.' these remarks made me doubt the sincerity of the first.
 "mrs. e. said she enjoyed intercourse as well as her husband, and
 she 'didn't see why she should not say so.' this same woman,
 whether using a current phrase or not, afterward said her husband
 'did not bother her very often.'
 "mrs. f., the mother of several children, was married to a man
 she neither loved nor respected, but she said that when a strange
 man touched her it made her tremble all over.
 "mrs. g., the mother of many children, divorced on account of the
 dissipation, drinking and otherwise, of her husband. she is of
 the creole type, but large and almost repulsive. she is a
 brilliant talker and she supports herself by writing. she has
 fallen in love with a number of young men, 'wildly, madly,
 passionately,' as one of them told me, and i am sure she suffers
 greatly from the lack of satisfaction. she would no doubt procure
 it if it were possible.
 "i believe," the writer concludes, "women are as passionate as
 men, but the enforced restraint of years possibly smothers it.
 the fear of having children and the methods to prevent conception
 are, i am sure, potent factors in the injury to the emotions of
 married women. perhaps the lack of intercourse acts less
 disastrously upon a woman because of the renewed feeling which
 comes after each menstrual period."
 as bearing on the causes which have led to the disguise and
 misinterpretation of the sexual impulse in women i may quote the
 following communication from another lady:—
 "i do think the coldness of women has been greatly exaggerated.
 men's theoretically ideal woman (though they don't care so much
 about it in practice) is passionless, and women are afraid to
 admit that they have any desire for sexual pleasure. rousseau,
 who was not very straight-laced, excuses the conduct of madame de
 warens on the ground that it was not the result of passion: an
 aggravation rather than a palliation of the offense, if society
 viewed it from the point of view of any other fault. even in the
 modern novels written by the 'new woman' the longing for
 maternity, always an honorable sentiment, is dragged in to veil
 the so-called 'lower' desire. that some women, at any rate, have
 very strong passions and that great suffering is entailed by
 their repression is not, i am sure, sufficiently recognized, even
 by women themselves.
 "besides the 'passionless ideal' which checks their sincerity,
 there are many causes which serve to disguise a woman's feelings
 to herself and make her seem to herself colder than she really
 is. briefly these are:—
 ". unrecognized disease of the reproductive organs, especially
 after the birth of children. a friend of mine lamented to me her
 inability to feel pleasure, though she had done so before the
 birth of her child, then  years old. with considerable
 difficulty i persuaded her to see a doctor, who told her all the
 reproductive organs were seriously congested; so that for three
 years she had lived in ignorance and regret for her husband's
 sake and her own.
 ". the dread of recommencing, once having suffered them, all the
 pains and discomforts of child-bearing.
 ". even when precautions are taken, much bother and anxiety is
 involved, which has a very dampening effect on excitement.
 ". the fact that men will never take any trouble to find out
 what specially excites a woman. a woman, as a rule, is at some
 pains to find out the little things which particularly affect the
 man she loves,—it may be a trick of speech, a rose in her hair,
 or what not,—and she makes use of her knowledge. but do you know
 one man who will take the same trouble? (it is difficult to
 specify, as what pleases one person may not another. i find that
 the things that affect me personally are the following: [a]
 admiration for a man's mental capacity will translate itself
 sometimes into direct physical excitement. [b] scents of white
 flowers, like tuberose or syringa. [c] the sight of fireflies.
 [d] the idea or the reality of suspension. [e] occasionally
 absolute passivity.)
 ". the fact that many women satisfy their husbands when
 themselves disinclined. this is like eating jam when one does not
 fancy it, and has a similar effect. it is a great mistake, in my
 opinion, to do so, except very rarely. a man, though perhaps
 cross at the time, prefers, i believe, to gratify himself a few
 times, when the woman also enjoys it, to many times when she does
 not.
 ". the masochistic tendency of women, or their desire for
 subjection to the man they love. i believe no point in the whole
 question is more misunderstood than this. nearly every man
 imagines that to secure a woman's love and respect he must give
 her her own way in small things, and compel her obedience in
 great ones. every man who desires success with a woman should
 exactly reverse that theory." 
when we are faced by these various and often conflicting statements of
opinion it seems necessary to obtain, if possible, a definite basis of
objective fact. it would be fairly obvious in any case, and it becomes
unquestionable in view of the statements i have brought together, that the
best-informed and most sagacious clinical observers, when giving an
opinion on a very difficult and elusive subject which they have not
studied with any attention and method, are liable to make unguarded
assertions; sometimes, also, they become the victims of ethical or
pseudoethical prejudices, so as to be most easily influenced by that class
of cases which happens to fit in best with their prepossessions.[] in
order to reach any conclusions on a reasonable basis it is necessary to
take a series of unselected individuals and to ascertain carefully the
condition of the sexual impulse in each.
at present, however, this is extremely difficult to do at all
satisfactorily, and quite impossible, indeed, to do in a manner likely to
yield absolutely unimpeachable results. nevertheless, a few series of
observations have been made. thus, dr. harry campbell[] records the
result of an investigation, carried on in his hospital practice, of 
married women of the poorer class; they were not patients, but ordinary,
healthy working-class women, and the inquiry was not made directly, but of
the husbands, who were patients. sexual instinct was said to be present in
 cases before marriage, and absent in ; in  of the  it never
appeared at all; so that it altogether appeared in , or in the ratio of
something over  per cent. among the  in whom it existed before
marriage it was said to have appeared in most with puberty; in , however,
a few years before puberty, and in  a few years later. in  of those in
whom it appeared before puberty, menstruation began late; in the third it
rose almost to nymphomania on the day preceding the first menstruation.
in nearly all the cases desire was said to be stronger in the husband than
in the wife; when it was stronger in the wife, the husband was
exceptionally indifferent. of the  in whom desire was absent after
marriage,  had been married for a period under two years, and campbell
remarks that it would be wrong to conclude that it would never develop in
these cases, for in this group of cases the appearance of sexual instinct
was sometimes a matter of days, sometimes of years, after the date of
marriage. in two-thirds of the cases there was a diminution of desire,
usually gradual, at the climacteric; in the remaining third there was
either no change or exaltation of desire. the most important general
result, campbell concludes, is that "the sexual instinct is very much less
intense in woman than in man," and to this he elsewhere adds a corollary
that "the sexual instinct in the civilized woman is, i believe, tending to
atrophy."
an eminent gynecologist, the late dr. matthews duncan, has (in his work on
sterility in women) presented a table which, although foreign to this
subject, has a certain bearing on the matter. matthews duncan, believing
that the absence of sexual desire and of sexual pleasure in coitus are
powerful influences working for sterility, noted their presence or absence
in a number of cases, and found that, among  sterile women between the
ages of  and , , or  per cent., acknowledged the presence of
sexual desire; and among  sterile women (mostly the same cases), ,
or  per cent., acknowledged the presence of sexual pleasure in coitus.
omitting the cases over  years of age, which were comparatively few, the
largest proportion of affirmative answers, both as regards sexual pleasure
and sexual desire, was from between  and  years of age. matthews
duncan assumes that the absence of sexual desire and sexual pleasure in
women is thoroughly abnormal.[] 
an english non-medical author, in the course of a thoughtful discussion of
sexual phenomena, revealing considerable knowledge and observation,[]
has devoted a chapter to this subject in another of its aspects. without
attempting to ascertain the normal strength of the sexual instinct in
women, he briefly describes  cases of "sexual anesthesia" in women (in 
or  of which there appears, however, to be an element of latent
homosexuality) from among the circle of his own friends. this author
concludes that sexual coldness is very common among english women, and
that it involves questions of great social and ethical importance.
i have not met with any series of observations made among
 seemingly healthy and normal women in other countries; there are,
 however, various series of somewhat abnormal cases in which the
 point was noted, and the results are not uninstructive. thus, in
 vienna at krafft-ebing's psychiatric clinic, gattel (ueber die
 sexuellen ursachen der neurasthenie und angstneurose, )
 carefully investigated the cases of  women, mostly at the
 height of sexual life,—i.e., between  and ,—who were
 suffering from slight nervous disorders, especially neurasthenia
 and mild hysteria, but none of them from grave nervous or other
 disease. of these , at least  had masturbated, at one time or
 another, either before or after marriage, in order to obtain
 relief of sexual feelings. in the case of  it is stated that
 they do not obtain sexual satisfaction in marriage, but in these
 cases only coitus interruptus is practised, and the fact that
 the absence of sexual satisfaction was complained of seems to
 indicate an aptitude for experiencing it. these  cases can
 therefore scarcely be regarded as exceptions. in all the other
 cases sexual desire, sexual excitement, or sexual satisfaction is
 always clearly indicated, and in a considerable proportion of
 cases it is noted that the sexual impulse is very strongly
 developed. this series is valuable, since the facts of the sexual
 life are, as far as possible, recorded with much precision. the
 significance of the facts varies, however, according to the view
 taken as to the causation of neurasthenia and allied conditions
 of slight nervous disorder. gattel argues that sexual
 irregularities are a peculiarly fruitful, if not invariable,
 source of such disorders; according to the more commonly accepted
 view this is not so. if we accept the more usual view, these
 women fairly correspond to average women of lower class; if,
 however, we accept gattel's view, they may possess the sexual
 instinct in a more marked degree than average women.
 in a series of  german women in whom the operation of removing
 the ovaries was performed, pfister usually noted briefly in what
 way the sexual impulse was affected by the operation ("die
 wirkung der castration auf den weiblichen organismus," archiv
 für gynäkologie, , p. ). in  cases (all but 
 unmarried) the presence of sexual desire at any time was denied,
 and  of these expressed disgust of sexual matters. in  cases
 the point is left doubtful. in all the other cases sexual desire
 had once been present, and in  or  cases it was acknowledged to
 be so strong as to approach nymphomania. in about  of these
 (not including any in which it was previously very strong) it was
 extinguished by castration, in a few others it was diminished,
 and in the rest unaffected. thus, when we exclude the  cases in
 which the point was not apparently investigated, and the 
 unmarried women, in whom it may have been latent or unavowed, we
 find that, of  married women,  women acknowledged the
 existence of sexual desire and only  denied it.
 schröter, again in germany, has investigated the manifestations
 of the sexual impulse among  insane women in the asylum at
 eichberg in rheingau. ("wird bei jungen unverheiratheten zur zeit
 der menstruation stärkere sexuelle erregheit beobaehtet?"
 allgemeine zeitschrift für psychiatrie, vol. lvi, , pp.
 -.) there is no reason to suppose that the insane represent
 a class of the community specially liable to sexual emotion,
 although its manifestations may become unrestrained and
 conspicuous under the influence of insanity; and at the same
 time, while the appearance of such manifestations is evidence of
 the aptitude for sexual emotions, their absence may be only due
 to disease, seclusion, or to an intact power of self-control.
 of the  women,  were married and  unmarried. schröter
 divided them into four groups: () those below ; () those
 between  and ; () those between  and ; () those from 
 to the menopause. the patients included persons from the lowest
 class of the population, and only about a quarter of them could
 fairly be regarded as curable. thus the manifestations of
 sexuality were diminished, for with advance of mental disease
 sexual manifestations cease to appear. schröter only counted
 those cases in which the sexual manifestations were decided and
 fairly constant at the menstrual epoch; if not visibly
 manifested, sexual feeling was not taken into account. sexual
 phenomena accompanied the entry of the menstrual epoch in 
 cases: i.e., in  (or in the proportion of  per cent.) of
 the first group, consisting entirely of unmarried women; in 
 (or  per cent.) of the second group; in  (or  per cent.) of
 the third group; and in  (or  per cent.) of the fourth group.
 it was found that  patients showed no sexual phenomena at any
 time, while  showed sexual phenomena frequently between the
 menstrual epochs, but only in a slight degree, and not at all
 during the period. at all ages sexual manifestations were more
 prevalent among the unmarried than among the married, though this
 difference became regularly and progressively less with increase
 in age.
 schröter inclines to think that sexual excitement is commoner
 among insane women belonging to the lower social classes than in
 those belonging to the better classes. among  women in a
 private asylum, only  (. per cent.) showed very marked and
 constant excitement at menstrual periods. he points out, however,
 that this may be due to a greater ability to restrain the
 manifestations of feeling.
 there is some interest in schröter's results, though they cannot
 be put on a line with inquiries made among the sane; they only
 represent the prevalence of the grossest and strongest sexual
 manifestations when freed from the restraints of sanity. 
as a slight contribution toward the question, i have selected a series of
 cases of women of whose sexual development i possess precise
information, with the following results: in  cases distinct sexual
feeling was experienced spontaneously at the age of  and , but the
complete orgasm only occurred some years after puberty; in  cases sexual
feeling appeared spontaneously for a few months to a year after the
appearance of menstruation, which began between  and  years of age,
usually at ; in another case sexual feeling first appeared shortly after
menstruation began, but not spontaneously, being called out by a lover's
advances; in the remaining  cases sexual emotion never became definite
and conscious until adult life (the ages being , , , ), in  cases
through being made love to, and in  cases through self-manipulation out
of accident or curiosity. it is noteworthy that the sexual feelings first
developed in adult life were usually as strong as those arising at
puberty. it may be added that, of these  women,  had at some time or
another masturbated ( shortly after puberty,  in adult life), but,
except in  case, rarely and at intervals. all belong to the middle class,
 or  leading easy, though not idle, lives, while all the others are
engaged in professional or other avocations often involving severe labor.
they differ widely in character and mental ability; but, while  or 
might be regarded as slightly abnormal, they are all fairly healthy.
i am inclined to believe that the experiences of the foregoing group are
fairly typical of the social class to which they belong. i may, however,
bring forward another series of  women, varying in age from  to 
(with  exceptions all over ), and in every respect comparable with the
smaller group, but concerning whom my knowledge, though reliable, is
usually less precise and detailed. in this group  state that they have
never experienced sexual emotion, these being all unmarried and leading
strictly chaste lives; in  cases the sexual impulse may be described as
strong, or is so considered by the subject herself; in  cases it is only
moderate; in  it is very slight when evoked, and with difficulty evoked,
in  of these only appearing two years after marriage, in another the
exhaustion and worry of household cares being assigned for its comparative
absence. it is noteworthy that all the more highly intelligent, energetic
women in the series appear in the group of those with strong sexual
emotions, and also that severe mental and physical labor, even when
cultivated for this purpose, has usually had little or no influence in
relieving sexual emotion.
an american physician in the state of connecticut sends me the
 following notes concerning a series of  married women, taken,
 as they occurred, in obstetric practice. they are in every way
 respectable and moral women:—
 "mrs. a. says that her husband does not give her sufficient
 sexual attention, as he fears they will have more children than
 he can properly care for. mrs. b. always enjoys intercourse; so
 does mrs. c. mrs. d. is easily excited and very fond of sexual
 attention. mrs. e. likes intercourse if her husband is careful
 not to hurt her. mrs. f. never had any sexual desire until after
 second marriage, but it is now very urgent at times. mrs. g. is
 not easily excited, but has never objected to her husband's
 attention. mrs. h. would prefer to have her husband exhibit more
 attention. mrs. i. never refused her husband, but he does not
 trouble her much. mrs. j. thinks that three or four times a week
 is satisfactory, but would not object to nightly intercourse.
 mrs. k. does not think that her husband could give her more than
 she would like. mrs. l. would prefer to live with a woman if it
 were not for sexual intercourse. mrs. m., aged , says that her
 husband, aged , insists upon intercourse three times every
 night, and that he keeps her tired and disgusted. she each time
 has at least one orgasm, and would not object to reasonable
 attention." 
it may be remarked that, while these results in english women of the
middle class are in fair agreement with the german and austrian
observations i have quoted, they differ from campbell's results among
women of the working class in london. this discrepancy is, perhaps, not
difficult to explain. while the conditions of upper-class life may
possibly be peculiarly favorable to the development of the sexual
emotions, among the working classes in london, where the stress of the
struggle for existence under bad hygienic conditions is so severe, they
may be peculiarly unfavorable. it is thus possible that there really are a
smaller number of women experiencing sexual emotion among the class dealt
with by campbell than among the class to which my series belong.[]
a more serious consideration is the method of investigation. a working
man, who is perhaps unintelligent outside his own work, and in many cases
married to a woman who is superior in refinement, may possibly be able to
arouse his wife's sexual emotions, and also able to ascertain what those
emotions are, and be willing to answer questions truthfully on this point,
to the best of his ability, but he is by no means a witness whose evidence
is final. while, however, campbell's facts may not be quite
unquestionable, i am inclined to agree with his conclusion, and
mantegazza's, that there is a very great range of variation in this
matter, and that there is no age at which the sexual impulse in women may
not appear. a lady who has received the confidence of very many women
tells me that she has never found a woman who was without sexual feeling.
i should myself be inclined to say that it is extremely difficult to find
a woman who is without the aptitude for sexual emotion, although a great
variety of circumstances may hinder, temporarily or permanently, the
development of this latent aptitude. in other words, while the latent
sexual aptitude may always be present, the sexual impulse is liable to be
defective and the aptitude to remain latent, with consequent deficiency of
sexual emotion, and absence of sexual satisfaction.
this is not only indicated by the considerable proportion of my
 cases in which there is only moderate or slight sexual feeling. i
 have ample evidence that in many cases the element of pain, which
 may almost be said to be normal in the establishment of the
 sexual function, is never merged, as it normally is, in
 pleasurable sensations on the full establishment of sexual
 relationships. sometimes, no doubt, this may be due to
 dyspareunia. sometimes there may be an absolute sexual
 anesthesia, whether of congenital or hysterical origin. i have
 been told of the case of a married lady who has never been able
 to obtain sexual pleasure, although she has had relations with
 several men, partly to try if she could obtain the experience,
 and partly to please them; the very fact that the motives for
 sexual relationships arose from no stronger impulse itself
 indicates a congenital defect on the psychic as well as on the
 physical side. but, as a rule, the sexual anesthesia involved is
 not absolute, but lies in a disinclination to the sexual act due
 to various causes, in a defect of strong sexual impulse, and an
 inaptitude for the sexual orgasm.
 i am indebted to a lady who has written largely on the woman
 question, and is herself the mother of a numerous family, for
 several letters in regard to the prevalence among women of sexual
 coldness, a condition which she regards as by no means to be
 regretted. she considers that in all her own children the sexual
 impulse is very slightly developed, the boys being indifferent to
 women, the girls cold toward men and with no desire to marry,
 though all are intelligent and affectionate, the girls showing a
 very delicate and refined kind of beauty. (a large selection of
 photographs accompanied this communication.) something of the
 same tendency is said to mark the stocks from which this family
 springs, and they are said to be notable for their longevity,
 healthiness, and disinclination for excesses of all kinds. it is
 scarcely necessary to remark that a mother, however highly
 intelligent, is by no means an infallible judge as to the
 presence or absence in her children of so shy, subtle, and
 elusive an impulse as that of sex. at the same time i am by no
 means disposed to question the existence in individuals, and even
 in families or stocks, of a relatively weak sexual impulse,
 which, while still enabling procreation to take place, is
 accompanied by no strong attraction to the opposite sex and no
 marked inclination for marriage. (adler, op. cit., p. ,
 found such a condition transmitted from mother to daughter.) such
 persons often possess a delicate type of beauty. even, however,
 when the health is good there seems usually to be a certain lack
 of vitality. 
it seems to me that a state of sexual anesthesia, relative or absolute,
cannot be considered as anything but abnormal. to take even the lowest
ground, the satisfaction of the reproductive function ought to be at least
as gratifying as the evacuation of the bowels or bladder; while, if we
take, as we certainly must, higher ground than this, an act which is at
once the supreme fact and symbol of love and the supreme creative act
cannot under normal conditions be other than the most pleasurable of all
acts, or it would stand in violent opposition to all that we find in
nature.
how natural the sexual impulse is in women, whatever difficulties may
arise in regard to its complete gratification, is clearly seen when we
come to consider the frequency with which in young women we witness its
more or less instinctive manifestations. such manifestations are liable to
occur in a specially marked manner in the years immediately following the
establishment of puberty, and are the more impressive when we remember the
comparatively passive part played by the female generally in the game of
courtship, and the immense social force working on women to compel them to
even an unnatural extension of that passive part. the manifestations to
which i allude not only occur with most frequency in young girls, but,
contrary to the common belief, they seem to occur chiefly in innocent and
unperverted girls. the more vicious are skillful enough to avoid the
necessity for any such open manifestations. we have to bear this in mind
when confronted by flagrant sexual phenomena in young girls.
"a young girl," says hammer ("ueber die sinnlichkeit gesunder
 jungfrauen," die neue generation, aug., ), "who has not
 previously adopted any method of self-gratification experiences
 at the beginning of puberty, about the time of the first
 menstruation and the sprouting of the pubic hair, in the absence
 of all stimulation by a man, spontaneous sexual tendencies of
 both local and psychic nature. on the psychic side there is a
 feeling of emptiness and dissatisfaction, a need of subjection
 and of serving, and, if the opportunity has so far been absent,
 the craving to see masculine nudity and to learn the facts of
 procreation. side by side with these wishes, there are at the
 same time inhibitory desires, such as the wish to keep herself
 pure, either for a man whom she represents to herself as the
 'ideal,' or for her parents, who must not be worried, or as a
 member of a chosen people in whose spirit she must live and die,
 or out of love to jesus or to some saint. on the physical side,
 there is the feeling of fresh power and energy, of enterprise;
 the agreeable tension of the genital regions, which easily become
 moist. then there is the feeling of overirritability and excess
 of tension, and the need of relieving the tension through
 pinches, blows, tight lacing, and so forth. if the girl remains
 innocent of sex satisfaction, there takes place during sleep, at
 regular intervals of about three days, more or less the relief
 and emission of the tense glands, not corresponding to the
 menstrual period, but to intercourse, and serving better than
 sexual instruction to represent to her the phenomena of
 intercourse. if at this period actual intercourse takes place, it
 is, as a rule, free from pain, as also is the introduction of the
 speculum. without any seduction from without, the chaste girl now
 frequently finds a way to relieve the excessive tension without
 the aid of a man. it is self-abuse that leads gradually to the
 production of pain in defloration. the menstrual phenomena
 correspond to birth; self-gratification or relief during sleep to
 intercourse." this statement of the matter is somewhat too
 absolute and unqualified. under the artificial conditions of
 civilization the inhibitory influences of training speedily work
 powerfully, and more or less successfully, in banishing sexual
 phenomena into the subconscious, sometimes to work all the
 mischief there which freud attributes to them. it must also be
 said (as i have pointed out in the discussion of auto-erotism in
 another volume) that sexual dreams seem to be the exception
 rather than the rule in innocent girls. it remains true that
 sexual phenomena in girls at puberty must not be regarded as
 morbid or unnatural. there is also very good reason for believing
 (even apart from the testimony of so experienced a gynecologist
 as hammer) that on the physical side sexual processes tend to be
 accomplished with a facility that is often lost in later years
 with prolonged chastity. this is true alike of intercourse and of
 childbirth. (see vol. vi of these studies, ch. xii.) 
even, however, in the case of adults the active part played by women in
real life in matters of love by no means corresponds to the conventional
ideas on these subjects. no doubt nearly every woman receives her sexual
initiation from an older and more experienced man. but, on the other hand,
nearly every man receives his first initiation through the active and
designed steps taken by an older and more experienced woman. it is too
often forgotten by those who write on these subjects that the man who
seduces a woman has usually himself in the first place been "seduced" by a
woman.
a well-known physician in chicago tells me that on making inquiry
 of  middle-class married men in succession be found that  had
 been first seduced by a woman. an officer in the indian medical
 service writes to me as follows: "once at a club in burma we were
 some  at table and the subject of first intercourse came up.
 all had been led astray by servants save , whom their sisters'
 governesses had initiated. we were all men in the 'service,' so
 the facts may be taken to be typical of what occurs in our
 stratum of society. all had had sexual relations with respectable
 unmarried girls, and most with the wives of men known to their
 fathers, in some instances these being old enough to be their
 lovers' mothers. apparently up to the age of  none had dared to
 make the first advances, yet from the age of  onward all had
 had ample opportunity for gratifying their sexual instincts with
 women. though all had been to public schools where homosexuality
 was known to occur, yet (as i can assert from intimate knowledge)
 none had given signs of inversion or perversion in burma."
 in russia, tchlenoff, investigating the sexual life of over 
 moscow students of upper and middle class (archives
 d'anthropologie criminelle, oct.-nov., ), found that in half
 of them the first coitus took place between  and  years of
 age; in  per cent, with prostitutes, in  per cent, with
 servants, and in  per cent, with married women. in  per cent,
 the young man declared that he had taken the initiative, in 
 per cent, the women took it, and in  per cent, the incitement
 came from a comrade.
 the histories i have recorded in appendix b (as well as in the
 two following volumes of these studies) very well illustrate
 the tendency of young girls to manifest sexual impulses when
 freed from the constraint which they feel in the presence of
 adult men and from the fear of consequences. these histories show
 especially how very frequently nurse-maids and servant-girls
 effect the sexual initiation of the young boys intrusted to them.
 how common this impulse is among adolescent girls of low social
 class is indicated by the fact that certainly the majority of
 middle-class men can recall instances from their own childhood.
 (i here leave out of account the widespread practice among nurses
 of soothing very young children in their charge by manipulating
 the sexual organs.)
 a medical correspondent, in emphasizing this point, writes that
 "many boys will tell you that, if a nurse-girl is allowed to
 sleep in the same room with them, she will attempt sexual
 manipulations. either the girl gets into bed with the boy and
 pulling him on to her tickles the penis and inserts it into the
 vulva, making the boy imitate sexual movements, or she simply
 masturbates the child, to get him excited and interested, often
 showing him the female sexual opening in herself or in his
 sisters, teaching him to finger it. in fact, a nurse-girl may
 ruin a boy, chiefly, i think, because she has been brought up to
 regard the sexual organs as a mystery, and is in utter ignorance
 about them. she thus takes the opportunity of investigating the
 boy's penis to find out how it works, etc., in order to satisfy
 her curiosity. i know of a case in which a nurse in a fashionable
 london square garden used to collect all the boys and girls
 (gentlemen's children) in a summer-house when it grew dark, and,
 turning up her petticoats, invite all the boys to look at and
 feel her vulva, and also incite the older boys of  or  to
 have coitus with her. girls are afraid of pregnancy, so do not
 allow an adult penis to operate. i think people should take on a
 far higher class of nurses, than they do."
 "children ought never to be allowed, under any circumstances
 whatever," wrote lawson tait (diseases of women, , p. ),
 "to sleep with servants. in every instance where i have found a
 number of children affected [by masturbation] the contagion has
 been traced to a servant." freud has found (neurologisches
 centralblatt, no. , ) that in cases of severe youthful
 hysteria the starting point may frequently be traced to sexual
 manipulations by servants, nurse-girls, and governesses.
 "when i was about  or ," a friend writes, "a servant-maid of
 our family, who used to carry the candle out of my bedroom, often
 drew down the bedclothes and inspected my organs. one night she
 put the penis in her mouth. when i asked her why she did it her
 answer was that 'sucking a boy's little dangle' cured her of
 pains in her stomach. she said that she had done it to other
 little boys, and declared that she liked doing it. this girl was
 about ; she had lately been 'converted.' another maid in our
 family used to kiss me warmly on the naked abdomen when i was a
 small boy. but she never did more than that. i have heard of
 various instances of servant-girls tampering with boys before
 puberty, exciting the penis to premature erection by
 manipulation, suction, and contact with their own parts." such
 overstimulation must necessarily in some cases have an injurious
 influence on the boy's immature nervous system. thus, hutchinson
 (archives of surgery, vol. iv, p. ) describes a case of
 amblyopia in a boy, developing after he had been placed to sleep
 in a servant-girl's room.
 moll (konträre sexualempfindung, third edition, , p. )
 refers to the frequency with which servant-girls (between the
 ages of  and ) carry on sexual practices with young boys
 (between  and ) committed to their care. more than a century
 earlier tissot, in his famous work on onanism, referred to the
 frequency with which servant-girls corrupt boys by teaching them
 to masturbate; and still earlier, in england, the author of
 onania gave many such cases. we may, indeed, go back to the
 time of rabelais, who (as dr. kiernan reminds me) represents the
 governesses of gargantua, when he was a child, as taking pleasure
 in playing with his penis till it became wet, and joking with
 each other about it. (gargantua, book i, chapter ix.)
 the prevalence of such manifestations among servant-girls
 witnesses to their prevalence among lower-class girls generally.
 in judging such acts, even when they seem to be very deliberate,
 it is important to remember that at this age unreasoning instinct
 plays a very large part in the manifestations of the sexual
 impulse. this is clearly indicated by the phenomena observed in
 the insane. thus, as we have seen (page ), schröter has found
 that, among girls of low social class under  years of age,
 spontaneous periodical sexual manifestations at menstrual epochs
 occurred in as large a proportion as  per cent. among girls of
 better social position these impulses are inhibited, or at all
 events modified, by good taste or good feeling, the influences of
 tradition or education; it is only to the latter that children
 should be intrusted.
 hoche mentions a case in which a man was accused of repeatedly
 exhibiting his sexual organs to the servant-girl at a house; she
 enjoyed the spectacle (neurologisches centralblatt, , no.
 ). it may well be that in some cases of self-exhibition the
 offender has good reason, on the ground of previous experience,
 for thinking that he is giving pleasure. "when we used to go to
 bathe while i was at school," writes a correspondent, "girls from
 a poor quarter of the lower town (some quite ) often followed
 us and stood to watch about a hundred yards from the river. they
 used to 'giggle' and 'pass remarks.' i have seen girls of this
 class peeping through chinks of a palisade around a bathing-place
 on the thames." a correspondent who has given special attention
 to the point tells me of the great interest displayed by young
 girls of the people in italy in the sexual organs of men.
 curiosity—whether in the form of the desire for knowledge or the
 desire for sensation—is, of course, not confined to young girls
 and women of lower social strata, though in them it is less often
 restrained by motives of self-respect and good feeling. "at the
 age of ," writes a correspondent, "i was one day playing in a
 spare room with a girl of about  or . she gave me a
 penholder, and, crouching upon her hands and knees, with her
 posterior toward me, invited me to introduce the instrument into
 the vulva. this was the first time i had seen the female parts,
 and, as i appeared to be somewhat repelled, she coaxed me to
 comply with her desire. i did as she directed, and she said that
 it gave her pleasure. several times after i repeated the same act
 at her request. a friend tells me that when he was  a girl of
  asked him to lace up her boots. while he was kneeling at her
 feet his hand touched her ankle. she asked him to put his hand
 higher, and repeated 'higher, higher,' till he touched the
 pudenda, and finally, at her request, put his finger into the
 vestibule. this girl was very handsome and amiable, and a
 favorite of the boy's mother. no one suspected this propensity."
 again, a correspondent (a man of science) tells me of a friend
 who lately, when dining out, met a girl, the daughter of a
 country vicar; he was not specially attracted to her and paid her
 no special attention. "a few days afterward he was astonished to
 receive a call from her one afternoon (though his address is not
 discoverable from any recognized source). she sat down as near to
 him as she could, and rested her hand on his thigh, etc., while
 talking on different subjects and drinking tea. then without any
 verbal prelude she asked him to have connection with her. though
 not exactly a puritan, he is not the man to jump at such an offer
 from a woman he is not in love with, so, after ascertaining that
 the girl was virgo intacta, he declined and she went away. a
 fortnight or so later he received a letter from her in the
 country, making no reference to what had passed, but giving an
 account of her work with her sunday-school class. he did not
 reply, and then came a curt note asking him to return her letter.
 my friend feels sure she was devoted to auto-erotic performances,
 but, having become attracted to him, came to the conclusion she
 would like to try normal intercourse."
 wolbarst, studying the prevalence of gonorrhea among boys in new
 york (especially, it would appear, in quarters where the
 foreign-born elements—mainly russian jew and south italian—are
 large), states: "in my study of this subject there have been
 observed  cases of gonorrheal urethritis, in boys aged,
 respectively, , , and  years, which were acquired in the
 usual manner, from girls ranging between  and  years of age.
 in each case, according to the story told by the victim, the girl
 made the first advances, and in i case, that of the -year-old
 boy, the act was consummated in the form of an assault, by a
 girl  years old, in which the child was threatened with injury
 unless he performed his part." (a. l. wolbarst, journal of the
 american medical association, sept. , .) in a further
 series of cases (medical record, oct. , ) wolbarst
 obtained similar results, though he recognizes also the frequency
 of precocious sexuality in the young boys themselves.
 gibb states, concerning assaults on children by women: "it is
 undeniably true that they occur much more frequently than is
 generally supposed, although but few of the cases are brought to
 public notice, owing to the difficulty of proving the charge."
 (w. t. gibb, article "indecent assaults upon children," in a.
 mclane hamilton's system of legal medicine, vol. i, p. .)
 gibb's opinion carries weight, since he is medical adviser for
 the new york society for the protection of children, and
 compelled to sift the evidence carefully in such cases.
 it should be mentioned that, while a sexual curiosity exercised
 on younger children is, in girls about the age of puberty, an
 ill-regulated, but scarcely morbid, manifestation, in older women
 it may be of pathological origin. thus, kisch records the case of
 a refined and educated lady of  who had been married for nine
 years, but had never experienced sexual pleasure in coitus. for a
 long time past, however, she had felt a strong desire to play
 with the genital organs of children of either sex, a proceeding
 which gave her sexual pleasure. she sought to resist this impulse
 as much as possible, but during menstruation it was often
 irresistible. examination showed an enlarged and retroflexed
 uterus and anesthesia of vagina. (kisch, die sterilität des
 weibes, , p. .) the psychological mechanism by which an
 anesthetic vagina leads to a feeling of repulsion for normal
 coitus and normal sexual organs, and directs the sexual feelings
 toward more infantile forms of sexuality, is here not difficult
 to trace.
 it is not often that the sexual attempts of girls and young women
 on boys—notwithstanding their undoubted frequency—become of
 medico-legal interest. in france in the course of ten years (
 to ) only  women, who were mostly between  and  years
 of age, were actually convicted of sexual attempts on children
 below . (paul bernard, "viols et attentats a la pudeur,"
 archives de l'anthropologie criminelle, .) lop ("attentats
 à la pudeur commis par des femmes sur des petits enfants," id.,
 aug., ) brings together a number of cases chiefly committed
 by girls between the ages of  and . in england such
 accusations against a young woman or girl may easily be
 circumvented. if she is under  she is protected by the criminal
 law amendment act and cannot be punished. in any case, when found
 out, she can always easily bring the sympathy to her side by
 declaring that she is not the aggressor, but the victim. cases of
 violent sexual assault upon girls, lawson tait remarks, while
 they undoubtedly do occur, are very much rarer than the frequency
 with which the charge is made would lead us to suspect. at one
 time, by arrangement with the authority,  such charges at
 birmingham were consecutively brought before lawson tait. these
 charges were all made under the criminal law amendment act. in
 only  of these cases was he able to advise prosecution, in all
 of which cases conviction was obtained. in  other cases in which
 the police decided to prosecute there was either no conviction or
 a very light sentence. in at least  cases the charge was
 clearly trumped up. the average age of these girls was . "there
 is not a piece of sexual argot that ever had before reached my
 ears," remarks mr. tait, "but was used by these children in the
 descriptions given by them of what had been done to them; and
 they introduced, in addition, quite a new vocabulary on the
 subject. the minute and detailed descriptions of the sexual act
 given by chits of  and  would do credit to the pages of
 mirabeau. at first sight it is a puzzle to see how children so
 young obtained their information." "about the use of the word
 'seduced,'" the same writer remarks, "i wish to say that the
 class of women from amongst whom the great bulk of these cases
 are drawn seem to use it in a sense altogether different from
 that generally employed. it is not with them a process in which
 male villainy succeeds by various arts in overcoming female
 virtue and reluctance, but simply a date at which an incident in
 their lives occurs for the first time; and, according to their
 use of the phrase, the ancient legend of the sacred scriptures,
 had it ended in the more ordinary and usual way by the virtue of
 joseph yielding to the temptation offered, would have to read as
 a record of the seduction of mrs. potiphar."
 with reference to lawson tait's observation that violent assaults
 on women, while they do occur, are very much rarer than the
 frequency with which such charges are made would lead us to
 believe, it may be remarked that many medico-legal authorities
 are of the same opinion. (see, e.g., g. vivian poore's
 treatise on medical jurisprudence, , p. . this writer
 also remarks: "i hold very strongly that a woman may rape a man
 as much as a man may rape a woman.") there can be little doubt
 that the plea of force is very frequently seized on by women as
 the easiest available weapon of defense when her connection with
 a man has been revealed. she has been so permeated by the current
 notion that no "respectable" woman can possibly have any sexual
 impulses of her own to gratify that, in order to screen what she
 feels to be regarded as an utterly shameful and wicked, as well
 as foolish, act, she declares it never took place by her own will
 at all. "now, i ask you, gentlemen," i once heard an experienced
 counsel address the jury in a criminal case, "as men of the
 world, have you ever known or heard of a woman, a single woman,
 confess that she had had sexual connection and not declare that
 force had been used to compel her to such connection?" the
 statement is a little sweeping, but in this matter there is some
 element of truth in the "man of the world's" opinion. one may
 refer to the story (told by etienne de bourbon, by francisco de
 osuna in a religious work, and by cervantes in don quixote,
 part ii, ch. xlv) concerning a magistrate who, when a girl came
 before him to complain of rape, ordered the accused young man
 either to marry her or pay her a sum of money. the fine was paid,
 and the magistrate then told the man to follow the girl and take
 the money from her by force; the man obeyed, but the girl
 defended herself so energetically that he could not secure the
 money. then the judge, calling the parties before him again,
 ordered the fine to be returned: "had you defended your chastity
 as well as you have defended your money it could not have been
 taken away from you." in most cases of "rape," in the case of
 adults, there has probably been some degree of consent, though
 that partial assent may have been basely secured by an appeal to
 the lower nervous centers alone, with no participation of the
 intelligence and will. freud (zur psychopathologie des
 alltagslebens, p. ) considers that on this ground the judge's
 decision in don quixote is "psychologically unjust," because in
 such a case the woman's strength is paralyzed by the fact that an
 unconscious instinct in herself takes her assailant's part
 against her own conscious resistance. but it must be remembered
 that the factor of instinct plays a large part even when no
 violence is attempted. 
such facts and considerations as these tend to show that the sexual
impulse is by no means so weak in women as many would lead us to think. it
would appear that, whereas in earlier ages there was generally a tendency
to credit women with an unduly large share of the sexual impulse, there is
now a tendency to unduly minimize the sexual impulse in women.
[] i have had occasion to refer to the historic evolution of
male opinion regarding women in previous volumes, as, e.g., man and
woman, chapter i, and the appendix on "the influence of menstruation on
the position of women" in the first volume of these studies.
[] the terminology proposed by ziehen ("zur lehre von den
psychopathischen konstitutionen," charité annalen, vol. xxxxiii, )
is as follows: for absence of sexual feeling, anhedonia; for diminution
of the same, hyphedonia; for excess of sexual feeling, hyperhedonia;
for qualitative sexual perversions, parhedonia. "erotic blindness" was
suggested by nardelli.
[] o. adler, die mangelhafte geschlechtsempfindung des
weibes, , p. .
[] a correspondent tells me that he knows a woman who has been
a prostitute since the age of , but never experienced sexual pleasure
and a real, non-simulated orgasm till she was ; since then she has
become very sensual. in other similar cases the hitherto indifferent
prostitute, having found the man who suits her, abandons her profession,
even though she is thereby compelled to live in extreme poverty. "an
insensible woman," as la bruyère long ago remarked in his chapter "des
femmes," "is merely one who has not yet seen the man she must love."
[] guttceit (dreissig jahre praxis, vol. i, p. ) pointed
out that the presence or absence of the orgasm is the only factor in
"sexual anesthesia" of which we can speak at all definitely; and he
believed that anaphrodism, in the sense of absence of the sexual impulse,
never occurs at all, many women having confided to him that they had
sexual desires, although those desires were not gratified by coitus.
[] op. cit., p. .
[] havelock ellis, "madame de warens," the venture, .
[] it is interesting to observe that finally even adler admits
(op. cit., p. ) that there is no such thing as congenital lack of
aptitude for sexual sensibility.
[] "i am not entirely satisfied with the testimony as to the
alleged sexual anesthesia," a medical correspondent writes. "the same
principle which makes the young harlot an old saint makes the repentant
rake a believer in sexual anesthesia. most of the medical men who believe,
or claim to believe, that sexual anesthesia is so prevalent do so either
to flatter their hysterical patients or because they have the mentality of
the hyacinthe of zola's paris."
[] differences in the nervous organization of man and woman,
; chapter xiii, "sexual instinct in men and women compared."
[] matthews duncan considered that "the healthy performance of
the functions of child-bearing is surely connected with a well-regulated
condition of desire and pleasure." "desire and pleasure," he adds, "may be
excessive, furious, overpowering, without bringing the female into the
class of maniacs; they may be temporary, healthy, and moderate; they may
be absent or dull." (matthews duncan, goulstonian lectures on sterility
in woman, pp. , .)
[] geoffrey mortimer, chapters on human love, , ch.
xvi.
[] i do not, however, attach much weight to this possibility.
the sexual instinct among the lower social classes everywhere is subject
to comparatively weak inhibition, and löwenfeld is probably right in
believing the women of the lower class do not suffer from sexual
anesthesia to anything like the same extent as upper-class women. in
england most women of the working class appear to have had sexual
intercourse at some time in their lives, notwithstanding the risks of
pregnancy, and if pregnancy occurs they refer to it calmly as an
"accident," for which they cannot be held responsible; "well, i couldn't
help that," i have heard a young widow remark when mildly reproached for
the existence of her illegitimate child. again, among american negresses
there seems to be no defect of sexual passion, and it is said that the
majority of negresses in the southern states support not only their
children, but their lovers and husbands.
special characters of the sexual impulse in women—the more passive part
played by women in courtship—this passivity only apparent—the physical
mechanism of the sexual process in women more complex—the slower
development of orgasm in women—the sexual impulse in women more
frequently needs to be actively aroused—the climax of sexual energy falls
later in women's lives than in men's—sexual ardor in women increased
after the establishment of sexual relationships—women bear sexual
excesses better than men—the sexual sphere larger and more diffused in
women—the sexual impulse in women shows a greater tendency to periodicity
and a wider range of variation.
so far i have been discussing the question of the sexual impulse in women
on the ground upon which previous writers have usually placed it. the
question, that is, has usually presented itself to them as one concerning
the relative strength of the impulse in men and women. when so considered,
not hastily and with prepossession, as is too often the case, but with a
genuine desire to get at the real facts in all their aspects, there is no
reason, as we have seen, to conclude that, on the whole, the sexual
impulse in women is lacking in strength.
but we have to push our investigation of the matter further. in reality,
the question as to whether the sexual impulse is or is not stronger in one
sex than in the other is a somewhat crude one. to put the question in that
form is to reveal ignorance of the real facts of the matter. and in that
form, moreover, no really definite and satisfactory answer can be given.
it is necessary to put the matter on different ground. instead of taking
more or less insolvable questions as to the strength of the sexual impulse
in the two sexes, it is more profitable to consider its differences. what
are the special characters of the sexual impulse in women?
there is certainly one purely natural sexual difference of a fundamental
character, which lies at the basis of whatever truth may be in the
assertion that women are not susceptible of sexual emotion. as may he
seen when considering the phenomena of modesty, the part played by the
female in courtship throughout nature is usually different from that
played by the male, and is, in some respects, a more difficult and complex
part. except when the male fails to play his part properly, she is usually
comparatively passive; in the proper playing of her part she has to appear
to shun the male, to flee from his approaches—even actually to repel
them.[]
courtship resembles very closely, indeed, a drama or game; and the
aggressiveness of the male, the coyness of the female, are alike
unconsciously assumed in order to bring about in the most effectual manner
the ultimate union of the sexes. the seeming reluctance of the female is
not intended to inhibit sexual activity either in the male or in herself,
but to increase it in both. the passivity of the female, therefore, is not
a real, but only an apparent, passivity, and this holds true of our own
species as much as of the lower animals. "women are like delicately
adjusted alembics," said a seventeenth-century author. "no fire can be
seen outside, but if you look underneath the alembic, if you place your
hand on the hearts of women, in both places you will find a great
furnace."[] or, as marro has finely put it, the passivity of women in
love is the passivity of the magnet, which in its apparent immobility is
drawing the iron toward it. an intense energy lies behind such passivity,
an absorbed preoccupation in the end to be attained.
tarde, when exercising magistrate's functions, once had to inquire into a
case in which a young man was accused of murder. in questioning a girl of
, a shepherdess, who appeared before him as a witness, she told him that
on the morning following the crime she had seen the footmarks of the
accused up to a certain point. he asked how she recognized them, and she
replied, ingenuously but with assurance, that she could recognize the
footprints of every young man in the neighborhood, even in a plowed
field.[] no better illustration could be given of the real significance
of the sexual passivity of women, even at its most negative point.
"the women i have known," a correspondent writes, "do not express
 their sensations and feelings as much as i do. nor have i found
 women usually anxious to practise 'luxuries.' they seldom care to
 practice fellatio; i have only known one woman who offered to
 do fellatio because she liked it. nor do they generally care to
 masturbate a man; that is, they do not care greatly to enjoy the
 contemplation of the other person's excitement. (to me, to see
 the woman excited means almost more than my own pleasure.) they
 usually resist cunnilinctus, although they enjoy it. they do
 not seem to care to touch or look at a man's parts so much as he
 does at theirs. and they seem to dislike the tongue-kiss unless
 they feel very sexual or really love a man." my correspondent
 admits that his relationships have been numerous and facile,
 while his erotic demands tend also to deviate from the normal
 path. under such circumstances, which not uncommonly occur, the
 woman's passions fail to be deeply stirred, and she retains her
 normal attitude of relative passivity.
 it is owing to the fact that the sexual passivity of women is
 only an apparent, and not a real, passivity that women are apt to
 suffer, as men are, from prolonged sexual abstinence. this,
 indeed, has been denied, but can scarcely be said to admit of
 doubt. the only question is as to the relative amount of such
 suffering, necessarily a very difficult question. as far back as
 the fourteenth century johannes de sancto amando stated that
 women are more injured than men by sexual abstinence. in modern
 times maudsley considers that women "suffer more than men do from
 the entire deprivation of sexual intercourse" ("relations between
 body and mind," lancet, may , ). by some it has been held
 that this cause may produce actual disease. thus, tilt, an
 eminent gynecologist of the middle of the nineteenth century, in
 discussing this question, wrote: "when we consider how much of
 the lifetime of woman is occupied by the various phases of the
 generative process, and how terrible is often the conflict within
 her between the impulse of passion and the dictates of duty, it
 may be well understood how such a conflict reacts on the organs
 of the sexual economy in the unimpregnated female, and
 principally on the ovaria, causing an orgasm, which, if often
 repeated, may possibly be productive of subacute ovaritis."
 (tilt, on uterine and ovarian inflammation, , pp. -.)
 long before tilt, haller, it seems, had said that women are
 especially liable to suffer from privation of sexual intercourse
 to which they have been accustomed, and referred to chlorosis,
 hysteria, nymphomania, and simple mania curable by intercourse.
 hegar considers that in women an injurious result follows the
 nonsatisfaction of the sexual impulse and of the "ideal
 feelings," and that symptoms thus arise (pallor, loss of flesh,
 cardialgia, malaise, sleeplessness, disturbances of menstruation)
 which are diagnosed as "chlorosis." (hegar, zusammenhang der
 geschlechtskrankheiten mit nervösen leiden, , p. .) freud,
 as well as gattel, has found that states of anxiety
 (angstzustände) are caused by sexual abstinence. löwenfeld, on
 careful examination of his own cases, is able to confirm this
 connection in both sexes. he has specially noticed it in young
 women who marry elderly husbands. löwenfeld believes, however,
 that, on the whole, healthy unmarried women bear sexual
 abstinence better than men. if, however, they are of at all
 neuropathic disposition, ungratified sexual emotions may easily
 lead to various morbid conditions, especially of a
 hysteroneurasthenic character. (löwenfeld, sexualleben und
 nervenleiden, second edition, , pp. , , -.)
 balls-headley considers that unsatisfied sexual desires in women
 may lead to the following conditions: general atrophy, anemia,
 neuralgia and hysteria, irregular menstruation, leucorrhea,
 atrophy of sexual organs. he also refers to the frequency of
 myoma of the uterus among those who have not become pregnant or
 who have long ceased to bear children. (balls-headley, art.
 "etiology of diseases of female genital organs," allbutt and
 playfair, system of gynæcology, , p. .) it cannot,
 however, be said that he brings forward substantial evidence in
 favor of these beliefs. it may be added that in america, during
 recent years, leading gynecologists have recorded a number of
 cases in which widows on remarriage have shown marked improvement
 in uterine and pelvic conditions.
 the question as to whether men or women suffer most from sexual
 abstinence, as well as the question whether definite morbid
 conditions are produced by such abstinence, remains, however, an
 obscure and debated problem. the available data do not enable us
 to answer it decisively. it is one of those subtle and complex
 questions which can only be investigated properly by a
 gynecologist who is also a psychologist. incidentally, however,
 we have met and shall have occasion to meet with evidence bearing
 on this question. it is sufficient to say here, briefly, that it
 is impossible to believe, even if no evidence were forthcoming,
 that the exercise or non-exercise of so vastly important a
 function can make no difference to the organism generally. so
 far as the evidence goes, it may be said to indicate that the
 results of the abeyance of the sexual functions in healthy women
 in whom the sexual emotions have never been definitely aroused
 tend to be diffused and unconscious, as the sexual impulse itself
 often is, but that, in women in whom the sexual emotions have
 been definitely aroused and gratified, the results of sexual
 abstinence tend to be acute and conscious.
 these acute results are at the present day very often due to
 premature ejaculation by nervous or neurasthenic husbands, the
 rapidity with which detumescence is reached in the husband
 allowing insufficient time for tumescence in the wife, who
 consequently fails to reach the orgasm. this has of late been
 frequently pointed out. thus kafemann (sexual-probleme, march,
 , p.  et seq.) emphasizes the prevalence of sexual
 incompetence in men. ferenczi, of budapest (zentralblatt für
 psychoanalyse, , ht.  and , p. ), believes that the
 combination of neurasthenic husbands with resultantly nervous
 wives is extraordinarily common; even putting aside the
 neurasthenic, he considers it may be said that the whole male sex
 in relation to women suffer from precocious ejaculation. he adds
 that it is often difficult to say whether the lack of harmony may
 not be due to retarded orgasm in the woman. he regards the
 influence of masturbation in early life as tending to quicken
 orgasm in man, while when practised by the other sex it tends to
 slow orgasm, and thus increases the disharmony. he holds,
 however, that the chief cause lies in the education of women with
 its emphasis on sexual repression; this works too well and the
 result is that when the external impediments to the sexual
 impulse are removed the impulse has become incapable of normal
 action. porosz (british medical journal, april , ) has
 brought forward cases of serious nervous trouble in women which
 have been dispersed when the sexual weakness and premature
 ejaculation of the husband have been cured. 
the true nature of the passivity of the female is revealed by the ease
with which it is thrown off, more especially when the male refuses to
accept his cue. or, if we prefer to accept the analogy of a game, we may
say that in the play of courtship the first move belongs to the male, but
that, if he fails to play, it is then the female's turn to play.
among many birds the males at mating time fall into a state of
 sexual frenzy, but not the females. "i cannot call to mind a
 single case," states an authority on birds (h. e. howard,
 zoölogist, , p. ), "where i have seen anything
 approaching frenzy in the female of any species while mating."
 another great authority on birds, a very patient and skillful
 observer, mr. edmund selous, remarks, however, in describing the
 courting habits of the ruffs and reeves (machetes pugnax) that,
 notwithstanding the passivity of the females beforehand, their
 movements during and after coitus show that they derive at least
 as much pleasure as the males. (e. selous, "selection in birds,"
 zoölogist, feb. and may, .)
 the same observer, after speaking of the great beauty of the male
 eider duck, continues: "these glorified males—there were a dozen
 of these, perhaps, to some six or seven females—swam closely
 about the latter, but more in attendance upon them than as
 actively pursuing them, for the females seemed themselves almost
 as active agents in the sport of being wooed as were their lovers
 in wooing them. the male bird first dipped down his head till his
 beak just touched the water, then raised it again in a
 constrained and tense manner,—the curious rigid action so
 frequent in the nuptial antics of birds,—at the same time
 uttering his strange haunting note. the air became filled with
 it; every moment one or other of the birds—sometimes several
 together—with upturned bill would softly laugh or exclaim, and
 while the males did this, the females, turning excitedly, and
 with little eager demonstrations from one to another of them,
 kept lowering and extending forward the head and neck in the
 direction of each in turn.... i noticed that a female would often
 approach a male bird with her head and neck laid flat along the
 water as though in a very 'coming on' disposition, and that the
 male bird declined her advances. this, taken in conjunction with
 the actions of the female when courted by the male, appears to me
 to raise a doubt as to the universal application of the law that
 throughout nature the male, in courtship, is eager, and the
 female coy. here, to all appearances, courtship was proceeding,
 and the birds had not yet mated. the female eider ducks,
 however,—at any rate, some of them,—appeared to be anything but
 coy." (bird watching, pp. -.)
 among moor-hens and great-crested grebes sometimes what selous
 terms "functional hermaphroditism" occurs and the females play
 the part of the male toward their male companions, and then
 repeat the sexual act with a reversion to the normal order, the
 whole to the satisfaction of both parties. (e. selous,
 zoölogist, , p. .)
 it is not only among birds that the female sometimes takes the
 active part, but also among mammals. among white rats, for
 instance, the males are exceptionally eager. steinach, who has
 made many valuable experiments on these animals (archiv für die
 gesammte physiologie, bd. lvi, , p. ), tells us that,
 when a female white rat is introduced into the cage of a male, he
 at once leaves off eating, or whatever else he may be doing,
 becomes indifferent to noises or any other source of
 distraction, and devotes himself entirely to her. if, however, he
 is introduced into her cage the new environment renders him
 nervous and suspicious, and then it is she who takes the active
 part, trying to attract him in every way. the impetuosity during
 heat of female animals of various species, when at length
 admitted to the male, is indeed well known to all who are
 familiar with animals.
 i have referred to the frequency with which, in the human
 species,—and very markedly in early adolescence, when the sexual
 impulse is in a high degree unconscious and unrestrainedly
 instinctive,—similar manifestations may often be noted. we have
 to recognize that they are not necessarily abnormal and still
 less pathological. they merely represent the unseasonable
 apparition of a tendency which in due subordination is implied in
 the phases of courtship throughout the animal world. among some
 peoples and in some stages of culture, tending to withdraw the
 men from women and the thought of women, this phase of courtship
 and this attitude assume a prominence which is absolutely normal.
 the literature of the middle ages presents a state of society in
 which men were devoted to war and to warlike sports, while the
 women took the more active part in love-making. the medieval
 poets represent women as actively encouraging backward lovers,
 and as delighting to offer to great heroes the chastity they had
 preserved, sometimes entering their bed-chambers at night.
 schultz (das höfische leben, bd. i, pp. -) considers that
 these representations are not exaggerated. cf. krabbes, die
 frau im altfranzösischen karls-epos, , p.  et seq.; and
 m. a. potter, sohrab and rustem, , pp. -.
 among savages and barbarous races in various parts of the world
 it is the recognized custom, reversing the more usual method, for
 the girl to take the initiative in courtship. this is especially
 so in new guinea. here the girls almost invariably take the
 initiative, and in consequence hold a very independent position.
 women are always regarded as the seducers: "women steal men." a
 youth who proposed to a girl would be making himself ridiculous,
 would be called a woman, and be laughed at by the girls. the
 usual method by which a girl proposes is to send a present to the
 youth by a third party, following this up by repeated gifts of
 food; the young man sometimes waits a month or two, receiving
 presents all the time, in order to assure himself of the girl's
 constancy before decisively accepting her advances. (a. c. haddon,
 cambridge expedition to torres straits, vol. v, ch. viii;
 id., "western tribes of torres straits," journal of the
 anthropological institute, vol. xix, february, , pp. ,
 , , , , ; id., head hunters, pp. -; r. e.
 guise, "tribes of the wanigela river," journal of the
 anthropological institute, new series, vol. i, february-may,
 , p. .) westermarck gives instances of races among whom
 the women take the initiative in courtship. (history of
 marriage, p. ; so also finck, primitive love and
 love-stories, , p.  et seq.; and as regards celtic
 women, see rhys and brynmor jones, the welsh people.) 
there is another characteristic of great significance by which the sexual
impulse in women differs from that in men: the widely unlike character of
the physical mechanism involved in the process of coitus. considering how
obvious this difference is, it is strange that its fundamental importance
should so often be underrated. in man the process of tumescence and
detumescence is simple. in women it is complex. in man we have the more or
less spontaneously erectile penis, which needs but very simple conditions
to secure the ejaculation which brings relief. in women we have in the
clitoris a corresponding apparatus on a small scale, but behind this has
developed a much more extensive mechanism, which also demands
satisfaction, and requires for that satisfaction the presence of various
conditions that are almost antagonistic. naturally the more complex
mechanism is the more easily disturbed. it is the difference, roughly
speaking, between a lock and a key. this analogy is far from indicating
all the difficulties involved. we have to imagine a lock that not only
requires a key to fit it, but should only be entered at the right moment,
and, under the best conditions, may only become adjusted to the key by
considerable use. the fact that the man takes the more active part in
coitus has increased these difficulties; the woman is too often taught to
believe that the whole function is low and impure, only to be submitted to
at her husband's will and for his sake, and the man has no proper
knowledge of the mechanism involved and the best way of dealing with it.
the grossest brutality thus may be, and not infrequently is, exercised in
all innocence by an ignorant husband who simply believes that he is
performing his "marital duties." for a woman to exercise this physical
brutality on a man is with difficulty possible; a man's pleasurable
excitement is usually the necessary condition of the woman's sexual
gratification. but the reverse is not the case, and, if the man is
sufficiently ignorant or sufficiently coarse-grained to be satisfied with
the woman's submission, he may easily become to her, in all innocence, a
cause of torture.
to the man coitus must be in some slight degree pleasurable or it cannot
take place at all. to the woman the same act which, under some
circumstances, in the desire it arouses and the satisfaction it imparts,
will cause the whole universe to shrivel into nothingness, under other
circumstances will be a source of anguish, physical and mental. this is so
to some extent even in the presence of the right and fit man. there can be
no doubt whatever that the mucus which is so profusely poured out over the
external sexual organs in woman during the excitement of sexual desire has
for its end the lubrication of the parts and the facilitation of the
passage of the intromittent organ. the most casual inspection of the cold,
contracted, dry vulva in its usual aspect and the same when distended,
hot, and moist suffices to show which condition is and which is not that
ready for intercourse, and until the proper condition is reached it is
certain that coitus should not be attempted.
the varying sensitiveness of the female parts again offers difficulties.
sexual relations in women are, at the onset, almost inevitably painful;
and to some extent the same experience may be repeated at every act of
coitus. ordinary tactile sensibility in the female genitourinary region is
notably obtuse, but at the beginning of the sexual act there is normally a
hyperesthesia which may be painful or pleasurable as excitement
culminates, passing into a seeming anesthesia, which even craves for rough
contact; so that in sexual excitement a woman normally displays in quick
succession that same quality of sensibility to superficial pressure and
insensibility to deep pressure which the hysterical woman exhibits
simultaneously.
thus we see that a highly important practical result follows from the
greater complexity of the sexual apparatus in women and the greater
difficulty with which it is aroused. in coitus the orgasm tends to occur
more slowly in women than in men. it may easily happen that the whole
process of detumescence is completed in the man before it has begun in
his partner, who is left either cold or unsatisfied. this is one of the
respects in which women remain nearer than men to the primitive stage of
humanity.
in the hippocratic treatise, of generation, it is stated that,
 while woman has less pleasure in coitus than man, her pleasure
 lasts longer. (œuvres d'hippocrate, edition littré,
 vol. vii, p. .)
 beaunis considers that the slower development of the orgasm in
 women is the only essential difference in the sexual process in
 men and women. (beaunis, les sensations internes, , p.
 .) this characteristic of the sexual impulse in women, though
 recognized for so long a period, is still far too often ignored
 or unknown. there is even a superstition that injurious results
 may follow if the male orgasm is not effected as rapidly as
 possible. that this is not so is shown by the experiences of the
 oneida community in america, who in their system of sexual
 relationship carried prolonged intercourse without ejaculation to
 an extreme degree. there can be no doubt whatever that very
 prolonged intercourse gives the maximum amount of pleasure and
 relief to the woman. not only is this the very decided opinion of
 women who have experienced it, but it is also indicated by the
 well-recognized fact that a woman who repeats the sexual act
 several times in succession often experiences more intense orgasm
 and pleasure with each repetition.
 this point is much better understood in the east than in the
 west. the prolongation of the man's excitement, in order to give
 the woman time for orgasm, is, remarks sir richard burton
 (arabian nights, vol. v, p. ), much studied by moslems, as
 also by hindoos, who, on this account, during the orgasm seek to
 avoid overtension of muscles and to preoccupy the brain. during
 coitus they will drink sherbet, chew betel-nut, and even smoke.
 europeans devote no care to this matter, and hindoo women, who
 require about twenty minutes to complete the act, contemptuously
 call them "village cocks." i have received confirmation of
 burton's statements on this point from medical correspondents in
 india.
 while the european desires to perform as many acts of coitus in
 one night as possible, breitenstein remarks, the malay, as still
 more the javanese, wishes, not to repeat the act many times, but
 to prolong it. his aim is to remain in the vagina for about a
 quarter of an hour. unlike the european, also, he boasts of the
 pleasure he has given his partner far more than of his own
 pleasure. (breitenstein,  jahre in india, theil i, "borneo,"
 p. .)
 jäger (entdeckung der seele, second edition, vol. i, , p.
 ), as quoted by moll, explains the preference of some women
 for castrated men as due, not merely to the absence of risk of
 impregnation, but to the prolonged erections that take place in
 the castrated. aly-belfàdel remarks (archivio di psichiatria,
 , p. ) that he knows women who prefer old men in coitus
 simply because of their delay in ejaculation which allows more
 time to the women to become excited.
 a russian correspondent living in italy informs me that a
 neapolitan girl of , who had only recently ceased to be a
 virgin, explained to him that she preferred coitus in ore vulvæ
 to real intercourse because the latter was over before she had
 time to obtain the orgasm (or, as she put it, "the big bird has
 fled from the cage and i am left in the lurch"), while in the
 other way she was able to experience the orgasm twice before her
 partner reached the climax. "this reminds me," my correspondent
 continues, "that a milanese cocotte once told me that she much
 liked intercourse with jews because, on account of the
 circumcised penis being less sensitive to contact, they ejaculate
 more slowly then christians. 'with christians,' she said, 'it
 constantly happens that i am left unsatisfied because they
 ejaculate before me, while in coitus with jews i sometimes
 ejaculate twice before the orgasm occurs in my partner, or,
 rather, i hold back the second orgasm until he is ready.' this is
 confirmed," my correspondent continues, "by what i was told by a
 russian jew, a student at the zürich polytechnic, who had a
 russian comrade living with a mistress, also a russian student,
 or pseudostudent. one day the jew, going early to see his friend,
 was told to enter by a woman's voice and found his friend's
 mistress alone and in her chemise beside the bed. he was about to
 retire, but the young woman bade him stay and in a few minutes he
 was in bed with her. she told him that her lover had just gone
 away and that she never had sexual relief with him because he
 always ejaculated too soon. that morning he had left her so
 excited and so unrelieved that she was just about to
 masturbate—which she rarely did because it gave her
 headache—when she heard the jew's voice, and, knowing that jews
 are slower in coitus than christians, she had suddenly resolved
 to give herself to him."
 i am informed that the sexual power of negroes and slower
 ejaculation (see appendix a) are the cause of the favor with
 which they are viewed by some white women of strong sexual
 passions in america, and by many prostitutes. at one time there
 was a special house in new york city to which white women
 resorted for these "buck lovers"; the women came heavily veiled
 and would inspect the penises of the men before making their
 selection. 
it is thus a result of the complexity of the sexual mechanism in women
that the whole attitude of a woman toward the sexual relationship is
liable to be affected disastrously by the husband's lack of skill or
consideration in initiating her into this intimate mystery. normally the
stage of apparent repulsion and passivity, often associated with great
sensitiveness, physical and moral, passes into one of active participation
and aid in the consummation of the sexual act. but if, from whatever
cause, there is partial arrest on the woman's side of this evolution in
the process of courtship, if her submission is merely a mental and
deliberate act of will, and not an instinctive and impulsive
participation, there is a necessary failure of sexual relief and
gratification. when we find that a woman displays a certain degree of
indifference in sexual relationships, and a failure of complete
gratification, we have to recognize that the fault may possibly lie, not
in her, but in the defective skill of a lover who has not known how to
play successfully the complex and subtle game of courtship. sexual
coldness due to the shock and suffering of the wedding-night is a
phenomenon that is far too frequent.[] hence it is that many women may
never experience sexual gratification and relief, through no defect on
their part, but through the failure of the husband to understand the
lover's part. we make a false analogy when we compare the courtship of
animals exclusively with our own courtships before marriage. courtship,
properly understood, is the process whereby both the male and the female
are brought into that state of sexual tumescence which is a more or less
necessary condition for sexual intercourse. the play of courtship cannot,
therefore, be considered to be definitely brought to an end by the
ceremony of marriage; it may more properly be regarded as the natural
preliminary to every act of coitus.
tumescence is not merely a more or less essential condition for
 proper sexual intercourse. it is probably of more fundamental
 significance as one of the favoring conditions of impregnation.
 this has, indeed, been long recognized. van swieten, when
 consulted by the childless maria theresa, gave the opinion "ego
 vero censeo, vulvam sacratissimæ majestatis ante coitum diutius
 esse titillandam," and thereafter she had many children. "i think
 it very nearly certain," matthews duncan wrote (goulstonian
 lectures on sterility in woman, , p. ), "that desire and
 pleasure in due or moderate degree are very important aids to, or
 predisposing causes of, fecundity," as bringing into action the
 complicated processes of fecundation. hirst (text-book of
 obstetrics, , p. ) mentions the case of a childless
 married woman who for six years had had no orgasm during
 intercourse; then it occurred at the same time as coitus, and
 pregnancy resulted.
 kisch is very decidedly of the same opinion, and considers that
 the popular belief on this point is fully justified. it is a
 fact, he states, that an unfaithful wife is more likely to
 conceive with her lover than with her husband, and he concludes
 that, whatever the precise mechanism may be, "sexual excitement
 on the woman's part is a necessary link in the chain of
 conditions producing impregnation." (e. h. kisch, die sterilität
 des weibes, , p. .) kisch believes (p. ) that in the
 majority of women sexual pleasure only appears gradually, after
 the first cohabitation, and then develops progressively, and that
 the first conception usually coincides with its complete
 awakening. in  cases of his own the most frequent epoch of
 first impregnation was found to be between ten and fifteen months
 after marriage.
 the removal of sexual frigidity thus becomes a matter of some
 importance. this removal may in some cases be effected by
 treatment through the husband, but that course is not always
 practicable. dr. douglas bryan, of leicester, informs me that in
 several cases he has succeeded in removing sexual coldness and
 physical aversion in the wife by hypnotic suggestion. the
 suggestions given to the patient are "that all her womanly
 natural feelings would be quickly and satisfactorily developed
 during coitus; that she would experience no feeling of disgust
 and nausea, would have no fear of the orgasm not developing; that
 there would be no involuntary resistance on her part." the fact
 that such suggestions can be permanently effective tends to show
 how superficial the sexual "anesthesia" of women usually is. 
not only, therefore, is the apparatus of sexual excitement in women more
complex than in men, but—in part, possibly as a result of this greater
complexity—it much more frequently requires to be actively aroused. in
men tumescence tends to occur almost spontaneously, or under the simple
influence of accumulated semen. in women, also, especially in those who
live a natural and healthy life, sexual excitement also tends to occur
spontaneously, but by no means so frequently as in men. the comparative
rarity of sexual dreams in women who have not had sexual relationships
alone serves to indicate this sexual difference. in a very large number of
women the sexual impulse remains latent until aroused by a lover's
caresses. the youth spontaneously becomes a man; but the maiden—as it has
been said—"must be kissed into a woman."
one result of this characteristic is that, more especially when love is
unduly delayed beyond the first youth, this complex apparatus has
difficulty in responding to the unfamiliar demands of sexual excitement.
moreover, delayed normal sexual relations, when the sexual impulse is not
absolutely latent, tend to induce all degrees of perverted or abnormal
sexual gratification, and the physical mechanism when trained to respond
in other ways often fails to respond normally when, at last, the normal
conditions of response are presented. in all these ways passivity and even
aversion may be produced in the conjugal relationship. the fact that it is
almost normally the function of the male to arouse the female, and that
the greater complexity of the sexual mechanism in women leads to more
frequent disturbance of that mechanism, produces a simulation of organic
sexual coldness which has deceived many.
an instructive study of cases in which the sexual impulse has
 been thus perverted has been presented by smith baker ("the
 neuropsychical element in conjugal aversion," journal of nervous
 and mental disease, vol. xvii, september, ). raymond and
 janet, who believes that sexual coldness is extremely frequent in
 marriage, and that it plays an important part in the causation of
 physical and moral troubles, find that it is most often due to
 masturbation. (les obsessions, vol. ii, p. .) adler, after
 discussing the complexity of the feminine sexual mechanism, and
 the difficulty which women find in obtaining sexual gratification
 in normal coitus, concludes that "masturbation is a frequent,
 perhaps the most frequent, cause of defective sexual sensibility
 in women." (op. cit., p. .) he remarks that in women
 masturbation usually has less resemblance to normal coitus than
 in men and involves very frequently the special excitation of
 parts which are not the chief focus of excitement in coitus, so
 that coitus fails to supply the excitation which has become
 habitual (pp. -). in the discussion of "auto-erotism" in
 the first volume of these studies, i had already referred to
 the divorce between the physical and the ideal sides of love
 which may, especially in women, be induced by masturbation.
 another cause of inhibited sexual feeling has been brought
 forward. a married lady with normal sexual impulse states
 (sexual-probleme, april, , p. ) that she cannot
 experience orgasm and sexual satisfaction when the intercourse is
 not for conception. this is a psychic inhibition independent of
 any disturbance due to the process of prevention. she knows other
 women who are similarly affected. such an inhibition must be
 regarded as artificial and abnormal, since the final result of
 sexual intercourse, under natural and normal conditions, forms no
 essential constituent of the psychic process of intercourse. 
as a result of the fact that in women the sexual emotions tend not to
develop great intensity until submitted to powerful stimulation, we find
that the maximum climax of sexual emotion tends to fall somewhat later in
a woman's life than in a man's. among animals generally there appears to
be frequently traceable a tendency for the sexual activities of the male
to develop at a somewhat earlier age than those of the female. in the
human, species we may certainly trace the same tendency. as the great
physiologist, burdach, pointed out, throughout nature, with the
accomplishment of the sexual act the part of the male in the work of
generation comes to an end; but that act represents only the beginning of
a woman's generative activity.
a youth of  may often display a passionate ardor in love which is very
seldom indeed found in women who are under . it is rare for a woman,
even though her sexual emotions may awaken at puberty or earlier, to
experience the great passion of her life until after the age of  has
been passed. in confirmation of this statement, which is supported by
daily observation, it may be pointed out that nearly all the most
passionate love-letters of women, as well as their most passionate
devotions, have come from women who had passed, sometimes long passed,
their first youth. when heloise wrote to abelard the first of the letters
which have come down to us she was at least . mademoiselle aissé's
relation with the chevalier began when she was , and when she died, six
years later, the passion of each was at its height. mary wollstonecraft
was  when her love-letters to imlay began, and her child was born in the
following year. mademoiselle de lespinasse was  when she began to write
her letters to m. de guibert. in some cases the sexual impulse may not
even appear until after the period of the menopause has been passed.[]
in roman times ovid remarked (ars amatoria, lib. ii) that a
 woman fails to understand the art of love until she has reached
 the age of . "a girl of ," said stendhal (de l'amour, ch.
 viii), "has not the power to crystallize her emotions; she forms
 desires that are too limited by her lack of experience in the
 things of life, to be able to love with such passion as a woman
 of ." "sexual needs," said restif de la bretonne (monsieur
 nicolas, vol. xi, p. ), "often only appears in young women
 when they are between  and  years of age; at least, that is
 what i have observed."
 erb states that it is about the middle of the twenties that women
 begin to suffer physically, morally, and intellectually from
 their sexual needs. nyström (das geschlechtsleben, p. )
 considers that it is about the age of  that a woman first
 begins to feel conscious of sex needs. in a case of adler's (op.
 cit., p. ), sexual feelings first appeared after the birth of
 the third child, at the age of . forel (die sexuelle frage,
 , p. ) considers that sexual desire in woman is often
 strongest between the ages of  and . leith napier
 (menopause, p. ) remarks that from  to  is often an
 important age in woman who have retained their virginity, erotism
 then appearing with the full maturity of the nervous system.
 yellowlees (art. "masturbation," dictionary of psychological
 medicine), again, states that at about the age of  some women
 experience great sexual irritability, often resulting in
 masturbation. audiffrent (archives d'anthropologie criminelle,
 jan. , , p. ) considers that it is toward the age of 
 that a woman reaches her full moral and physical development, and
 that at this period her emotional and idealizing impulses reach a
 degree of intensity which is sometimes irresistible. it has
 already been mentioned that matthews duncan's careful inquiries
 showed that it is between the ages of  and  that the largest
 proportion of women experience sexual desire and sexual pleasure.
 it may be remarked, also, that while the typical english
 novelists, who have generally sought to avoid touching the deeper
 and more complex aspects of passion, often choose very youthful
 heroines, french novelists, who have frequently had a
 predilection for the problems of passion, often choose heroines
 who are approaching the age of .
 hirschfeld (von wesen der liebe, p. ) was consulted by a lady
 who, being without any sexual desires or feelings, married an
 inverted man in order to live with him a life of simple
 comradeship. within six months, however, she fell violently in
 love with her husband, with the full manifestation of sexual
 feelings and accompanying emotions of jealousy. under all the
 circumstances, however, she would not enter into sexual
 relationship with her husband, and the torture she endured became
 so acute that she desired to be castrated. in this connection,
 also, i may mention a case, which has been communicated to me
 from glasgow, of a girl—strong and healthy and menstruating
 regularly since the age of —who was seduced at the age of 
 without any sexual desire on her part, giving birth to a child
 nine months later. subsequently she became a prostitute for three
 years, and during this period had not the slightest sexual desire
 or any pleasure in sexual connection. thereafter she met a poor
 lad with whom she has full sexual desire and sexual pleasure, the
 result being that she refuses to go with any other man, and
 consequently is almost without food for several days every week.
 the late appearance of the great climax of sexual emotion in
 women is indicated by a tendency to nervous and psychic
 disturbances between the ages of  and about , which has been
 independently noted by various alienists (though it may be noted
 that  to  is not an unusual age for first attacks of insanity
 in men also). thus, krafft-ebing states that adult unmarried
 women between the ages of  and  often show nervous symptoms
 and peculiarities. (krafft-ebing, "ueber neurosen und psychosen
 durch sexuelle abstinenz," jahrbücher für psychiatrie, bd.
 viii, ht. -, .) pitres and régis find also (comptes-rendus
 xiie congrès international de médecine, moscow, , vol. iv,
 p. ) that obsessions, which are commoner in women than in men
 and are commonly connected in their causation with strong moral
 emotion, occur in women chiefly between the ages of  and ,
 though in men much earlier. the average age at which in england
 women inebriates begin drinking in excess is . (british
 medical journal, sept. , , p. .)
 a case recorded by sérieux is instructive as regards the
 development of the sexual impulse, although it comes within the
 sphere of mental disorder. a woman of  with bad heredity had in
 childhood had weak health and become shy, silent, and fond of
 solitude, teased by her companions and finding consolation in
 hard work. though very emotional, she never, even in the vaguest
 form, experienced any of those feelings and aspirations which
 reveal the presence of the sexual impulse. she had no love of
 dancing and was indifferent to any embraces she might chance to
 receive from young men. she never masturbated or showed inverted
 feelings. at the age of  she married. she still, however,
 experienced no sexual feelings; twice only she felt a faint
 sensation of pleasure. a child was born, but her home was unhappy
 on account of her husband's drunken habits. he died and she
 worked hard for her own living and the support of her mother.
 then at the age of  a new phase occurs in her life: she falls
 in love with the master of her workshop. it was at first a purely
 psychic affection, without any mixture of physical elements; it
 was enough to see him, and she trembled when she touched anything
 that belonged to him. she was constantly thinking about him; she
 loved him for his eyes, which seemed to her those of her own
 child, and especially for his intelligence. gradually, however,
 the lower nervous centers began to take part in these emotions;
 one day in passing her the master chanced to touch her shoulder;
 this contact was sufficient to produce sexual turgescence. she
 began to masturbate daily, thinking of her master, and for the
 first time in her life she desired coitus. she evoked the image
 of her master so constantly and vividly that at last
 hallucinations of sight, touch, and hearing appeared, and it
 seemed to her that he was present. these hallucinations were only
 with difficulty dissipated. (p. sérieux, les anomalies de
 l'instinct sexuel, , p. .) this case presents in an insane
 form a phenomenon which is certainly by no means uncommon and is
 very significant. up to the age of  we should certainly have
 been forced to conclude that this woman was sexually anesthetic
 to an almost absolute degree. in reality, we see this was by no
 means the case. weak health, hard work, and a brutal husband had
 prolonged the latency of the sexual emotions; but they were
 there, ready to explode with even insane intensity (this being
 due to the unsound heredity) in the presence of a man who
 appealed to these emotions.
 in connection with the late evolution of the sexual emotions in
 women reference may be made to what is usually termed "old maid's
 insanity," a condition not met with in men. in these cases, which
 are not, indeed, common, single women who have led severely
 strict and virtuous lives, devoting themselves to religious or
 intellectual work, and carefully repressing the animal side of
 their natures, at last, just before the climacteric, experience
 an awakening of the erotic impulse; they fall in love with some
 unfortunate man, often a clergyman, persecute him with their
 attentions, and frequently suffer from the delusion that he
 reciprocates their affections. 
when once duly aroused, there cannot usually be any doubt concerning the
strength of the sexual impulse in normal and healthy women. there would,
however, appear to be a distinct difference between the sexes at this
point also. before sexual union the male tends to be more ardent; after
sexual union it is the female who tends to be more ardent. the sexual
energy of women, under these circumstances, would seem to be the greater
on account of the long period during which it has been dormant.
sinibaldus in the seventeenth century, in his geneanthropeia,
 argued that, though women are cold at first, and aroused with
 more difficulty and greater slowness than men, the flame of
 passion spreads in them the more afterward, just as iron is by
 nature cold, but when heated gives a great degree of heat.
 similarly mandeville said of women that "their passions are not
 so easily raised nor so suddenly fixed upon any particular
 object; but when this passion is once rooted in women it is much
 stronger and more durable than in men, and rather increases than
 diminishes by enjoying the person of the beloved." (a modest
 defence of public stews, , p. .) burdach considered that
 women only acquire the full enjoyment of their general strength
 after marriage and pregnancy, while it is before marriage that
 men have most vigor. schopenhauer also said that a man's love
 decreases with enjoyment, and a woman's increases. and ellen key
 has remarked (love and marriage) that "where there is no
 mixture of southern blood it is a long time, sometimes indeed not
 till years after marriage, that the senses of the northern women
 awake to consciousness."
 even among animals this tendency seems to be manifested. edmund
 selous (bird watching, p. ) remarks, concerning sea-gulls:
 "always, or almost always, one of the birds—and this i take to
 be the female—is more eager, has a more soliciting manner and
 tender begging look than the other. it is she who, as a rule,
 draws the male bird on. she looks fondly up at him, and, raising
 her bill to his, as though beseeching a kiss, just touches with
 it, in raising, the feathers of the throat—an action light, but
 full of endearment. and in every way she shows herself the most
 desirous, and, in fact, so worries and pesters the poor male gull
 that often, to avoid her importunities, he flies away. this may
 seem odd, but i have seen other instances of it. no doubt, in
 actual courting, before the sexes are paired, the male bird is
 usually the most eager, but after marriage the female often
 becomes the wooer. of this i have seen some marked instances."
 selous mentions especially the plover, kestrel hawk, and rook. 
in association with the fact that women tend to show an increase of sexual
ardor after sexual relationships have been set up may be noted the
probably related fact that sexual intercourse is undoubtedly less
injurious to women than to men. other things being equal, that is to say,
the threshold of excess is passed very much sooner by the man than by the
woman. this was long ago pointed out by montaigne. the ancient saying,
"omne animal post coitum triste," is of limited application at the best,
but certainly has little reference to women.[] alacrity, rather than
languor, as robin has truly observed,[] marks a woman after coitus, or,
as a medical friend of my own has said, a woman then goes about the house
singing.[] it is, indeed, only after intercourse with a woman for whom,
in reality, he feels contempt that a man experiences that revulsion of
feeling described by shakespeare (sonnet cxxix). such a passage should not
be quoted, as it sometimes has been quoted, as the representation of a
normal phenomenon. but, with equal gratification on both sides, it remains
true that, while after a single coitus the man may experience a not
unpleasant lassitude and readiness for sleep, this is rarely the case with
his partner, for whom a single coitus is often but a pleasant stimulus,
the climax of satisfaction not being reached until a second or subsequent
act of intercourse. "excess in venery," which, rightly or wrongly, is set
down as the cause of so many evils in men, seldom, indeed, appears in
connection with women, although in every act of venery the woman has taken
part.[] 
that women bear sexual excesses better than men was noted by
 cabanis and other early writers. alienists frequently refer to
 the fact that women are less liable to be affected by insanity
 following such excesses. (see, e.g., maudsley, "relations
 between body and mind," lancet, may , ; and g. savage,
 art. "marriage and insanity" in dictionary of psychological
 medicine.) trousseau remarked on the fact that women are not
 exhausted by repeated acts of coitus within a short period,
 notwithstanding that the nervous excitement in their case is as
 great, if not greater, and he considered that this showed that
 the loss of semen is a cause of exhaustion in men. löwenfeld
 (sexualleben und nervenleiden, pp. , ) states that there
 cannot be question that the nervous system in women is less
 influenced by the after-effects of coitus than in men. not only,
 he remarks, are prostitutes very little liable to suffer from
 nervous overstimulation, and neurasthenia and hysteria when
 occurring in them be easily traceable to other causes, but
 "healthy women who are not given to prostitution, when they
 indulge in very frequent sexual intercourse, provided it is
 practised normally, do not experience the slightest injurious
 effect. i have seen many young married couples where the husband
 had been reduced to a pitiable condition of nervous prostration
 and general discomfort by the zeal with which he had exercised
 his marital duties, while the wife had been benefited and was in
 the uninterrupted enjoyment of the best health." this experience
 is by no means uncommon.
 a correspondent writes: "it is quite true that the threshold of
 excess is less easily reached by women than by men. i have found
 that women can reach the orgasm much more frequently than men.
 take an ordinary case. i spend two hours with ——. i have the
 orgasm  times, with difficulty; she has it  or , or even  or
 , times. women can also experience it a second or third time in
 succession, with no interval between. sometimes the mere fact of
 realizing that the man is having the orgasm causes the woman to
 have it also, though it is true that a woman usually requires as
 many minutes to develop the orgasm as a man does seconds." i may
 also refer to the case recorded in another part of this volume in
 which a wife had the orgasm  times to her husband's twice.
 hutchinson, under the name of post-marital amblyopia (archives
 of surgery, vol. iv, p. ), has described a condition
 occurring in men in good health who soon after marriage become
 nearly blind, but recover as soon as the cause is removed. he
 mentions no cases in women due to coitus, but finds that in
 women some failure of sight may occur after parturition.
 näcke states that, in his experience, while masturbation is,
 apparently, commoner in insane men than in insane women,
 masturbation repeated several times a day is much commoner in the
 women. (p. näcke, "die sexuellen perversitäten in der
 irrenanstalt," psychiatrische bladen, , no. .)
 great excesses in masturbation seem also to be commoner among
 women who may be said to be sane than among men. thus, bloch
 (new orleans medical journal, ) records the case of a young
 married woman of , of bad heredity, who had suffered from
 almost life-long sexual hyperesthesia, and would masturbate
 fourteen times daily during the menstrual periods.
 with regard to excesses in coitus the case may be mentioned of a
 country girl of , living in a rural district in north carolina
 where prostitution was unknown, who would cohabit with men almost
 openly. on one sunday she went to a secluded school-house and let
 three or four men wear themselves out cohabiting with her. on
 another occasion, at night, in a field, she allowed anyone who
 would to perform the sexual act, and  men and boys then had
 intercourse with her. when seen she was much prostrated and with
 a tendency to spasm, but quite rational. subsequently she married
 and attacks of this nature became rare.
 mr. lawson made an "attested statement" of what he had observed
 among the marquesan women. "he mentions one case in which he
 heard a parcel of boys next morning count over and name  men
 who during the night had intercourse with one woman."
 (medico-chirurgical review, , vol. ii, p. , apparently
 quoting chevers.) this statement seems open to question, but, if
 reliable, would furnish a case which must be unique. 
there is a further important difference, though intimately related to some
of the differences already mentioned, between the sexual impulse in women
and in men. in women it is at once larger and more diffused. as sinibaldus
long ago said, the sexual pleasure of men is intensive, of women
extensive. in men the sexual impulse is, as it were, focused to a single
point. this is necessarily so, for the whole of the essentially necessary
part of the male in the process of human procreation is confined to the
ejaculation of semen into the vagina. but in women, mainly owing to the
fact that women are the child-bearers, in place of one primary sexual
center and one primary erogenous region, there are at least three such
sexual centers and erogenous regions: the clitoris (corresponding to the
penis), the vaginal passage up to the womb, and the nipple. in both sexes
there are other secondary and reflex centers, but there is good reason for
believing that these are more numerous and more widespread in women than
in men.[] how numerous the secondary sexual centers in women may be is
indicated by the case of a woman mentioned by moraglia, who boasted that
she knew fourteen different ways of masturbating herself.
this great diffusion of the sexual impulse and emotions in women is as
visible on the psychic as on the physical side. a woman can find sexual
satisfaction in a great number of ways that do not include the sexual act
proper, and in a great number of ways that apparently are not physical at
all, simply because their physical basis is diffused or is to be found in
one of the outlying sexual zones.
it is, moreover, owing to the diffused character of the sexual emotions in
women that it so often happens that emotion really having a sexual origin
is not recognized as such even by the woman herself. it is possible that
the great prevalence in women of the religious emotional state of "storm
and stress," noted by professor starbuck,[] is largely due to
unemployed sexual impulse. in this and similar ways it happens that the
magnitude of the sexual sphere in woman is unrealized by the careless
observer. 
a number of converging facts tend to indicate that the sexual
 sphere is larger, and more potent in its influence on the
 organism, in women than in men. it would appear that among the
 males and females of lower animals the same difference may be
 found. it is stated that in birds there is a greater flow of
 blood to the ovaries than to the testes.
 in women the system generally is more affected by disturbances in
 the sexual sphere than in men. this appears to be the case as
 regards the eye. "the influence of the sexual system upon the eye
 in man," power states, "is far less potent, and the connection,
 in consequence, far less easy to trace than in woman." (h. power,
 "relation of ophthalmic disease to the sexual organs," lancet,
 november , .)
 the greater predominance of the sexual system in women on the
 psychic side is clearly brought out in insane conditions. it is
 well known that, while satyriasis is rare, nymphomania is
 comparatively common. these conditions are probably often forms
 of mania, and in mania, while sexual symptoms are common in men,
 they are often stated to be the rule in women (see, e.g.,
 krafft-ebing, psychopathia sexualis, tenth edition, english
 translation, p. ). bouchereau, in noting this difference in
 the prevalence of sexual manifestations during insanity, remarks
 that it is partly due to the naturally greater dependence of
 women on the organs of generation, and partly to the more active,
 independent, and laborious lives of men; in his opinion,
 satyriasis is specially apt to develop in men who lead lives
 resembling those of women. (bouchereau, art. "satyriasis,"
 dictionnaire encyclopédique des sciences médicales.) again,
 postconnubial insanity is very much commoner in women than in
 men, a fact which may indicate the more predominant part played
 by the sexual sphere in women. (savage, art. "marriage and
 insanity," dictionary of psychological medicine.)
 insanity tends to remove the artificial inhibitory influences
 that rule in ordinary life, and there is therefore significance
 in such a fact as that the sexual appetite is often increased in
 general paralysis and to a notable extent in women. (pactet and
 colin, les aliénés devant la justice, , p. .)
 näcke, from his experiences among the insane, makes an
 interesting and possibly sound distinction regarding the
 character of the sexual manifestations in the two sexes. among
 men he finds these manifestations to be more of a reflex and
 purely spinal nature and chiefly manifested in masturbation; in
 women he finds them to be of a more cerebral character, and
 chiefly manifested in erotic gestures, lascivious conversation,
 etc. the sexual impulse would thus tend to involve to a greater
 extent the higher psychic region in women than in men.
 forel likewise (die sexuelle frage, , p. ), remarking on
 the much greater prevalence of erotic manifestations among insane
 women than insane men (and pointing out that it is by no means
 due merely to the presence of a male doctor, for it remains the
 same when the doctor is a woman), considers that it proves that
 in women the sexual impulse resides more prominently in the
 higher nervous centers and in men in the lower centers. (as
 regards the great prevalence of erotic manifestations among the
 female insane, i may also refer to claye shaw's interesting
 observations, "the sexes in lunacy," st. bartholomew's hospital
 reports, vol. xxiv, ; also quoted in havelock ellis, man
 and woman, p.  et seq.) whether or not we may accept
 näcke's and forel's interpretation of the facts, which is at
 least doubtful, there can be little doubt that the sexual impulse
 is more fundamental in women. this is indicated by näcke's
 observation that among idiots sexual manifestations are commoner
 in females than in males. of  idiot girls, of the age of  and
 under,  certainly masturbated, sometimes as often as fourteen
 times a day, while the remaining girl probably masturbated; but
 of  youthful male idiots only  played with his penis. (p.
 näcke, "die sexuellen perversitäten in der irrenanstalt,"
 psychiatrische bladen, , no. , pp. , .) on the physical
 side bourneville and sollier found (progrès médical, ) that
 puberty is much retarded in idiot and imbecile boys, while j.
 voisin (annales d'hygiène publique, june, ) found that in
 idiot and imbecile girls, on the contrary, there is no lack of
 full sexual development or retardation of puberty, while
 masturbation is common. in women, it may be added, as ball
 pointed out (folie érotique, p. ), sexual hallucinations are
 especially common, while under the influence of anesthetics
 erotic manifestations and feelings are frequent in women, but
 rare in men. (havelock ellis, man and woman, p. .)
 the fact that the first coitus has a much more profound moral and
 psychic influence on a woman than on a man would also seem to
 indicate how much more fundamental the sexual region is in women.
 the fact may be considered as undoubted. (it is referred to by
 marro, la pubertà, p. .) the mere physical fact that, while
 in men coitus remains a merely exterior contact, in women it
 involves penetration into the sensitive and virginal interior of
 the body would alone indicate this difference. 
we are told that in the east there was once a woman named moârbeda who was
a philosopher and considered to be the wisest woman of her time. when
moârbeda was once asked: "in what part of a woman's body does her mind
reside?" she replied: "between her thighs." to many women,—perhaps,
indeed, we might even say to most women,—to a certain extent may be
applied—and in no offensive sense—the dictum of the wise woman of the
east; in a certain sense their brains are in their wombs. their mental
activity may sometimes seem to be limited; they may appear to be passing
through life always in a rather inert or dreamy state; but, when their
sexual emotions are touched, then at once they spring into life; they
become alert, resourceful, courageous, indefatigable. "but when i am not
in love i am nothing!" exclaimed a woman when reproached by a french
magistrate for living with a thief. there are many women who could truly
make the same statement, not many men. that emotion, which, one is tempted
to say, often unmans the man, makes the woman for the first time truly
herself.
"women are more occupied with love than men," wrote de sénancour
 (de l'amour, vol. ii, p. ); "it shows itself in all their
 movements, animates their looks, gives to their gestures a grace
 that is always new, to their smiles and voices an inexpressible
 charm; they live for love, while many men in obeying love feel
 that they are forgetting themselves."
 restif de la bretonne (monsieur nicolas, vol. vi, p. )
 quotes a young girl who well describes the difference which love
 makes to a woman: "before i vegetated; now all my actions have a
 motive, an end; they have become important. when i wake my first
 thought is 'someone is occupied with me and desires me.' i am no
 longer alone, as i was before; another feels my existence and
 cherishes it," etc.
 "one is surprised to see in the south," remarks bonstetten, in
 his suggestive book, l'homme du midi et l'homme du nord
 (),—and the remark by no means applies only to the
 south,—"how love imparts intelligence even to those who are most
 deficient in ideas. an italian woman in love is inexhaustible in
 the variety of her feelings, all subordinated to the supreme
 emotion which dominates her. her ideas follow one another with
 prodigious rapidity, and produce a lambent play which is fed by
 her heart alone. if she ceases to love, her mind becomes merely
 the scoria of the lava which yesterday had been so bright."
 cabanis had already made some observations to much the same
 effect. referring to the years of nubility following puberty, he
 remarks: "i have very often seen the greatest fecundity of ideas,
 the most brilliant imagination, a singular aptitude for the arts,
 suddenly develop in girls of this age, only to give place soon
 afterward to the most absolute mental mediocrity." (cabanis, "de
 l'influence des sexes," etc., rapports du physique et du morale
 de l'homme.) 
this phenomenon seems to be one of the indications of the immense organic
significance of the sexual relations. woman's part in the world is less
obtrusively active than man's, but there is a moment when nature cannot
dispense with energy and mental vigor in women, and that is during the
reproductive period. the languidest woman must needs be alive when her
sexual emotions are profoundly stirred. people often marvel at the
infatuation which men display for women who, in the eyes of all the world,
seem commonplace and dull. this is not, as we usually suppose, always
entirely due to the proverbial blindness of love. for the man whom she
loves, such a woman is often alive and transformed. he sees a woman who is
hidden from all the world. he experiences something of that surprise and
awe which dostoieffsky felt when the seemingly dull and brutish criminals
of siberia suddenly exhibited gleams of exquisite sensibility.
in women, it must further be said, the sexual impulse shows a much more
marked tendency to periodicity than in men; not only is it less apt to
appear spontaneously, but its spontaneous manifestations are in a very
pronounced manner correlated with menstruation. a woman who may experience
almost overmastering sexual desire just before, during, or after the
monthly period may remain perfectly calm and self-possessed during the
rest of the month. in men such irregularities of the sexual impulse are
far less marked. thus it is that a woman may often appear capricious,
unaccountable, or cold, merely because her moments of strong emotion have
been physiologically confined within a limited period. she may be one day
capable of audacities of which on another the very memory might seem to
have left her.
not only is the intensity of the sexual impulse in women, as compared to
men, more liable to vary from day to day, or from week to week, but the
same greater variability is marked when we compare the whole cycle of life
in women to that of men. the stress of early womanhood, when the
reproductive functions are in fullest activity, and of late womanhood,
when they are ceasing, produces a profound organic fermentation, psychic
as much as physical, which is not paralleled in the lives of men. this
greater variability in the cycle of a woman's life as compared with a
man's is indicated very delicately and precisely by the varying incidence
of insanity, and is made clearly visible in a diagram prepared by marro
showing the relative liability to mental diseases in the two sexes
according to age.[] at the age of  the incidence of insanity in both
sexes is equal; from that age onward the curve in men proceeds in a
gradual and equable manner, with only the slightest oscillation, on to old
age. but in women the curve is extremely irregular; it remains high during
all the years from  to , instead of falling like the masculine curve;
then it falls rapidly to considerably below the masculine curve, rising
again considerably above the masculine level during the climacteric years
from  to , after which age the two sexes remain fairly close together
to the end of life. thus, as measured by the test of insanity, the curve
of woman's life, in the sudden rise and sudden fall of its sexual crisis,
differs from the curve of man's life and closely resembles the minor curve
of her menstrual cycle.
the general tendency of this difference in sexual life and impulse is to
show a greater range of variation in women than in men. fairly uniform, on
the whole, in men generally and in the same man throughout mature life,
sexual impulse varies widely between woman and woman, and even in the same
woman at different periods.
[] ovid remarks (ars amatoria, bk. i) that, if men were
silent, women would take the active and suppliant part.
[] ferrand, de la maladie d'amour, , ch. ii.
[] tarde, archives d'anthropologie criminelle, may , .
marro, who quotes this observation (pubertà, p. ; in french edition,
p. ), remarks that his own evidence lends some support to lombroso's
conclusion that under ordinary circumstances woman's sensory acuteness is
less than that of man. he is, however, inclined to impute this to
defective attention; within the sexual sphere women's attention becomes
concentrated, and their sensory perceptions then go far beyond those of
men. there is probably considerable truth in this subtle observation.
[] a well-known gynecologist writes from america: "abhorrence
due to suffering on first nights i have repeatedly seen. one very marked
case is that of a fine womanly young woman with splendid figure; she is a
very good woman, and admires her husband, but, though she tries to develop
desire and passion, she cannot succeed. i fear the man will some day
appear who will be able to develop the latent feelings."
[] it is curious that, while the sexual impulse in women tends
to develop at a late age more frequently than in men, it would also appear
to develop more frequently at a very early age than in the other sex. the
majority of cases of precocious sexual development seems to be in female
children. w. roger williams ("precocious sexual development," british
gynæcological journal, may, ) finds that  such cases have been
recorded in females and only  in males, and, while  is the earliest
age at which boys have proved virile, girls have been known to conceive at
[] i find the same remark made by plazzonus in the seventeenth
century.
[] art. "fécondation," dictionnaire encyclopédique des
sciences médicales.
[] this also is an ancient remark, for in the early treatise
de secretis mulierum, once attributed to michael scot, it is stated,
concerning the woman who finds pleasure in coitus, "cantat libenter."
[] it is scarcely necessary to add that prostitutes can
furnish little evidence one way or the other. not only may prostitutes
refuse to participate in the sexual orgasm, but the evils of a
prostitute's life are obviously connected with causes quite other than
mere excess of sexual gratification.
[] this is, for instance, indicated by the experiments of
gualino concerning the sexual sensitiveness of the lips (archivio di
psichiatria, , fasc. ). he found that mechanical irritation applied
to the lips produced more or less sexual feeling in  out of  women,
but in only  out of  men, i.e., in three-fifths of the women and
two-fifths of the men.
[] "adolescence is for women primarily a period of storm and
stress, while for men it is in the highest sense a period of doubt,"
(starbuck, psychology of religion, p. .) it is interesting to note
that in the religious sphere, also, the emotions of women are more
diffused than those of men; starbuck confirms the conclusion of professor
coe that, while women have at least as much religious emotion as men, in
them it is more all pervasive, and they experience fewer struggles and
acute crises. (ibid., p. .)
[] marro, la pubertà, p. . this table covers all those
cases, nearly , of patients entering the turin asylum, from  to
, in which the age of the first appearance of insanity was known.
summary of conclusions.
in conclusion it may be worth while to sum up the main points brought out
in this brief discussion of a very large question. we have seen that there
are two streams of opinion regarding the relative strength of the sexual
impulse in men and women: one tending to regard it as greater in men, the
other as greater in women. we have concluded that, since a large body of
facts may be brought forward to support either view, we may fairly hold
that, roughly speaking, the distribution of the sexual impulse between the
two sexes is fairly balanced.
we have, however, further seen that the phenomena are in reality too
complex to be settled by the usual crude method of attempting to discover
quantitative differences in the sexual impulse. we more nearly get to the
bottom of the question by a more analytic method, breaking up our mass of
facts into groups. in this way we find that there are certain well-marked
characteristics by which the sexual impulse in women differs from the same
impulse in men: . it shows greater apparent passivity. . it is more
complex, less apt to appear spontaneously, and more often needing to be
aroused, while the sexual orgasm develops more slowly than in men. . it
tends to become stronger after sexual relationships are established. .
the threshold of excess is less easily reached than in men. . the sexual
sphere is larger and more diffused. . there is a more marked tendency to
periodicity in the spontaneous manifestations of sexual desire. . largely
as a result of these characteristics, the sexual impulse shows a greater
range of variation in women than in men, both as between woman and woman
and in the same woman at different periods.
it may be added that a proper understanding of these sexual differences in
men and women is of great importance, both in the practical management of
sexual hygiene and in the comprehension of those wider psychological
characteristics by which women differ from men.
in the eighteenth century, when savage tribes in various parts of the
world first began to be visited, extravagantly romantic views widely
prevailed as to the simple and idyllic lives led by primitive peoples.
during the greater part of the nineteenth century the tendency of opinion
was to the opposite extreme, and it became usual to insist on the degraded
and licentious morals of savages.[]
in reality, however, savage life is just as little a prolonged debauch as
a prolonged idyll. the inquiries of such writers as westermarck, frazer,
and crawley are tending to introduce a sounder conception of the actual,
often highly complex, conditions of primitive life in its relations to the
sexual instinct.
at the same time it is not difficult to account for the belief, widely
spread during the nineteenth century, in the unbridled licentiousness of
savages. in the first place, the doctrine of evolution inevitably created
a prejudice in favor of such a view. it was assumed that modesty,
chastity, and restraint were the finest and ultimate flowers of moral
development; therefore at the beginnings of civilization we must needs
expect to find the opposite of these things. apart, however, from any mere
prejudice of this kind, a superficial observation of the actual facts
necessarily led to much misunderstanding. just as the nakedness of many
savage peoples led to the belief that they were lacking in modesty,
although, as a matter of fact, modesty is more highly developed in savage
life than in civilization,[] so the absence of our european rules of
sexual behavior among savages led to the conclusion that they were
abandoned to debauchery. the widespread custom of lending the wife under
certain circumstances was especially regarded as indicating gross
licentiousness. moreover, even when intercourse was found to be free
before marriage, scarcely any investigator sought to ascertain what amount
of sexual intercourse this freedom involved. it was not clearly understood
that such freedom must by no means be necessarily assumed to involve very
frequent intercourse. again, it often happened that no clear distinction
was made between peoples contaminated by association with civilization,
and peoples not so contaminated. for instance, when prostitution is
attributed to a savage people we must usually suppose either that a
mistake has been made or that the people in question have been degraded by
intercourse with white peoples, for among unspoilt savages customs that
can properly be called prostitution rarely prevail. nor, indeed, would
they be in harmony with the conditions of primitive life.
it has been seriously maintained that the chastity of savages, so far as
it exists at all, is due to european civilization. it is doubtless true
that this is the case with individual persons and tribes, but there is
ample evidence from various parts of the world to show that this is by no
means the rule. and, indeed, it may be said—with no disregard of the
energy and sincerity of missionary efforts—that it could not be so. a new
system of beliefs and practices, however excellent it may be in itself,
can never possess the same stringent and unquestionable force as the
system in which an individual and his ancestors have always lived, and
which they have never doubted the validity of. that this is so we may have
occasion to observe among ourselves. christian teachers question the
wisdom of bringing young people under free-thinking influence, because,
although they do not deny the morals of free-thinkers, they believe that
to unsettle the young may have a disastrous effect, not only on belief,
but also on conduct. yet this dangerously unsettling process has been
applied by missionaries on a wholesale scale to races which in some
respect are often little more than children. when, therefore, we are
considering the chastity of savages we must not take into account those
peoples which have been brought into close contact with europeans.
in order to understand the sexual habits of savages generally there are
two points which always have to be borne in mind as of the first
importance: () the checks restraining sexual intercourse among savages,
especially as regards time and season, are so numerous, and the sanctions
upholding those checks so stringent, that sexual excess cannot prevail to
the same extent as in civilization; () even in the absence of such
checks, that difficulty of obtaining sexual erethism which has been noted
as so common among savages, when not overcome by the stimulating
influences prevailing at special times and seasons, and which is probably
in large measure dependent on hard condition of life as well as an
insensitive quality of nervous texture, still remains an important factor,
tending to produce a natural chastity. there is a third consideration
which, though from the present point of view subsidiary, is not without
bearing on our conception of chastity among savages: the importance, even
sacredness, of procreation is much more generally recognized by savage
than by civilized peoples, and also a certain symbolic significance is
frequently attached to human procreation as related to natural
fruitfulness generally; so that a primitive sexual orgy, instead of being
a mere manifestation of licentiousness, may have a ritual significance, as
a magical means of evoking the fruitfulness of fields and herds.[] 
when a savage practises extraconjugal sexual intercourse, the act is
frequently not, as it has come to be conventionally regarded in
civilization, an immorality or at least an illegitimate indulgence; it is
a useful and entirely justifiable act, producing definite benefits,
conducing alike to cosmic order and social order, although these benefits
are not always such as we in civilization believe to be caused by the act.
thus, speaking of the northern tribes of central australia, spencer and
gillen remark: "it is very usual amongst all of the tribes to allow
considerable license during the performance of certain of their ceremonies
when a large number of natives, some of them coming often from distant
parts, are gathered together—in fact, on such occasions all of the
ordinary marital rules seem to be more or less set aside for the time
being. each day, in some tribes, one or more women are told off whose duty
it is to attend at the corrobboree grounds,—sometimes only during the
day, sometimes at night,—and all of the men, except those who are
fathers, elder and younger brothers, and sons, have access to them.... the
idea is that the sexual intercourse assists in some way in the proper
performance of the ceremony, causing everything to work smoothly and
preventing the decorations from falling off."[]
it is largely this sacred character of sexual intercourse—the fact that
it is among the things that are at once "divine" and "impure," these two
conceptions not being differentiated in primitive thought—which leads to
the frequency with which in savage life a taboo is put upon its exercise.
robertson smith added an appendix to his religion of the semites on
"taboo on the intercourse of the sexes."[] westermarck brought together
evidence showing the frequency with which this and allied causes tended to
the chastity of savages.[] frazer has very luminously expounded the
whole primitive conception of sexual intercourse, and showed how it
affected chastity.[] warriors must often be chaste; the men who go on
any hunting or other expedition require to be chaste to be successful; the
women left behind must be strictly chaste; sometimes even the whole of the
people left behind, and for long periods, must be chaste in order to
insure the success of the expedition. hubert and maus touched on the same
point in their elaborate essay on sacrifice, pointing out how frequently
sexual relationships are prohibited on the occasion of any ceremony
whatever.[] crawley, in elaborating the primitive conception of taboo,
has dealt fully with ritual and traditional influences making for chastity
among savages. he brings forward, for instance, a number of cases, from
various parts of the world, in which intercourse has to be delayed for
days, weeks, even months, after marriage. he considers that the sexual
continence prevalent among savages is largely due to a belief in the
enervating effects of coitus; so dangerous are the sexes to each other
that, as he points out, even now sexual separation of the sexes commonly
occurs.[]
there are thus a great number of constantly recurring occasions in savage
life when continence must be preserved, and when, it is firmly believed,
terrible risks would be incurred by its violation—during war, after
victory, after festivals, during mourning, on journeys, in hunting and
fishing, in a vast number of agricultural and industrial occupations.
it might fairly be argued that the facility with which the savage places
these checks on sexual intercourse itself bears witness to the weakness of
the sexual impulse. evidence of another order which seems to point to the
undeveloped state of the sexual impulse among savages may be found in the
comparatively undeveloped condition of their sexual organs, a condition
not, indeed, by any means constant, but very frequently noted. as regards
women, it has in many parts of the world been observed to be the rule, and
the data which ploss and bartels have accumulated seem to me, on the
whole, to point clearly in this direction.[]
at another point, also, it may be remarked, the repulsion between the
sexes and the restraints on intercourse may be associated with weak sexual
impulse. it is not improbable that a certain horror of the sexual organs
may be a natural feeling which is extinguished in the intoxication of
desire, yet still has a physiological basis which renders the sexual
organs—disguised and minimized by convention and by artistic
representation—more or less disgusting in the absence of erotic
emotion.[] and this is probably more marked in cases in which the
sexual instinct is constitutionally feeble. a lady who had no marked
sexual desires, and who considered it well bred to be indifferent to such
matters, on inspecting her sexual parts in a mirror for the first time in
her life was shocked and disgusted at the sight. certainly many women
could record a similar experience on being first approached by a man,
although artistic conventions present the male form with greater truth
than the female. moreover,—and here is the significant point,—this
feeling is by no means restricted to the refined and cultured. "when
working at michelangelo," wrote a correspondent from italy, "my upper
gondolier used to see photographs and statuettes of all that man's works.
stopping one day before the night and dawn of s. lorenzo, sprawling naked
women, he exclaimed: 'how hideous they are!' i pressed him to explain
himself. he went on: 'the ugliest man naked is handsomer than the finest
woman naked. women have crooked legs, and their sexual organs stink. i
only once saw a naked woman. it was in a brothel, when i was . the sight
of her "natura" made me go out and vomit into the canal. you know i have
been twice married, but i never saw either of my wives without clothing.'
of very rank cheese he said one day: 'puzza come la natura d'una donna.'"
this man, my correspondent added, was entirely normal and robust, but
seemed to regard sexual congress as a mere evacuation, the sexual instinct
apparently not being strong.
it seems possible that, if the sexual impulse had no existence, all men
would regard women with this horror feminæ. as things are, however, at
all events in civilization, sexual emotions begin to develop even earlier,
usually, than acquaintance with the organs of the other sex begins; so
that this disgust is inhibited. if, however, among savages the sexual
impulse is habitually weak, and only aroused to strength under the impetus
of powerful stimuli, often acting periodically, then we should expect the
horror to be a factor of considerable importance.
the weakness of the physical sexual impulse among savages is reflected in
the psychic sphere. many writers have pointed out that love plays but a
small part in their lives. they practise few endearments; they often only
kiss children (westermarck notes that sexual love is far less strong than
parental love); love-poems are among some primitive peoples few (mostly
originating with the women), and their literature often gives little or no
attention to passion.[] affection and devotion are, however, often
strong, especially in savage women.
it is not surprising that jealousy should often, though not by any means
invariably, be absent, both among men and among women. among savages this
is doubtless a proof of the weakness of the sexual impulse. spencer and
gillen note the comparative absence of jealousy in men among the central
australian tribes they studied.[] negresses, it is said by a french
army surgeon in his untrodden fields of anthropology, do not know what
jealousy is, and the first wife will even borrow money to buy the second
wife. among a much higher race, the women in a korean household, it is
said, live together happily, as an almost invariable rule, though it
appears that this was not always the case among a polygamous people of
european race, the mormons.
the tendency of the sexual instinct in savages to periodicity, to seasonal
manifestations, i do not discuss here, as i have dealt with it in the
first volume of these studies.[] it has, however, a very important
bearing on this subject. periodicity of sexual manifestations is, indeed,
less absolute in primitive man than in most animals, but it is still very
often quite clearly marked. it is largely the occurrence of these violent
occasional outbursts of the sexual instinct—during which the organic
impulse to tumescence becomes so powerful that external stimuli are no
longer necessary—that has led to the belief in the peculiar strength of
the impulse in savages.[]
[] thus, lubbock (lord avebury), in the origin of
civilization, fifth edition, , brings forward a number of references
in evidence of this belief. more recently finck, in his primitive love
and love-stories, , seeks to accumulate data in favor of the
unbounded licentiousness of savages. he admits, however, that a view of
the matter opposed to his own is now tending to prevail.
[] see "the evolution of modesty" in the first volume of these
studies.
[] the sacredness of sexual relations often applies also to
individual marriage. thus, skeat, in his malay magic, shows that the
bride and bridegroom are definitely recognized as sacred, in the same
sense that the king is, and in malay states the king is a very sacred
person. see also, concerning the sacred character of coitus, whether
individual or collective, a. van gennep, rites de passage, passim.
[] spencer and gillen, northern tribes of central australia,
p. .
[] religion of the semites, second edition, , p.  et
seq.
[] history of marriage, pp. -, -, etc.
[] golden bough, third edition, part ii, taboo and the
perils of the soul. frazer has discussed taboo generally. for a shorter
account of taboo, see art. "taboo" by northcote thomas in encyclopædia
britannica, eleventh edition, . freud has lately (imago, ) made
an attempt to explain the origin of taboo psychologically by comparing it
to neurotic obsessions. taboo, freud believes, has its origin in a
forbidden act to perform which there is a strong unconscious tendency; an
ambivalent attitude, that is, combining the opposite tendencies, is thus
established. in this way freud would account for the fact that tabooed
persons and things are both sacred and unclean.
[] "essai sur le sacrifice," l'année sociologique, , pp.
[] the mystic rose, , p.  et seq.,  et seq.,
 et seq.
[] das weib, vol. i, section .
[] this statement has been questioned. it should, however, be
fairly evident that the sexual organs in either sex, when closely
examined, can scarcely be regarded as beautiful except in the eyes of a
person of the opposite sex who is in a condition of sexual excitement, and
they are not always attractive even then. moreover, it must be remembered
that the snake-like aptitude of the penis to enter into a state of
erection apart from the control of the will puts it in a different
category from any other organ of the body, and could not fail to attract
the attention of primitive peoples so easily alarmed by unusual
manifestations. we find even in the early ages of christianity that st.
augustine attached immense importance to this alarming aptitude of the
penis as a sign of man's sinful and degenerate state.
[] lubbock, origin of civilization, fifth edition, pp. ,
; westermarck, history of marriage, p. ; grosse, anfänge der
kunst, p. ; herbert spencer, "origin of music," mind, oct., .
[] spencer and gillen, native tribes of central australia,
p. ; cf. finck, primitive love and love-stories, p.  et seq.
[] "the phenomena of sexual periodicity." the subject has also
been more recently discussed by walter heape, "the 'sexual season' of
mammals," quarterly journal of microscopical science, vol. xliv, .
see also f. h. a. marshall, the physiology of reproduction, .
[] this view finds a belated supporter in max marcuse
("geschlechtstrieb des urmenschens," sexual-probleme, oct., ), who,
on grounds which i cannot regard as sound, seeks to maintain the belief
that the sexual instinct is more highly developed among savage than among
civilized peoples.
the facts thus seem to indicate that among primitive peoples, while the
magical, ceremonial, and traditional restraints on sexual intercourse are
very numerous, very widespread, and nearly always very stringent, there
is, underlying this prevalence of restraints on intercourse, a fundamental
weakness of the sexual instinct, which craves less, and craves less
frequently, than is the case among civilized peoples, but is liable to be
powerfully manifested at special seasons. it is perfectly true that among
savages, as sutherland states, "there is no ideal which makes chastity a
thing beautiful in itself"; but when the same writer goes on to state that
"it is untrue that in sexual license the savage has everything to learn,"
we must demand greater precision of statement.[] travelers, and too
often would-be scientific writers, have been so much impressed by the
absence among savages of the civilized ideal of chastity, and by the
frequent freedom of sexual intercourse, that they have not paused to
inquire more carefully into the phenomena, or to put themselves at the
primitive point of view, but have assumed that freedom here means all that
it would mean in a european population.
in order to illustrate the actual circumstances of savage life in this
respect from the scanty evidence furnished by the most careful observers,
i have brought together from scattered sources a few statements concerning
primitive peoples in very various parts of the world.[] 
among the andamanese, portman, who knows them well, says that sexual
desire is very moderate; in males it appears at the age of , but, as
"their love for sport is greater than their passions, these are not
gratified to any great extent till after marriage, which rarely takes
place till a man is about ."[]
although chastity is not esteemed by the fuegians, and virginity is lost
at a very early age, yet both men and women are extremely moderate in
sexual indulgence.[]
among the eskimo at the other end of the american continent, according to
dr. f. cook, the sexual passions are suppressed during the long darkness
of winter, as also is the menstrual function usually, and the majority of
the children are born nine months after the appearance of the sun.[]
among the indians of north america it is the custom of many tribes to
refrain from sexual intercourse during the whole period of lactation, as
also d'orbigny found to be the case among south american indians, although
suckling went on for over three years.[] many of the indian tribes have
now been rendered licentious by contact with civilization. in the
primitive condition their customs were entirely different. dr. holder, who
knows many tribes of north american indians well, has dealt in some detail
with this point. "several of the virtues," he states, "and among them
chastity, were more faithfully practised by the indian race before the
invasion from the east than these same virtues are practised by the white
race of the present day.... the race is less salacious than either the
negro or white race.... that the women of some tribes are now more careful
of their virtue than the women of any other community whose history i
know, i am fully convinced."[] it is not only on the women that sexual
abstinence is imposed. among some branches of the salish indians of
british columbia a young widower must refrain from sexual intercourse for
a year, and sometimes lives entirely apart during that period.[]
in many parts of polynesia, although the sexual impulse seems often to
have been highly developed before the arrival of europeans, it is very
doubtful whether license, in the european sense, at all generally
prevailed. the marquesans, who have sometimes been regarded as peculiarly
licentious, are especially mentioned by foley as illustrating his
statement that sexual erethism is with difficulty attained by primitive
peoples except during sexual seasons.[] herman melville's detailed
account in typee of the marquesans (somewhat idealized, no doubt)
reveals nothing that can fairly be called licentiousness. at rotuma, j.
stanley gardiner remarks, before the missionaries came sexual intercourse
before marriage was free, but gross immorality and prostitution and
adultery were unknown. matters are much worse now.[] the maoris of new
zealand, in the old days, according to one who had lived among them, were
more chaste than the english, and, though a chief might lend his wife to a
friend as an honor, it would be very difficult to take her (private
communication).[] captain cook also represented these people as modest
and virtuous.
among the papuans of new guinea and torres straits, although intercourse
before marriage is free, it is by no means unbridled, nor is it carried to
excess. there are many circumstances restraining intercourse. thus,
unmarried men must not indulge in it during october and november at torres
straits. it is the general rule also that there should be no sexual
intercourse during pregnancy, while a child is being suckled (which goes
on for three or four years), or even until it can speak or walk.[] in
astrolabe bay, new guinea, according to vahness, a young couple must
abstain from intercourse for several weeks after marriage, and to break
this rule would be disgraceful.[]
as regards australia, brough smyth wrote: "promiscuous intercourse between
the sexes is not practised by the aborigines, and their laws on the
subject, particularly those of new south wales, are very strict. when at
camp all the young unmarried men are stationed by themselves at the
extreme end, while the married men, each with his family, occupy the
center. no conversation is allowed between the single men and the girls or
the married women. infractions of these laws were visited by punishment;
... five or six warriors threw from a comparatively short distance several
spears at him [the offender]. the man was often severely wounded and
sometimes killed."[] this author mentions that a black woman has been
known to kill a white man who attempted to have intercourse with her by
force. yet both sexes have occasional sexual intercourse from an early
age. after marriage, in various parts of australia, there are numerous
restraints on intercourse, which is forbidden not merely during
menstruation, but during the latter part of pregnancy and for one moon
after childbirth.[]
concerning the people of the malay peninsula, hrolf vaughan stevens
states: "the sexual impulse among the belendas is only developed to a
slight extent; they are not sensual, and the husband has intercourse with
his wife not oftener than three times a month. the women also are not
ardent.... the orang lâut are more sensual than the dyaks, who are,
however, more given to obscene jokes than their neighbors.... with the
belendas there is little or no love-play in sexual relations".[] skeat
tells us also that among malays in war-time strict chastity must be
observed in a stockade, or the bullets of the garrison will lose their
power.[]
it is a common notion that the negro and negroid races of africa are
peculiarly prone to sexual indulgence. this notion is not supported by
those who have had the most intimate knowledge of these peoples. it
probably gained currency in part owing to the open and expansive
temperament of the negro, and in part owing to the extremely sexual
character of many african orgies and festivals, though those might quite
as legitimately be taken as evidence of difficulty in attaining sexual
erethism.
a french army surgeon, speaking from knowledge of the black races in
various french colonies, states in his untrodden fields of anthropology
that it is a mistake to imagine that the negress is very amorous. she is
rather cold, and indifferent to the refinements of love, in which respects
she is very unlike the mulatto. the white man is usually powerless to
excite her, partly from his small penis, partly from his rapidity of
emission; the black man, on account of his blunter nervous system, takes
three times as long to reach emission as the white man. among the
mohammedan peoples of west africa, daniell remarks, as well as in central
and northern africa, it is usual to suckle a child for two or more years.
from the time when pregnancy becomes apparent to the end of weaning no
intercourse takes place. it is believed that this would greatly endanger
the infant, if not destroy it. this means that for every child the woman,
at all events, must remain continent for about three years.[] sir h. h.
johnston, writing concerning the peoples of central africa, remarks that
the man also must remain chaste during these periods. thus, among the
atonga the wife leaves her husband at the sixth month of pregnancy, and
does not resume relations with him until five or six months after the
birth of the child. if, in the interval, he has relations with any other
woman, it is believed his wife will certainly die. "the negro is very
rarely vicious," johnston says, "after he has attained to the age of
puberty. he is only more or less uxorious. the children are vicious, as
they are among most races of mankind, the boys outrageously so. as regards
the little girls over nearly the whole of british central africa, chastity
before puberty is an unknown condition, except perhaps among the a-nyanja.
before a girl is become a woman it is a matter of absolute indifference
what she does, and scarcely any girl remains a virgin after about  years
of age."[] among the bangala of the upper congo a woman suckles her
child for six to eighteen months and during all this period the husband
has no intercourse with his wife, for that, it is believed, would kill the
child.[]
among the yoruba-speaking people of west africa a. b. ellis mentions that
suckling lasts for three years, during the whole of which period the wife
must not cohabit with her husband.[]
although chastity before marriage appears to be, as a rule, little
regarded in africa, this is not always so. in some parts of west africa, a
girl, at all events if of high birth, when found guilty of unchastity may
be punished by the insertion into her vagina of bird pepper, a kind of
capsicum, beaten into a mass; this produces intense pain and such acute
inflammation that the canal may even be obliterated.[]
among the dahomey women there is no coitus during pregnancy nor during
suckling, which lasts for nearly three years. the same is true among the
jekris and other tribes on the niger, where it is believed that the milk
would suffer if intercourse took place during lactation.[]
in another part of africa, among the suaheli, even after marriage only
incomplete coitus is at first allowed and there is no intercourse for a
year after the child's birth.[]
farther south, among the ba wenda of north transvaal, says the rev. r.
wessmann, although the young men are permitted to "play" with the young
girls before marriage, no sexual intercourse is allowed. if it is seen
that a girl's labia are apart when she sits down on a stone, she is
scolded, or even punished, as guilty of having had intercourse.[]
among the higher races in india the sexual instinct is very developed, and
sexual intercourse has been cultivated as an art, perhaps more elaborately
than anywhere else. here, however, we are far removed from primitive
conditions and among a people closely allied to the europeans. farther to
the east, as among the cambodians, strict chastity seems to prevail, and
if we cross the himalayas to the north we find ourselves among wild people
to whom sexual license is unknown. thus, among the turcomans, even a few
days after the marriage has been celebrated, the young couple are
separated for an entire year.[]
all the great organized religions have seized on this value of sexual
abstinence, already consecrated by primitive magic and religion, and
embodied it in their system. it was so in ancient egypt. thus, according
to diodorus, on the death of a king, the entire population of egypt
abstained from sexual intercourse for seventy-two days. the persians,
again, attached great value to sexual as to all other kinds of purity.
even involuntary seminal emissions were severely punishable. to lie with a
menstruating woman, according to the vendidad, was as serious a matter
as to pollute holy fire, and to lie with a pregnant woman was to incur a
penalty of  strokes. among the modern parsees a man must not lie with
his wife after she is four months and ten days pregnant. mohammedanism
cannot be described as an ascetic religion, yet long and frequent periods
of sexual abstinence are enjoined. there must be no sexual intercourse
during the whole of pregnancy, during suckling, during menstruation (and
for eight days before and after), nor during the thirty days of the
ramedan fast. other times of sexual abstinence are also prescribed; thus
among the mohammedan yezidis of mardin in northern mesopotamia there must
be no sexual intercourse on wednesdays or fridays.[]
in the early christian church many rules of sexual abstinence still
prevailed, similar to those usual among savages, though not for such
prolonged periods. in egbert's penitential, belonging to the ninth
century, it is stated that a woman must abstain from intercourse with her
husband three months after conception and for forty days after birth.
there were a number of other occasions, including lent, when a husband
must not know his wife.[] "some canonists say," remarks jeremy taylor,
"that the church forbids a mutual congression of married pairs upon
festival days.... the council of eliberis commanded abstinence from
conjugal rights for three or four or seven days before the communion. pope
liberius commanded the same during the whole time of lent, supposing the
fast is polluted by such congressions."[]
[] a. sutherland, origin and growth of the moral instinct,
vol. i, pp. , . as has been shown by, for instance, dr. iwan bloch
(beiträge zur ætiologie der psychopathia sexualis, erster theil, ),
every perverse sexual practice may be found, somewhere or other, among
savages or barbarians; but, as the same writer acutely points out (p. ),
these devices bear witness to the need of overcoming frigidity rather than
to the strength of the sexual impulse.
[] ploss and bartels have brought together in das weib a
large number of facts in the same sense, more especially under the
headings of abstinenz-vorschriften and die fernhaltung der
schwangeren. i have not drawn upon their collection.
[] journal of the anthropological institute, may, , p.
[] hyades and deniker, mission scientifique du cap horn,
vol. vii, p. .
[] f. cook, new york journal of gynecology and obstetrics,
[] a. d'orbigny, l'homme américain, , vol. i, p. .
[] a. b. holder, "gynecic notes among the american indians,"
american journal of obstetrics, , vol. xxvi, no. .
[] journal of the anthropological institute, , p. .
[] foley, bulletin de la société d' anthropologie, paris,
november , .
[] j. s. gardiner, journal of the anthropological institute,
february, , p. .
[] as regards the modern maoris, a medical correspondent in
new zealand writes: "it is nothing for members of both sexes to live in
the same room, and for promiscuous intercourse to take place between
father and daughter or brother and sister. maori women, who will display a
great deal of modesty when in the presence of male maoris, will openly ask
strange europeans to have sexual intercourse with them, and without any
desire for reward. the men, however, seem to prefer their own women, and
even when staying in towns, where they can obtain prostitutes, they will
remain continent until they return home again, a period of perhaps a
month."
[] schellong, zeitschrift für ethnologie, , i, pp. ,
; haddon, journal of the anthropological institute, february, ,
pp. , ; guise, ib., february and may, , p. ; seligmann,
ib., , pp. , -; reports cambridge expedition, vol. v, pp.
[] zeitschrift für ethnologie, , ht. v, p. .
[] r. brough smyth, the aborigines of victoria, vol. ii, p.
[] journal of the anthropological institute, , pp. ,
[] zeitschrift für ethnologie, , iv, pp. -.
[] w. w. skeat, malay magic, p. .
[] w. f. daniell, medical topography of gulf of guinea, ,
p. .
[] sir h. h. johnston, british central africa, , pp. ,
[] rev. j. h. weeks, journal of the anthropological
institute, , p. .
[] sir a. b. ellis, yoruba-speaking peoples, p. .
[] w. f. daniell, op. cit., p. .
[] journal of the anthropological institute, august and
november, , p. .
[] zeitschrift für ethnologie, , ii and iii, p. ;
velten, sitten und gebraüche der suaheli, p. .
[] zeitschrift für ethnologie, , p. .
[] vambery, travels in central asia, , p. .
[] heard, journal of the anthropological institute,
jan.-june, , p. . the same rule is also observed by the christians
of this district.
[] haddon and stubbs, councils and ecclesiastical documents,
vol. iii, p. .
[] jeremy taylor, the rule of conscience, bk. iii, ch. iv,
rule xx.
thus it would seem probable that, contrary to a belief once widely
prevalent, the sexual instinct has increased rather than diminished with
the growth of civilization. this fact was clear to the insight of
lucretius, though it has often been lost sight of since.[] yet even
observation of animals might have suggested the real bearing of the facts.
the higher breeds of cattle, it is said, require the male more often than
the inferior breeds.[] thorough-bred horses soon reach sexual maturity,
and i understand that since pains have been taken to improve cart-horses
the sexual instincts of the mares have become less trustworthy. there is
certainly no doubt that in our domestic animals generally, which live
under what may be called civilized conditions, the sexual system and the
sexual needs are more developed than in the wild species most closely
related to them.[] all observers seem to agree on this point, and it is
sufficient to refer to the excellent summary of the question furnished by
heape in the study of "the 'sexual season' of mammals," to which reference
has already been made. he remarks, moreover, that, "while the sexual
activity of domestic animals and of wild animals in captivity may be more
frequently exhibited, it is not so violent as is shown by animals in the
wild state."[] so that, it would seem, the greater periodicity of the
instinct in the wild state, alike in animals and in man, is associated
with greater violence of the manifestations when they do appear. certain
rodents, such as the rat and the mouse, are well known to possess both
great reproductive power and marked sexual proclivities. heape suggests
that this also is "due to the advantages derived from their intimate
relations with the luxuries of civilization." heape recognizes that, as
regards reproductive power, the same development may be traced in man: "it
would seem highly probable that the reproductive power of man has
increased with civilization, precisely as it may be increased in the lower
animals by domestication; that the effect of a regular supply of good
food, together with all the other stimulating factors available and
exercised in modern civilized communities, has resulted in such great
activity of the generative organs, and so great an increase in the supply
of the reproductive elements, that conception in the healthy human female
may be said to be possible almost at any time during the reproductive
period."
"people of sense and reflection are most apt to have violent and constant
passions," wrote mary wollstonecraft, "and to be preyed on by them."[]
it is that fact which leads to the greater importance of sexual phenomena
among the civilized as compared to savages. the conditions of civilization
increase the sexual instinct, which consequently tends to be more
intimately connected with moral feelings. morality is bound up with the
development of the sexual instinct. the more casual and periodic character
of the impulse in animals, since it involves greater sexual indifference,
tends to favor a loose tie between the sexes, and hence is not favorable
to the development of morals as we understand morals. in man the
ever-present impulse of sex, idealizing each sex to the other sex, draws
men and women together and holds them together. foolish and ignorant
persons may deplore the full development which the sexual instinct has
reached in civilized man; to a finer insight that development is seen to
be indissolubly linked with all that is most poignant and most difficult,
indeed, but also all that is best, in human life as we know it.
[] de rerum naturâ, v, .
[] raciborski (traité de la menstruation, p. ) quotes the
observation of an experienced breeder of choice cattle to this effect.
[] "the organs which in the feral state," as adlerz remarks
(biologisches centralblatt, no. , ; quoted in science, may ,
), "are continually exercised in a severe struggle for existence, do
not under domestication compete so closely with one another for the less
needed nutriment. hence, organs like the reproductive glands, which are
not so directly implicated in self-preservation, are able to avail
themselves of more food."
[] quarterly journal of microscopical science, vol. xliv,
, p. , , .
[] "love," in thoughts on the education of daughters.
it is a very remarkable fact that, although for many years past serious
attempts have been made to elucidate the psychology of sexual perversions,
little or no endeavor has been made to study the development of the normal
sexual emotions. nearly every writer seems either to take for granted that
he and his readers are so familiar with all the facts of normal sex
psychology that any detailed statement is altogether uncalled for, or else
he is content to write a few fragmentary remarks, mostly made up of
miscellaneous extracts from anatomical, philosophical, and historical
works.
yet it is as unreasonable to take normal phenomena for granted here as in
any other region of science. a knowledge of such phenomena is as necessary
here as physiology is to pathology or anatomy to surgery. so far from the
facts of normal sex development, sex emotions, and sex needs being uniform
and constant, as is assumed by those who consider their discussion
unnecessary, the range of variation within fairly normal limits is
immense, and it is impossible to meet with two individuals whose records
are nearly identical.
there are two fundamental reasons why the endeavor should be made to
obtain a broad basis of clear information on the subject. in the first
place, the normal phenomena give the key to the abnormal phenomena, and
the majority of sexual perversions, including even those that are most
repulsive, are but exaggerations of instincts and emotions that are
germinal in normal human beings. in the second place, we cannot even know
what is normal until we are acquainted with the sexual life of a large
number of healthy individuals. and until we know the limits of normal
sexuality we are not in position to lay down any reasonable rules of
sexual hygiene.
on these grounds i have for some time sought to obtain the sexual
histories, and more especially the early histories, of men and women who,
on prima facie grounds, may fairly be considered, or are at all events
by themselves and others considered, ordinarily healthy and normal.
there are many difficulties about such a task, difficulties which are
sufficiently obvious. there is, first of all, the natural reticence to
reveal facts of so intimately personal a character. there is the
prevailing ignorance and unintelligence which leads to the phenomena being
obscure to the subject himself. when the first difficulty has been
overcome, and the second is non-existent, there is still a lack of
sufficiently strong motive to undertake the record, as well as a failure
to realize the value of such records. i have, however, received a large
number of such histories, for the most part offered spontaneously with
permission to make such further inquiries as i thought desirable. some of
these histories are extremely interesting and instructive. in the present
appendix, and in a corresponding appendix to the two following volumes of
these studies, i bring forward a varied selection of these narratives.
in a few cases, it will be seen, the subjects are, to say the least, on
the borderland of the abnormal, but they do not come before us as patients
desiring treatment. they are playing their, usually active, sometimes even
distinguished, part in the world, which knows nothing of their intimate
histories.
history i.—e. t. (i reproduce this history, written in the third
 person, as it reached my hands.) t.'s earliest recollections of
 ideas of a sexual character are vaguely associated with thoughts
 upon whipping inflicted on companions by their parents, and
 sometimes upon his own person. about the age of  t. occasionally
 depicted to himself the appearance of the bare nates and
 genitalia of boys during flagellation. reflection upon whipping
 gave rise to slight curious sensations at the base of the abdomen
 and in the nerves of the sexual system. the sight of a boy being
 whipped upon the bare nates caused erection before the age of .
 he cannot account for these excitations, as at the time he had
 not learned the most rudimentary facts of sex. the spectacle of
 the boy's nudity had no attraction for him, while the beating
 aroused his indignation against the person who administered it.
 t. knew a boy and girl of about his own age whose imaginations
 dwelt somewhat morbidly upon whipping. the three used to talk
 together about such chastisement, and the little girl liked to
 read "stories that had whippings in them." none of these children
 delighted in cruelty; the fascination in the theme of castigation
 seemed to be in imagining the spectacle of the exposed nates,
 though actual witnessing of the whipping made them angry at the
 time.
 accustomed to watch a young sister being bathed, t. had no
 distinct curiosity concerning the differences in sex until the
 age of . about this time he asked his father where babies came
 from, and was told to be quiet. when he persisted in the inquiry
 his father threatened to box his ears. his mother told him
 subsequently that doctors brought babies to mothers. he credited
 the story so far as to carefully watch the doctor who came when
 his mother "was going to have a new baby," in the hope of seeing
 a bundle in his arm. t. was  when he interrogated a servant-girl
 of  about babies and their origin. she laughed and said that
 one day she would tell him how children came. one sunday this
 servant took t. for a country walk and initiated him in sexual
 intercourse, telling him he was too young to be a father, but
 that was the way babies were made. the girl took him into a
 field, saying she would show him how to do something which would
 make him "feel as though he was in heaven," informing him that
 she had often done this with young men. she then succeeded in
 causing erection and instructed him how to act. his feeling at
 the time was one of disgust; the appearance and odor of the
 female genitalia repelled him. afterward, however, he wished to
 repeat the experience with girls of his own age. finding the boy
 unresponsive, the girl took the masculine position and embraced
 him with great passion. t. can recall the expression of the
 girl's face, the perspiration on her forehead, and the whispered
 query whether it pleased him. the embrace lasted for about ten
 minutes, when the girl said it had "done her good." later the
 same day they met a girl cousin of this servant about  or 
 years old. the three went to a lonely part of the seashore. the
 servant there suggested that t. should repeat the act with the
 little girl. t. was too shy, though the girl seemed quite willing
 and experienced. the older girl told the younger to keep watch a
 few yards away, while she again brought about intercourse in the
 same way. the servant told t. not to tell anyone. intercourse
 with the servant was never repeated after that day; from shame he
 kept the promise for many years.
 after this episode t. began to speculate about sexual matters and
 to observe the coupling of dogs with newly acquired interest. at
  years he often lay awake, listening to a woman of  singing
 to a piano accompaniment. the woman's voice seemed very
 beautiful, and so strongly impressed him that he fell in love
 with her and longed to embrace her sexually. this secret
 attachment was much more romantic than sensual, though the idea
 of embracing the woman seemed to t. a natural part of the
 romance. he was beginning to invest the sex with angelic
 qualities. the thought of his adventure with the servant no
 longer caused repulsion, but rather pleasure. he reflected that
 if he could meet the girl now he could be very fond of her and
 understand things better. at this time he had not masturbated,
 nor even heard of the practice. one day, while playing with a
 girl of his own age, he succeeded in overcoming her shyness and
 induced her to expose herself, at the same time uncovering his
 own sexual parts. on this occasion and once afterward he
 succeeded in penetrating the vulva. both he and the girl
 experienced imperfect enjoyment.
 at boarding-school, where he was sent at , t. learned the
 vulgar phrases for sexual organs and sexual acts, and acquired
 the habit of moderate masturbation. coarse talk and indecent
 jests about the opposite sex were common amusements of the
 playroom and dormitories. at first the obscene conversation was
 very distasteful; later he became more used to it, but thought it
 strange that sex intimacy should be a subject for ridicule and
 jest.
 he began to read love-stories and think much about girls. at the
 same time he learned the nature of "the sin of fornication," and
 wondered why it should be considered so heinous. parts of the
 bible condemning intercourse between the unmarried alarmed him.
 being of a serious as well as emotional and amorous nature, he
 became converted to evangelic belief. his mother warned him to
 beware of unclean companions at school. he tried to act as a
 christian and think only pure thoughts about women. the talk,
 however, was always of girls and of being in love. his mind was
 often engrossed with amatory ideas of a poetic, sensuous nature,
 his sexual experiences having a firm hold on his imagination,
 while they gave him gratifying assurance of actual knowledge
 concerning things merely imagined by most of his companions.
 his health was vigorous and he keenly enjoyed all outdoor games
 and excelled in daring and schoolboy mischief.
 at  he fell deeply in love with a girl of corresponding age. he
 never felt any powerful sexual desire for his sweetheart, and
 never attempted anything but kissing and decorous caresses. he
 liked to walk and sit with the girl, to hold her hand, and stroke
 her soft hair. he felt real grief when separated from her. his
 thoughts of her were seldom sensual. a year or so afterward he
 had a temporary passion for a woman of , who used to flirt with
 him and allow kissing. t. thought her queen-like and very lovely,
 and wished to be her knight.
 one day he saw, for a moment, in a friend's house, a dark,
 earnest-looking girl of , who made a very deep impression upon
 him, and, though he did not exchange a word with her, he often
 thought about her afterward. five years later he met the dark
 girl again, and the pair were mutually drawn to one another. he
 proposed marriage and avowed a most desperate passion. a refusal
 on the plea of youth caused him the deepest misery. about eight
 years thereafter t. married the girl, and the marriage proved a
 very happy one for both.
 when he was  t. made the acquaintance of a pretty blonde of the
 same age. she was a high-spirited hoiden. they were soon close
 friends and later lovers. they wrote a number of letters to each
 other and exchanged locks of hair and presents. their talk about
 love was unreserved. one day she told t. that she had been
 sexually embraced by a former lover, a boy of , hinting very
 plainly that she would like t. to embrace her. this amour lasted
 for about six months. the lovers had many opportunities for
 clandestine intercourse. they used to consummate their passion in
 a part of a wood they called "the bower." now and then one or the
 other would experience a pricking of conscience, but they were
 too passionately attached to each other to sever the intimacy. at
 length the girl began to dread the risk of conception and the
 intercourse ceased. looking back upon this episode t. avers that
 the attachment and its physical expression seemed quite natural,
 poetic, and beautiful, though at times his religious principles
 condemned his conduct. he now thinks that the experience is by no
 means to be regretted either by the girl or himself. it was a
 wholesome youthful passion, as innocent as the mating of birds,
 and the insight which it gave to both of the hidden emotions of
 human nature was morally advantageous in after-life.
 t. believes that his amative precocity was due to the early
 awakening of sex feeling by the servant-girl. but he also
 believes that the love passion would have asserted itself early
 in any case, since he inherits a warm temperament, had erectile
 power long before puberty, and has considerable seminal capacity.
 having closely watched the effects of suppressed normal emotions
 and desires in youth at the time of pubescence, he maintains that
 such suppression is disastrous, causing unhealthy thoughts and
 leading to the formation of a habit of masturbation which may
 persist throughout life. he believes that temporary sexual
 intimacies between boys and girls under  from the period of
 puberty would be far less harmful than separation of the sexes
 until marriage, with its resultants: masturbation, hysteria,
 repressed and disordered functions in young women, seduction,
 prostitution, venereal affections, and many other evils.
 history ii.—the following narrative was written by a married
 lady: "my mother (herself a very passionate and attractive woman)
 recognized the difficulty for english girls of getting
 satisfactorily married, and determined, if possible, to shield us
 from disappointment by turning our thoughts in a different
 direction. theoretically the idea was perhaps good, but in
 practice it proved useless. the natural desires were there.
 disappointment and disillusion followed their repression none the
 less surely for having altered their natural shape. i think the
 love i had for my mother was almost sexual, as to be with her was
 a keen pleasure, and to be long away from her an almost
 unendurable pain. she used to talk to us a good deal on all sorts
 of subjects, but she never troubled about education in the
 ordinary sense. when  years old i had been taught nothing except
 to read and write. she never forbade us to read anything, but if
 by accident we got hold of a book of which she did not approve
 she used to say: 'i think that is rather a silly story, don't
 you?' we were so eager to come up to her standard of taste that
 we at once imagined we thought it silly, too. in the same way she
 discouraged ideas about love or marriage, not by suggesting there
 was anything wrong or improper about them, but by implying great
 contempt for girls who thought about lovers, etc. up to the age
 of about  i had a vague general impression that love was very
 well for ordinary women, but far beneath the dignity of a
 somewhat superior person like myself. to show how little it
 entered my thoughts i may add that, up to , i fancied a woman
 got a child by being kissed on the lips by a man. hence all the
 fuss in novels about the kiss on the mouth.
 "when i was  years old i began to feel a great craving for
 scientific knowledge. a child's guide to science, which i
 discovered at a second-hand book-stall (and which, by the way,
 informed me that heat is due to a substance called caloric),
 became a constant companion. in order to learn about light and
 gravitation, i saved up my money and ordered (of all books)
 newton's principia, shedding bitter tears when i found i could
 not understand a word of it. at the same time i was horribly
 ashamed of this desire for knowledge. i got such books as i could
 surreptitiously and hid them in odd corners. why, i cannot
 imagine, as no one would have objected, but, on the contrary, i
 should have been helped to suitable books.
 "my sisters and i were all violently argumentative, but our
 quarrels were all on abstract subjects. we saw little of other
 children and made no friendships, preferring each other's society
 to that of outsiders. when i was about  a girl of the same age
 came to stay with us for a few days. when we went to bed the
 first night she asked me if i ever played with myself, whereupon
 i took a great dislike to her. no sexual ideas or feelings were
 excited. when still quite a child, however, i had feelings of
 excitement which i now recognize as sexual. such feelings always
 came to me in bed (at least i cannot remember them at any other
 time) and were generally accompanied by a gradually increasing
 desire to make water. for a long time i would not dare to get out
 of bed for fear of being scolded for staying awake, and only did
 so at last when actually compelled. in the mean time the sexual
 excitement increased also, and i believe i thought the latter was
 the result of the former, or, perhaps, rather, that both were the
 same thing. (this was when i was about  or  years old.) so far
 as i can recollect, the excitement did not recur when the desire
 to make water had been gratified. i seemed to remember wondering
 why thinking of certain things (i can't remember what these were)
 should make one want to urinate. (in later life i have found
 that, if the bladder is not emptied before coitus, pleasure is
 often more intense.) there were also feelings, which i now
 recognize as sexual, in connection with ideas of whipping.
 "as a child and girl i had very strong religious feelings (i
 should have now if i could believe in the reality of religion),
 which were absent in my sisters. these feelings were much the
 same as i experienced later sexually; i felt toward god what i
 imagined i should like to feel to my husband if i married. this,
 i fancy, is what usually occurs. at  i went to a
 boarding-school where there were seventy girls between  and .
 i think it goes to show that there is but very little sexual
 precocity among english girls that during the three years i
 stayed there i never heard a word the strictest mother would have
 objected to. one or two of the older girls were occasionally a
 little sentimental, but on no occasion did i hear the physical
 side of things touched upon. i think this is partly due to the
 amount of exercise we took. when picturing my childhood i always
 see myself racing about, jumping walls, climbing trees. in france
 and italy i have been struck by the greater sedateness of
 continental children. our idea of naughtiness consisted chiefly
 in having suppers in our bedrooms and sliding down the banisters
 after being sent to bed. the first gratified our natural
 appetite, while the second supplied the necessary thrill in the
 fear of being caught.
 "i made no violent friendships with the other girls, but i became
 much attached to the french governess. she was , and a born
 teacher, very strict with all of us, and doubly so with me for
 fear of showing favoritism. but she was never unjust, and i was
 rather proud of her severity and took a certain pleasure in being
 punished by her, the punishment always taking the form of
 learning by heart, which i rather liked doing. so i had my
 thrill, excitement, i don't quite know what to call it, without
 any very great inconvenience to myself. just before we left
 school the sexual instinct began to show itself in enthusiasm for
 art with a capital a, ouida's novels being mainly responsible. my
 sister and i agreed that we would spend our lives traveling about
 france, italy, and the continent, generally à la tricotrin,
 with a violin in one pocket and an atravante dante in the other.
 to do this satisfactorily to ourselves we must be artists, and i
 resolved to go in for music and become a second liszt. when my
 father offered to take us to italy, the artist's mecca, for a
 couple of years, we were wild with delight. we went, and
 disillusionment began. it may perhaps seem absurd, but we
 suffered acutely that first summer. our villa was quite on the
 beach, the lowest of its flight of steps being washed by the
 mediterranean. at the back were grounds which seemed a paradise.
 long alleys covered over with vines and carpeted with long grass
 and poppies, grassy slopes dotted with olives and ilex, roses
 everywhere, and almost every flower in profusion, with, at night,
 the fireflies and the heavy scents of syringa and orange
 blossoms. in the midst of every possible excitement to the senses
 there was one thing wanting, and we did not know what that was.
 "we attributed our restlessness and dissatisfaction to the slow
 progress in our artistic education, and consoled ourselves by
 thinking when once we had mastered the technical difficulties we
 should feel all right. and of course we did derive a very real
 pleasure from all the beauties of art and nature with which italy
 abounds.
 "it seems to me, however, that the art craze is one of the modern
 phases of woman's sexual life. when we were in italy the great
 centers of the country were simply overrun with girls studying
 art, most of whom had very little talent, but who had mistaken
 the restlessness due to the first awakening of the sexual
 instinct for the divine flame of genius. in our case it did not
 matter, as we were not dependent upon our own exertions. but it
 must have been terribly hard for girls who had burned their boats
 and chosen art as a career, to have added to the repression of
 their natural desires the bitterness of knowing that in their
 chosen walk of life they were failures. the results as far as
 work goes might not be so bad if the passions, as in men, were
 occasionally gratified. it is the constant drudgery combined with
 the disappointment and finding that art alone does not satisfy
 which is so paralyzing. besides, sexual gratification is always
 followed by exaltation of the mental faculties, with, in my
 experience, no depressing reaction such as follows pleasure
 excited by mental causes alone.
 "at one time when living at the villa i met a man about , who
 took rather a fancy to me. i mention this because it woke me up;
 no emotion was excited, but i realized for the first time (i must
 have been nearly ) that i was no longer a child, and that a
 man could think of me in connection with love. it was only after
 this, and not immediately after, either, that men's society began
 to have an interest for me, and that i began to think a man's
 love would be a pleasant thing to possess, after all.
 "the sexual instinct, at any rate as regards consciousness, thus
 developed slowly and in what i believe to be a very usual
 sequence: religion, admiration for an older woman, and art. i am
 not sure that i have made quite enough of the first, yet i do not
 know that there is any more to say. there were very strong
 physical feelings connected with all these which were identical
 with those now connected with passion, but they were completely
 satisfied by the mental idea which excited them.
 "the first time i can remember feeling keen physical pleasure was
 when i was between  and  years old. i can't recollect the
 cause, but i remember lying quite still in my little cot clasping
 the iron rails at the top. it may be said that this is hardly
 slow development, but i mean slow as regards () any connection
 of the idea with a man or () any physical means of excitation.
 "i have laid stress on my desire for knowledge, as i think my
 sexual feelings were affected by it. a great part of my feeling
 for my mother was due to the stores of information she appeared
 to possess. the omniscience of god was to me his most striking
 attribute. my french teacher's capacity was her chief attraction.
 when, as a girl, i thought of marriage, i desired a man who
 'could explain things to me.' one learns later to live one's
 mental and sexual life separately to a great extent. but at  i
 could not have done so; given the opportunity, i should have made
 the mistake of dorothea in middlemarch.
 "i have spoken of the depressing after-effects of pleasure
 brought about by a purely mental cause, but i do not think this
 is the case in childhood and early youth. (perhaps some women
 feel no such depression afterward, and this may account for their
 coldness in regard to men.) this may perhaps be accounted for by
 the fact that it occurs much more rarely, and also it is perhaps
 a natural process before the sexual organs fully develop, and so
 not harmful.
 "i always find it difficult in expressing the different degrees
 of physical excitement even to myself, though i know exactly what
 i felt. as a child, from the time of the early experience already
 mentioned (about the age of  or ), and as a young girl, the
 second stage (secretion of mucus) was always reached. the amount
 of secretion has always been excessive, but at first secretion
 only lasted a short time; later it began to last for several
 hours, or even sometimes the whole night, if the natural
 gratification has been withheld for a long time (say, three
 months). i do not remember ever feeling the third stage (complete
 orgasm) until i saw the first man i fancied i cared for. i do not
 think that mental causes alone have ever produced more than the
 first two stages (general diffuse excitement and secretion). i
 have sometimes wondered whether i could produce the third
 mechanically, but i have a curious unreasonable repugnance to
 trying the experiment; it would seem to materialize it too much.
 as a child and a girl i was contented to arrive at the second
 stage, possibly because i did not realize that there was any
 other, and perhaps this is why i have experienced no evil
 results.
 "in dreams the third stage seems to come suddenly without any
 leading up to it, either mental or physical, of which i am
 conscious. i do not, however, remember having any such dreams
 before i was engaged. they came at a later period; even then,
 when great pleasure was experienced, it came, as a rule, suddenly
 and sharply, with no dreams leading up to it. the dreams
 generally take a sad form (an evangeline and gabriel business),
 where one vainly seeks the person who eludes one. i have,
 however, sometimes had pleasurable dreams of men who were quite
 indifferent to me and of whom i never thought when awake. the
 impression on waking is so strong one could almost fancy one's
 self really in love with them. i can quite understand falling in
 love with a person by dreaming of him in this way.
 "the first time i remember experiencing the third stage in waking
 moments was at a picnic, when the man, to whom i have before
 referred as the first that i fancied i cared for, leaned against
 me accidentally in passing a plate or dish; but i was already in
 a violent state of excitement at being with him. there was no
 possibility of anything between us, as he was married. if he
 guessed my feelings, they were never admitted, as i did my best
 to hide them. i never experienced this, except at the touch of
 some one i loved. (i think the saying about the woman 'desiring
 the desire of the man' is just about as true as most epigrams. it
 is the man's personality alone which affects me. his feelings
 toward me are of—i was going to say—indifference, but at any
 rate quite secondary importance, and the gratification of my own
 vanity counts as nothing in such relations.)
 "as a rule, to reach even the second stage the exciting ideas
 must be associated with some particular person, except in the
 case of a story, where one identifies one's self with one of the
 characters. in childhood and early youth it was, in the case of
 religion, the idea of god and the presence and the personality of
 god which aroused my feelings and always seemed very vivid to me.
 in the case of my governess, my feelings were aroused in exactly
 the same way as later they would be by one's lover. in the art
 craze i am rather vague as to how it came about, but i think, as
 a rule, there was rather a craving for pleasure than pleasure
 itself. i do not remember ever thinking much about the physical
 feeling. it seemed as natural that a pleasant emotion should
 produce pleasant physical effects as that a painful one should
 cause tears. as a child, one takes so much for granted, and later
 on my mind was so much occupied with worrying about the truth of
 religion that i hardly thought enough about anything else to
 analyze it carefully.
 "i may summarize my own feelings thus: first, exciting ideas
 alone produce, as a rule, merely the first stage of sexual
 excitement. second, the same ideas connected with a particular
 person will produce the second stage. third, the same may be said
 of the presence of the beloved person. fourth, actual contact
 appears necessary for the third stage. if the first stage only be
 reached, the sensation is not pleasurable in reality, or would
 not be but for its association. if produced, as i have sometimes
 found it to be, by a sense of mental incapacity, it is distinctly
 disagreeable, especially if one feels that the energy which might
 have been used in coping with the difficulty is being thus
 dissipated. if it be produced, as it may be, as the result of
 physical or mental restraint, it is also unpleasant unless the
 restraint were put upon one by a person one loves. then, however,
 the second stage would probably be reached, but this would depend
 a good deal on one's mood. if the first stage only were reached,
 i think it would be disagreeable; it would mean a conflict
 between one's will and sexual feeling. perhaps women who feel
 actual repugnance to the sexual act with a man they love have
 never gone beyond the first stage, when their dislike to it would
 be quite intelligible to me.
 "some time after the life in italy had come to an end i became
 engaged. there was considerable difficulty in the way of
 marriage, but we saw a good deal of each other. my fiancé often
 dined with us, and we met every day. the result of seeing him so
 frequently was that i was kept in a constant state of strong, but
 suppressed, sexual excitement. this was particularly the case
 when we met in the evening and wandered about the moonlit garden
 together. when this had gone on about three months i began to
 experience a sense of discomfort after each of his visits. the
 abdomen seemed to swell with a feeling of fullness and
 congestion; but, though these sensations were closely connected
 with the physical excitement, they were not sufficiently painful
 to cause me any alarm or make me endeavor to avoid their
 pleasurable cause. the symptoms got worse, however, and no longer
 passed off quickly as at first. the swelling increased;
 considerable pain and a dragged-down sensation resulted the
 moment i tried to walk even a short distance. i was troubled
 with constant indigestion, weight in the chest, pain in the head
 and eyes, and continual slight diarrhea. this went on for about
 nine months, and then my fiancé was called away from the
 neighborhood. after his departure i got a trifle better, but the
 symptoms remained, though in less acute form. a few months later
 the engagement was broken off, and for some weeks i was severely
 ill with influenza and was on my back for several weeks. when i
 could get about a little, though very weak, all the swelling was
 gone, but pain returned whenever i tried to walk or stand for
 long. the indigestion and diarrhea were also very troublesome. i
 was treated for both by a physician, but without success. next
 year i became engaged to my husband and was shortly after
 married. the indigestion and diarrhea disappeared soon after. the
 pain and dragging feeling in the abdomen bothered me much in
 walking or any kind of exercise. one day i came across a medical
 work, the elements of social science, in which i found
 descriptions of symptoms like those i suffered from ascribed to
 uterine disease. i again applied to a doctor, telling him i
 thought there was displacement and possibly congestion. he
 confirmed my opinion and told me to wear a pessary. he ascribed
 the displacement to the relaxing climate, and said he did not
 think i should ever get quite right again. after the pessary had
 been placed in position every trace of pain, etc., left me. a
 year later i thought i would try and do without the pessary, and
 to my great satisfaction none of the old trials came back after
 its removal, in spite of much trouble, anxiety, sick nursing, and
 fatigue. i attribute the disorder entirely to violent sexual
 excitement which was not permitted its natural gratification and
 relief.
 "i have reason to believe that suppression acts very injuriously
 on a woman's mental capacity. when excitement is naturally
 relieved the mind turns of its own accord to another subject, but
 when suppressed it is unable to do this. personally, in the
 latter event, i find the greatest difficulty in concentrating my
 thoughts, and mental effort becomes painful. other women have
 complained to me of the same difficulty. i have tried mechanical
 mental work, such as solving arithmetical or algebraic problems,
 but it does no good; in fact, it seems only to increase the
 excitement. (i may remark here that my feelings are always very
 strong not only before and after the monthly period, but also
 during the time itself; very unfortunately, as, of course, they
 cannot then be gratified. this only applies to desire from
 within, as i am strongly susceptible to influences from without
 at any time.) there seems nothing to be done but to bow to the
 storm till it passes over. anything i do during the time it
 lasts, even household work, is badly done. the brain seems to
 become addled for the time being, while after gratification of
 desire it seems to attain an additional quickness and cleverness.
 perhaps this cause contributes to the small amount of
 intellectual and artistic work done by women, admitting their
 natural inferiority to men in artistic impulse. a woman whose
 passions are satisfied generally has her strength sapped by
 maternity, while her attention is drawn from abstract ideas to
 her children."
 history iii.—b. states that his first sexual thoughts and acts
 were curiously connected with whipping. at  he and another boy
 used to beat each other with a cricket bat upon the bare nates,
 and afterward indulge in mutual masturbation. he cannot remember
 the beginning of his sexual speculation as a child, nor how he
 learned masturbation. when he was  he used to discuss erotic
 matters with a schoolfellow who was in the habit of engaging in
 vulvar intercourse with a girl of his own age. the intercourse
 was practised on the way home from school, and in a standing
 posture. b. embraced the girl in the same way. he is not
 interested in the psychological aspects of the sexual emotion.
 although his sex passion was early kindled, he never had commerce
 with prostitutes. he thinks that his youthful experiences had no
 ill effect upon him morally, mentally, or physically. he
 practised masturbation in moderation till he married, at the age
 of .
 history iv.—"i can remember" (writes the subject) "trotting away
 as a youngster about  with another boy to 'see a girl's legs';
 the idea emanated from the other boy, but i was vaguely
 interested. how or where we were going to see the object in
 question i do not remember nor anything further than the
 intention. when  or  i remember being put to bed with the nurse
 girl and feeling her bare arm with undoubted sexual excitement; i
 remember, too, gradually feeling along the arm very cautiously,
 fearing the girl would wake and being bitterly disappointed to
 find it was merely the arm. i am almost certain i had then no
 idea of sex, but the disappointment was actual.
 "these are the only early experiences of the sort i can remember.
 when about  i had others. on the coast of the north of england,
 which had then very few visitors and seemed to me very remote, i
 lived in a farm-house and used to assist the girls of the farm in
 looking after young cattle. these girls certainly instilled
 sexual ideas, though i did not realize them with precision. they
 used to talk about things a good many of which, i can now see, i
 did not then understand as they did. i liked to see these girls
 wading with their dresses tucked up. about this time i fell
 passionately in love with a girl cousin, but do not remember
 having any sensual ideas in regard to her. i cannot say that
 these early experiences had any influence on my later sexual
 development so far as i am consciously aware. i have always
 remembered them vaguely, never with sexual excitement.
 "sexual dreams took place first at about the age of ; there was
 then emission and sensation in sleep. these were, however, not
 much associated with distinctly sexual dreams. all that i recall
 after them was the sensation, which, however, i did not even then
 absolutely localize. masturbation was undoubtedly the direct
 result of these dreams. it was tried at first tentatively, out of
 curiosity to determine if the sensation of the dream could be so
 reproduced. sexual dreams, such as i have described, occurred
 frequently, although i cannot say at what interval. i have never
 experienced the slightest attraction for the same sex."
 history v.—"my maternal grandfather" (writes the subject of this
 history) "was a small farmer who kept a few beagles and
 greyhounds for hare-hunting. he had three daughters, one of whom
 became my mother. one of his sporting companions, a doctor of
 profligate habits and a drunkard, seduced my mother at the age of
 . when her condition was discovered she had to flee from the
 violence of her father, and i was born some distance from her
 home. after my grandfather's death i was reared by my
 grandmother, and saw nothing of my mother until i was nearly ;
 she had left the country in shame and disgrace.
 "i believe that in my heredity the transmission comes chiefly
 from my mother, who is now  years old. although her life has
 been blameless in every particular since her youthful
 indiscretion, she has never got over it. i feel in my character a
 reflection of her overstrung condition during pregnancy.
 "i can distinctly remember from the age of  years, and am sure
 that i had no sexual feelings before the age of , though always
 in the company of girls. i had many boyish passions for girls,
 always older than myself, but these were never accompanied by
 sexual desires. i deified all my sweethearts, and was satisfied
 if i got a flower, a handkerchief, or even a shred of clothing of
 my inamorata for the time being. these things gave me a strange
 idealistic emotion, but caused no sexual desire or erection.
 "at  a -year-old sister of a boy companion once sat down on a
 sheaf of corn so as to expose the mons veneris and enticed me to
 copulate. there was slight erection, and after the act had been
 continued some time a pleasurable sensation of ejaculation, but
 without true emission. i had frequent relations with this woman
 after that.
 "about this time the farm servant of a neighbor taught me
 masturbation. the mistress of the farm, a thin, willowy, dark
 woman, the mother of several children, treated me with such
 familiarity as once to urinate in my presence, so that i saw her
 very hirsute mons veneris. from that moment i conceived a great
 passion for her, and used to tremble as soon as i saw her. i had
 become well developed and virile, but, though i think she was a
 lustful woman, i never ventured to touch her. i found an extreme
 ecstasy in masturbating while gazing upon some article of her
 clothing. this gave me much greater sexual pleasure than actual
 connection with the ever-willing sister of my schoolfellow. i
 think i loved the married woman best because the mons veneris was
 more covered with hair.
 "this has always had a peculiar attraction for me. later, when
 accosted by prostitutes, i never would go with them unless i was
 assured the mons veneris was very hirsute. never much addicted to
 masturbation, i derived no great enjoyment therefrom unless i had
 hair or part of the clothing of the woman with whom i was
 indulging in psychic coitus.
 "at  i left school and went to a large city to learn a
 business. at this time the sexual appetite was very strong. i
 frequently had intercourse with three women in one evening.
 "i have had but few lascivious dreams. in these the phantom
 partner was almost invariably a dead woman. (when about  i had
 seen the dead body of an aunt who died at .)
 "when  i went to london and took all the pleasure which came my
 way. i cared only for normal coitus. offers of another type
 created disgust. i once allowed a woman to exhaust me sexually
 orally, but felt degraded thereby. women with whom i had become
 very intimate often urged me to cunnilingus, but i could not do
 it. i have practised intermammary coitus a very few times.
 "at  i married a pure, gentle woman, after having for ten
 months before marriage led a life of celibacy. my wife died when
 i was , and for about eight months i lived a celibate life.
 lascivious dreams sometimes occurred, but i invariably awoke
 before ejaculation. eventually i gave way to the cravings of my
 strong sexual nature, but never wished for anything out of the
 usual except intercourse from behind. a woman with marked
 development of the nates has great attraction for me. solitary
 masturbation has for some time ceased, but a nude woman in the
 act of masturbation with her back to me gives me great pleasure.
 i am as strong sexually at  as i was at , only i never want
 women unless i am brought into actual contact with them and they
 are hairy and have large pelvic development. i am in excellent
 health. genitals are well developed, and i am clothed with hair
 from the chin to the genitals. my skull is dolichocephalic. i am
 violent and tenacious in temper, high-strung, and rapid in
 thought and action. my digestion is good, but i have a tendency
 to constipation. occasionally i have a twinge of pain below the
 occipital region.
 "my early views of women have changed; i no longer deify them,
 though i study them. i have known very sensual women living at
 home in respectable middle-class society. one, in particular, a
 girl of , after coitus used to excite me lingually. i have had
 a sweetheart who remained virgo intacta. had i seduced her, as
 i could have done, i should have lost all interest in her. i
 could never bear the presence of naked men, and would never go to
 a public swimming bath for that reason. i regard myself as a man
 of abnormally strong, but, on the whole, healthy and wholesome,
 sexual feelings. as a rule, i have coitus twice or oftener in one
 week and i practise withdrawal. i am a total abstainer, and never
 could embrace a woman who smelled of drink."
 history vi.—the writer of the following is a man of letters,
 married. "quite early i remember a strange and romantic interest
 in the feminine. certainly before i was  i had a strong
 affection for a little girl playmate; our family lost sight of
 hers, and i saw and heard nothing of her for sixteen years; then,
 hearing she was coming to town, i experienced quite a flutter of
 heart, so strong had been the impression caused at even the early
 age of our acquaintance. not that i mean to say i never wavered
 in between! through the whole of my boyhood i remember persistent
 romantic interests in girls and women, whose smooth, fair faces
 and sweet voices exercised ever a subtle attraction over me.
 before i was  i had picked out my 'future wife' a dozen times
 at least! (a different one each time of course!) curiosity as to
 the physical detail of sex and birth was singularly absent.
 possibly this was partly due to the fact that the only younger
 member of our family was born when i was but  years old. grave,
 shy, and reserved, i was never taken into the counsels of
 prurient schoolmates. i was unaware that there was such
 discussion between them—though it is, i suppose, not probable
 that our school was exempt. i was a great reader, and when about
  or  i came across a reference to an illegitimate child which
 puzzled me. ere long, however, in my random and extensive reading
 i hit on a book that touched on phallicism, and i learned that
 there were male and female organs of generation. i had neither
 shame nor curiosity; i jumped to the conclusion that during close
 caresses somehow a subtle aroma arose from the man to fertilize
 the woman; i left the subject at this, satisfied, and had no
 inkling of the real intimacy of the embrace.
 "about , much interested in bradlaugh, i bought both the
 knowlton pamphlet and mrs. besant's population book. i found the
 physical details in scientific language so dull that i could not
 peruse them. by reading the argumentative passages i learned that
 somehow (i knew not how) children could be produced or not
 produced as desired; and in this stage of the matter it seemed
 to me so admirable that it should be so that i wondered why there
 should be cavil.
 "about this age my elder brother believed it to be his duty to
 tell me the secrets of sex; i remember his talking to me, while
 i, bored and uninterested, thought of something else. when he
 finished i had heard nothing. remember, i felt no shame on the
 matter—none at all. i was simply bored. this i attribute to two
 things: first, my preponderating interest in the romantic side of
 things; secondly (and this bears with it a strong moral), the
 feeling that the knowledge lay always within my grasp kept me
 from that curiosity which so oft consumes those who think it is
 hidden away from them.
 "the changes of puberty came naturally and without startling me.
 even the fact of emissions—which took place during sleep at
 intervals, unaccompanied by dreams or by any physical prostration
 afterward—has left on my memory no recollection of surprise; i
 knew it to be somehow connected with generation, but i had no
 physical trouble, and i am quite sure i did not bother further
 about it. the best possible proof of this lies in the fact that
 my memory is a blank on the matter. at the age of  (i take this
 from a diary, so i know it is correct) i was still ignorant as to
 intrinsic fact. then i pulled myself together and felt it was
 really time i learned the actual details of the matter. i went to
 a clever friend of mine and asked him to tell me all about it. he
 expressed himself astounded at my not knowing; and he had very
 great shyness about telling me. in fact, i had to drag facts out
 of him by a real cross-examination, during which he persistently
 marveled at my ignorance. though he had a great deal of false
 shame about the matter, i had none at all. his revelations
 considerably surprised me, because i had no idea that there was
 actual intromission. when i came to reflect on what i had learned
 the fact of this close physical intimacy appealed to me as being
 quite poetic and beautiful between two lovers; and i have had no
 reason since to change my opinion.
 "summary.—. romantic interest in girls and women commencing
 early and remaining persistently.
 ". knowledge before puberty of the fact that this interest was
 based on the all-important process of reproduction.
 ". absence of further physical curiosity even at puberty itself.
 ". knowledge ultimately acquired without shock.
 "the physical in sex has never been any bother to me, neither
 have i bothered about it. i have recognized it, frankly, and
 don't see why i shouldn't, but my unashamed recognition has
 probably been because the merely physical is less absorbing to me
 than to most. mental and emotional interest in passion has
 absorbed me greatly, but the merely physical has sunk into what
 i call its natural place of subordination. nature is kind. it is
 our 'conspiracy of silence' which tends to emphasize physical
 detail."
 history vii.—g. d., who is a doctor and a man of science, writes:
 "there is a strong history of gout on the paternal side. no
 history of alcohol, tubercle, brain trouble, or of the
 arthropathies. there is some reason to believe that two of my
 maternal aunts were sexually frigid, and perhaps this was true to
 a less extent of my mother, who had a contracted pelvis,
 necessitating the induction of labor at the eighth month of
 pregnancy.
 "about the age of  a german nursery governess, b., took charge
 of me, and i soon became devoted to her. i was then a delicate
 child, and used to suffer frequently from nightmare, waking up
 screaming and covered with sweat. when this happened, b. would
 sometimes take me into her bed and soothe me with kisses, etc.
 these i returned, and can remember that i was particularly fond
 of kissing her breasts.
 "about this time a girl cousin, a., about a year older than
 myself, was one of my most frequent playmates. i endeavored to
 monopolize her company and attention, and on this account often
 came to blows with c., a cousin rather younger than myself, who
 has since told me that he was then 'in love' with a. and
 'jealous' of me. i believe i was really jealous and in love at
 the time, but cannot remember that anything in the nature of
 caresses took place between a. and myself.
 "some time later, probably when i was about , something led up
 to b. saying that she was not built like i was, that she had no
 penis, etc. (i cannot remember my nursery term for penis.) i was
 incredulous, and demanded to be allowed to see if it was true;
 this was refused, and i made many plans to gratify my curiosity,
 such as slipping into her room when she was dressing, tipping up
 the chair she was sitting in, and trying to suddenly thrust my
 hand up under her skirts. i did not succeed in finding out, but
 have since thought that, although she did not allow me to attain
 the object of my efforts, the later game caused her pleasurable
 sensations. i regard these efforts as being prompted purely by
 curiosity; i had no feelings of warmth or irritations of the
 genitals, and i certainly never manipulated them, nor was i, as
 far as i can judge, an unusually prurient small boy. b. left when
 i was about , when i went to a preparatory school.
 "at ½ i was sent to a public school, and was then told by my
 father the chief facts of sex and warned to avoid masturbation.
 my first wet dream took place when i was . rather before this i
 had begun to suffer with severe intermittent testicular neuralgia
 which practically defied all treatment and continued on and off
 for four or five years, the attacks gradually becoming fewer and
 less severe.
 "when , circumstances compelled me to leave school and to live
 for two years at the seaside with no companions of my own age. i
 had, however, the run of a well-stocked library, and fished and
 collected insects energetically.
 "at  i made love to the trained nurse attending my mother, but,
 owing more, i think, to my timidity than to the austerity of her
 virtue, got no further than kissing. about this time wet dreams
 became inconveniently frequent; they would occur three or four
 times weekly, and resisted the stock remedies. at  i was
 advised to try connection. this i did, and found but little
 pleasure in the act, there being a strong esthetic objection to
 the 'love that keeps awake for lure.'
 "about this time i found in the united states pharmacopœia
 a remedy for my emissions, which have, however, always
 remained rather more frequent than those of the average
 individual, judging from the experience of my friends. emissions
 are generally accompanied by lascivious dreams, but at times take
 place when i dream that i am hurrying to catch a train, or to
 micturate against time.
 "i have of late years (not noticed till after ) observed that
 the dream accompanying emission is shorter; so that, whereas up
 to, say,  i generally performed the whole physiological act
 with my dream-charmer, i now almost invariably emit and awake
 before intromission has taken place. there has been no
 alternation comparable to this in the performance of the act
 while i am awake.
 "as regards my physique i should mention that all my reflexes are
 very brisk, though i am only slightly ticklish in the ordinary
 sense of the term. i sweat easily and am very shy, not only with
 women, but with any strangers. i have, however, trained myself
 not to show this. about averagely passionate, i should say, and
 extremely critical where women are concerned, the latter quality
 often keeping me chaste for months at a time."
 history viii.—"when i was about  years old" (states the lady
 who is the subject of the present observation) "i remember that,
 with several other children, we used to play in an old garden at
 being father and mother, unfastening our drawers and bringing the
 sexual parts together, as we imagined married people to do, but
 no sexual feelings were aroused, nor did the boys have
 erections." when about  years old she became conscious of a
 pleasurable sensation associated with the smell of leather, which
 has ever since persisted. at that age she was sometimes left to
 wait in the office of a wholesale business house full of
 leather-bound ledgers. she did not then notice the sensation
 particularly, and was certainly not conscious of any connection
 with sexual emotion. menstruation was established at ½ years.
 distinct sexual feelings were first observed a few months later.
 "the first feelings of love which i ever felt were at the age of
  for a nice, manly boy of my own age, who often came to our
 house. he liked me, but was not in love with me. it was very
 seldom that he would sit by me and hold my hand, as i wished him.
 this went on till i was about , when he went to the university.
 after his first term he came back and was then attracted to me;
 but, though i loved him very much, i was too proud to show it.
 when he tried to kiss me, i resisted, though i longed for it.
 thinking i was greatly offended, he apologized, which only made
 me angry. all these years i was worshiping at his shrine and
 mixed him up with all my ideas of life." whenever she was near
 him she experienced physical sensations, with moistening of the
 vulva. this continued till she was about , but the object of
 these emotions never again attempted any advances.
 at  she became engaged to someone else. at the beginning she
 was physically indifferent to her lover, but when he first kissed
 her she became greatly excited. the engagement, however, was soon
 broken off from absence of strong affection on either side and
 chiefly, it would seem, from the cooling of the lover's ardor.
 she thinks he would have been more strongly attached to her if
 she had been colder to him, or pretended to be, instead of
 responding with simplicity and frankness.
 during the next few years little occurred. she was working hard,
 and her amusements would mostly, she says, be regarded as rather
 childish. she was extremely fond of dancing, and she was always
 pleased when anyone paid her attention. she was frequently
 conscious of sexual feelings, sometimes tormented by them, and
 she regarded this as something to be ashamed of. the constant
 longing for love was affected little or not at all by hard work.
 "at about this time i was very fond of abandoning myself to
 day-dreams. i was very glad if i could get everyone out of the
 house and lie on an easy chair or the bed. i liked especially to
 read poetry, all the more if i did not quite understand it. this
 would lead me on to all sorts of dreams of love, which, however,
 never went beyond the preliminaries of actual love—as that was
 all i then knew of love." the only climax to her dream of love
 was founded on a piece of information volunteered by a married
 woman many years earlier, when she was about . this
 lady—evidently agreeing with rousseau (who in emile commended
 the mother's reply to the child's query whence babies come, "les
 femmes les pissent, mon enfant, avec des grands douleurs") that
 the unknown should first be explained to the young in terms of
 the known—told her that the husband micturated into the wife.
 she therefore used to imagine a lover who would bear her away
 into a forest and do this on her as she lay at the foot of a
 tree. (at a later date she accidentally discovered that a full
 bladder tended to enhance sexual feelings, and occasionally
 resorted to this physical measure of heightening excitement.) all
 the physical sensations of sexual desire were called out by these
 day-dreams, with abundant secretion, but never the orgasm. her
 reveries never led to masturbation or to allied manifestations,
 which have never taken place. such a method of relief has,
 indeed, never offered any temptation to her and she doubts even
 its possibility in her case. (at a later period of life, however,
 at the age of , masturbation began and was practised at
 intervals.) at the same time she remarks that, while no orgasm
 (of which, indeed, she was then ignorant) ever occurred, the
 sexual excitement produced by the day-dreams was sufficiently
 great to cause a feeling of relief afterward. these day-dreams
 were the only way in which the sexual erethism was discharged.
 she cannot recall having erotic dreams or any sexual
 manifestations during sleep.
 spontaneous sexual excitement was present a few days before
 menstruation, and fairly marked during and immediately after the
 period. it also tended to recur in the middle of the
 intermenstrual period.
 the pleasurable sensation connected with the smell of leather
 became more marked as she approached adult age. it was especially
 pronounced about the age of , and the sexual emotion it
 produced (with moisture of the vulva) was then clearly conscious.
 no other odor produced this effect in such a marked degree. it
 was often associated with leather bags, but not with boots,
 though on rubbing the leather of shoes she found that this odor
 was given out. she cannot account for its origin, and does not
 connect any association with it. it never affected her conduct or
 led to fetichistic habits.
 some other odors affect her in the same way, though not to the
 same degree as leather. this is more especially the case with
 some flowers, especially white flowers with heavy odors, like
 gardenias. many flowers, on the other hand, like primroses, seem
 rather opposed to sex effect, too fresh, though stimulating to
 the mind. some artificial scents tend to produce sexual effects
 also. personal odors have no influence of this kind. (at a later
 period the sexual influence of personal odors was occasionally
 experienced, but the present history deals only with the period
 before marriage.)
 she believes that most beautiful things, however unconnected with
 sex, have a tendency to produce distinctively sexual feelings in
 a faint degree, although sometimes more marked, with secretion.
 she has, however, never experienced homosexual feeling, and, on
 first consideration, was inclined to believe that the sight of a
 beautiful woman had no sexual effect on her, though she could
 quite understand such an effect. subsequently, on recalling as
 well as observing her experiences more carefully, she found that
 a lovely woman's face and figure (especially on one occasion the
 very graceful figure of a beautiful fairy in a ballet) produced
 distinct sexual sensations (with mucous emission). music,
 however, has strongly emotional effects upon her, and she cannot
 recall that she ever felt any equally powerful influence of this
 kind in the absence of music.
 looking back on the development of her feelings she finds that,
 though in some respects they may have been slow, they were
 simple, natural, spontaneous, and correspond to "the dawning and
 progress which go on in the development of every girl. while it
 is going on in actual fact, the girl does not know or bother
 herself about trying to understand it. afterward it seems quite
 clear and simple. full occupation of the brain, and hands too,
 while it does not do away with desire, is a great help and
 safeguard to a growing girl, when combined with proper
 information about herself and her relation to man the animal, so
 that she may realize where she is and how to choose the right
 man—though under the best conditions failure may occur."
 history ix.—the subject belongs to a large family having some
 neurotic members; she spent her early life on a large farm. she
 is vigorous and energetic, has intellectual tastes, and is
 accustomed to think for herself, from unconventional standpoints,
 on many subjects. her parents were very religious, and not, she
 thinks, of sensual temperament. her own early life was free from
 associations of a sexual character, and she can recall little
 that now seems to be significant in this respect. she remembers
 that in childhood and for some time later she believed that
 children were born through the navel. her activities went chiefly
 into humanitarian and utopian directions, and she cherished ideas
 of a large, healthy, free life, untrammeled by civilization. she
 regards herself as very passionate, but her sexual emotions
 appear to have developed very slowly and have been somewhat
 intellectualized. after reaching adult life she has formed
 several successive relationships with men to whom she has been
 attracted by affinity in temperament, in intellectual views, and
 in tastes. these relationships have usually been followed by some
 degree of disillusion, and so have been dissolved. she does not
 believe in legal marriage, though under fitting circumstances she
 would much like to have a child.
 she never masturbated until the age of . at that time a married
 friend told her that such a thing could be done. she found it
 gave her decided pleasure, indeed, more than coitus had ever
 given her except with one man. she has never practised it to
 excess, only at rare intervals, and is of the opinion that it is
 decidedly beneficial when thus moderately indulged in. she has
 sometimes found, for instance, that, after the mental excitement
 produced by delivering a lecture, sleep would be impossible if
 masturbation were not resorted to as a sedative to relieve the
 tension.
 spontaneous sexual excitement is strongest just before the
 monthly period.
 definite sexual dreams and sexual excitement during sleep have
 not occurred except possibly on one or two occasions.
 she has from girlhood experienced erotic day-dreams, imagining
 love-stories of which she herself was the heroine; the climax of
 these stories has developed with her own developing knowledge of
 sexual matters.
 she is not inverted, and has never been in love with a woman. she
 finds, however, that a beautiful woman is distinctly a sexual
 excitation, calling out definite physical manifestations of
 sexual emotion. she explains this by saying that she thinks she
 instinctively puts herself in the place of a man and feels as it
 seems to her a man would feel.
 she finds that music excites the sexual emotions, as well as many
 scents, whether of flowers, the personal odor of the beloved
 person, or artificial perfumes.
 history x.—the subject is of german extraction on both sides.
 the father is of marked intellectual tastes, as also is she
 herself. there is no unhealthy strain in the family so far as she
 is aware, though they all have very strong passions. she is well
 developed, healthy, vigorous, and athletic, any trouble to which
 she is subject being mainly due to overwork.
 looking back on her childhood, she can now see various sexual
 manifestations occurring at a period when she was quite ignorant
 of sex matters. "the very first," she writes, "was at the age of
 . i remember once sitting astride a banister while my parents
 were waiting for me outside. i distinctly remember a pleasurable
 sensation—probably in part due to a physical feeling—in the
 thought of staying there when i knew i ought to have run out to
 them. from that year till the age of  i simply reveled in the
 idea of being tortured. i went gladly to bed every night to
 imagine myself a slave, chained, beaten, made to carry loads and
 do ignominious work. one of my imaginings, i remember, was that i
 was chained to a moldering skeleton." as she grew older these
 fancies were discontinued. at the same time there was a trace of
 sadistic tendency: "i used to frighten and tease a young child,
 driven to it by an irresistible impulse, and experiencing a
 certain pleasurable feeling in so doing. but this, i am glad to
 say, was rare, as i hate all cruelty."
 one of her favorite imaginings as a child was that she was a boy,
 and especially that she was a knight rescuing damsels in
 distress. she was not fond of girls' occupations, and has always
 had a sort of chivalrous feeling toward women.
 "when i first heard of the sexual act," she writes, "it appeared
 to me so absurd that i took little notice. about the age of  i
 discussed it a good deal with other girls, and we used to play
 childishly indecent games—out of pure mischief and not from any
 definite physical feeling."
 about a year after menstruation was established she accidentally
 discovered the act of masturbation by leaning over a table. "i
 discovered it naturally; no one taught me; and the very
 naturalness of the impulse that led me to it often made me in
 later years question the harmfulness." both her sisters
 masturbated from a very early age, but not, to her knowledge, her
 brother. the practice of masturbation was continued. "for many
 years, imbued with the old ideas of morality, i struggled against
 it in vain. the sight of animals copulating, the perusal of
 various books (shakespeare, rabelais, gautier's mademoiselle de
 maupin, etc.), the sight of the nude in some bacchanalian
 pictures (such as rubens's), all aroused passion. coexistent with
 this—perhaps (though i doubt it) due to it—arose a disgust for
 normal intercourse. i fell in love and enjoyed kisses, etc., but
 the mere thought of anything beyond disgusted me. had my lover
 suggested such a thing i would have lost all love for him. but
 all this time i went on masturbating, though as seldom as
 possible and without thought of my lover. love was to me a thing
 ideal and quite apart from lust, and i still think that it is
 false to try to connect the two. i fear that even now, if i fell
 in love, sexual intercourse would break the charm. at the age of
  i came across tolstoy's kreutzer sonata and was overjoyed to
 find all i had thought written down there. gradually, through
 seeing a friend happily married, i have grown to a more normal
 view of things. i am very critical of men and have never met one
 liberal-minded and just enough to please me. perhaps if i did i
 might take a perfectly healthy view of things."
 in course of time various devices had been adopted to heighten
 sexual excitement when indulging in masturbation. thus, for
 instance, she found that the effects of sexual excitement are
 increased by keeping the bladder full. but the chief method which
 she had devised for heightening and prolonging the preliminary
 excitement consisted in wearing tight stays (as a rule, she wears
 loose stays) and in painting her face. she cannot herself explain
 this. self-excitement is completed by friction, or sometimes by
 the introduction of a piece of wood into the vagina. she finds
 that, the more frequently she masturbates, the more easily she is
 excited. spontaneous sexual feeling is strongest before and after
 the menstrual period; not so much so during the periods.
 there are various faint traces of homosexuality, it may be
 gathered, in the history of this subject's sexual development.
 recently these have come to a climax in the formation of a
 homosexual relationship with a girl friend. this relationship has
 given her great pleasure and satisfaction. she does not, however,
 regard herself as being a really inverted person.
 there have been vivid sexual dreams from about  (apparently
 about the period of the relationship with the lover). these
 dreams have not, however, had special reference to persons of
 either sex.
 apart from the influence of books and pictures already mentioned,
 she remarks that she is sexually affected by the personal odor of
 a beloved person, but is not consciously affected by any other
 odors.
 history xi.—widower, aged  years. surgeon. "my experience of
 sexual matters began early. when i was about  years of age a
 boy friend who was staying with us told me that his sister made
 him uncover his person, with which she played and encouraged him
 to do the same for her. he said it was great fun, and suggested
 that we should take two of my sisters into an old barn and repeat
 his experience on them. this we did, and tried all we could to
 have connection with them; they were nothing loath and did all
 they could to help us, but nothing was effected and i experienced
 no pleasure in it.
 "when i went back to school i attracted the attention of one of
 the big boys who slept in the same room with me; he came into my
 bed and began to play with my member, saying that it was the
 usual thing to do and would give me pleasure. i did not feel any
 pleasure, but i liked the attention, and rather enjoyed playing
 with his member, which was of large size, and surrounded by thick
 pubic hair. after i had played with him for some time i was
 surprised at his having an emission of sticky matter. afterward
 he rubbed me again, saying that if i let him do it long enough he
 would produce the same substance from me. this he failed to do,
 however, though he rubbed me long and frequently, on that and
 many other occasions. i was very disappointed at not being able
 to have an emission, and on every occasion that offered i
 endeavored to excite myself to the extent of compassing this. i
 used to ask to go out of school two or three times a day, and
 retired to the closet, where i practised on myself most
 diligently, but to no purpose, at that time, though i began to
 have pleasurable emotions in the act.
 "when i went home for the holidays i took a great interest in one
 of my father's maids, whose legs i felt as she ran upstairs one
 day. i was in great fear that she would complain of what i had
 done, but i was delighted to find that she did nothing of the
 sort; on the contrary, she took to kissing and fondling me,
 calling me her sweetheart and saying that i was a forward boy.
 this encouraged me greatly, and i was not long in getting to
 more intimate relations with her. she called me into her room one
 day when we were alone in the house, she being in a half-dressed
 condition, and put me on the bed and laid herself on me, kissing
 me passionately on the mouth. she next unbuttoned my trousers and
 fondled and kissed my member, and directed my hand to her
 privates. i became very much excited and trembled violently, but
 was able to do for her what she wanted in the way of masturbation
 until she became wet. after this we had many meetings in which we
 embraced and she let me introduce my member until she had
 satisfied herself, though i was too young to have an emission.
 "on return to school i practised mutual masturbation with several
 of my schoolfellows, and finally, at the age of  years, had my
 first real emission. i was greatly pleased thereat, and, with
 this and the growth of hair which began to show on my pubis,
 began to feel myself quite a man. i loved lying in the arms of
 another boy, pressing against his body, and fondling his person
 and being fondled by him in return. we always finished up with
 mutual masturbation. we never indulged in any unnatural
 connections.
 "after leaving school i had no opportunity of indulging in
 relations with my own sex, and, indeed, did not wish for such, as
 i became a slave to the charms of the other sex, and passed most
 of my time in either enjoying, or planning to enjoy, love
 passages with them.
 "the sight of a woman's limbs or bust, especially if partly
 hidden by pretty underclothing, and the more so if seen by
 stealth, was sufficient to give a lustful feeling and a violent
 erection, accompanied by palpitation of the heart and throbbing
 in the head.
 "i had frequent coitus at the age of , as well as masturbating
 regularly. i liked to perform masturbation on a girl, even more
 than i liked having connection with her; and this was especially
 so in the case of girls who had never had masturbation practised
 on them before; i loved to see the look of surprised pleasure
 appear on their faces as they felt the delightful and novel
 sensation.
 "to gratify this desire i persuaded dozens of girls to allow me
 to take liberties with them, and it would surprise you to learn
 what a number of girls, many of them in good social position,
 permitted me the liberty i desired, though the supply was never
 equal to my demand.
 "with a view to enlarging my opportunities i took up the study of
 medicine as a profession, and reveled in the chances it gave of
 being on intimate sexual terms with many who would have been,
 otherwise, out of my reach.
 "at the age of  i married the daughter of an officer, a
 beautiful girl with a fully developed figure and an amorous
 disposition. while engaged, we used to pass hours wrapped in each
 other's arms, practising mutual masturbation, or i would kiss
 her passionately on the mouth, introducing my tongue into her
 mouth at intervals, with the invariable result that i had an
 emission and she went off into sighs and shivers. after marriage
 we practised all sorts of fancy coitus, coitus reservatus,
 etc., and rarely passed twenty-four hours without two
 conjunctions, until she got far on in the family way, and our
 play had to cease for a while.
 "during this interval i went to stay at the house of an old
 schoolfellow, who had been one of my lovers of days gone by. it
 happened that on account of the number of guests staying in the
 house the bed accommodation was somewhat scanty, and i agreed to
 share my friend's bedroom. the sight of his naked body as he
 undressed gave rise to lustful feelings in me; and when he had
 turned out the light i stole across to his bed and got in beside
 him. he made no objection, and we passed the night in mutual
 masturbation and embraces, coitus inter femora, etc. i was
 surprised to find how much i preferred this state of affairs to
 coitus with my wife, and determined to enjoy the occasion to the
 full. we passed a fortnight together in the above fashion, and,
 though i afterward went back and did my duty by my wife, i never
 took the same pleasure in her again, and when she died, five
 years later, i felt no inclination to contract another marriage,
 but devoted myself heart and soul to my old school-friend, with
 whom i continued tender relations until his death by accident
 last year. since then i have lost all interest in life."
 "the patient," writes the well-known alienist to whom i am
 indebted for the above history, "consulted me lately. i found him
 a fairly healthy man to look at, suffering from some neurasthenia
 and a tendency to melancholia. generative organs large, one
 testicle shows some wasting, pubic hair abundant, form of body
 distinctly masculine; temperament neurotic. he improved under
 treatment, and, after seeing me three times and writing out the
 above history, came no more."
 history xii.—mrs. b., aged . father's family normal; mother's
 family clever, eccentric, somewhat neuropathic. she is herself
 normal, good-looking, usually healthy, highly intelligent, and
 with much practical ability, though at some periods of life, and
 especially in childhood, she has shared to some extent in the
 high-strung and supersensitive temperament of her mother's
 family. as a child she was sometimes spoiled and sometimes
 cuffed, and suffered tortures from nervousness. she has, however,
 acquired a large measure of self-control.
 the first sensations which she now recognizes as sexual were
 experienced at the age of , when her mother gave her an
 injection; afterward she declared herself unable to relieve her
 bowels naturally in order to obtain a repetition of this
 experience, which was several times repeated. at the age of  a
 man pursued her with attentions and attempted to take liberties,
 but she rejected his advances in terror; four years later another
 man attempted to assault her, but she resisted vigorously, struck
 him, and escaped by running. neither of these sexual attempts
 appears to have left any serious permanent impression on the
 child's mind.
 at the age of , when her mother was giving her a bath, the
 sensation of her mother's fingers touching her private parts gave
 her what she now knows to be sexual feelings, and a year later
 when taking her bath she would pour hot water on to the sexual
 region in order to cause these sensations; this did not lead to
 masturbation, but she had a vague idea that it was "wrong."
 at the age of  menstruation began; she suffered very severely
 from dysmenorrhea, the period sometimes lasting for ten days, and
 the pain being often extreme. she was not treated for this
 condition, her mother being of opinion that she would outgrow it.
 from the age of  or  until , or about the period of her
 marriage, she suffered from anemia.
 she had little curiosity about sexual matters; her mother wished
 that she should always come to her for information about things
 she became acquainted with as to the general facts of sex; she
 did not, however, know definitely the facts of copulation until
 her marriage. she knew nothing of erection or semen, and thought
 that when a man and woman placed their organs together a child
 resulted. she hated talking about these subjects indecently, and
 would not listen to the sexual conversation of her schoolfellows.
 she never felt any homosexual attraction. once another girl was
 much in love with her, but she despised and disliked her
 attentions; again, when a girl much older than herself, a friend
 of her mother's, slept with her and made advances, she repelled
 her and refused to sleep with her again.
 she always got on well with men, and men were attracted to her.
 she was direct and sincere, without undue modesty. but she never
 allowed men to touch her or kiss her. she was a good dancer, and
 fond of dancing, but denies that it ever led to sexual feelings.
 she never felt any sexual attraction for a man until, at the age
 of , she fell in love with her future husband five years or
 more before marriage.
 at this period she began to feel vague discomfort, which she knew
 to be localized near her sexual organs. she was aware, in a dim
 way, that it was connected with her love, and was of a sexual
 nature. but there was no definite idea of sexual intercourse. she
 felt nervous and depressed. if she had been asked to state what
 would relieve her, she could only have said b.'s presence and
 tenderness. a few days before he declared his love she
 experienced the nearest approach to sexual feeling she had ever
 had. it was summer and, with b. and some of her family, she had
 gone on a little expedition. one evening, in the train after a
 day's excursion, b. took her hand (unperceived by the others) and
 held it for some time. this aroused the strongest emotions in
 her; she closed her eyes, and, though she was not at the time
 aware that her sensations were localized in her sexual organs,
 she thinks, in the light of subsequent knowledge, that she then
 experienced the orgasm.
 during the engagement, which lasted between two and three years,
 circumstances prevented frequent meetings. b. would kiss her,
 suck her nipples, which became erect, and lie on her. she allowed
 him to take these liberties, feeling that if she refused him all
 satisfaction he might have relations with other women. she still
 felt no definite desire for contact of the sexual organs. she
 longed rather to be embraced and kissed, and to lie in her
 lover's arms all night. a few months before marriage, however,
 she masturbated occasionally, just before or just after
 menstruation, imagining, while doing it, that she was in her
 lover's arms. the act was usually followed by a sick feeling.
 just before marriage she underwent an operation for the relief of
 the dysmenorrhea. she was somewhat shocked and sickened by the
 experiences of the wedding night. it seemed to her that her
 husband approached her with the violence of an animal, and there
 was some difficulty in effecting entrance. coitus, though
 incomplete, took place some seven times on this first night. the
 bleeding from rupture of the hymen continued, so that for two
 days she had to wear a towel. for two months subsequently there
 was great pain during intercourse, although she suppressed the
 indications of this.
 there were several children born of the marriage and for some
 years she lived happily, on the whole, with her husband,
 notwithstanding various hardships and difficulties and some
 incompatibility of temper.
 as regards her sexual feelings she considers, from what other
 women have told her, that her feelings are, if anything, stronger
 than the average. the orgasm, however, was not fully developed
 until about five years after marriage. sexual feeling is most
 pronounced before, during, and after the menstrual period, more
 especially before and about the third day (the period usually
 lasts from five to seven days). there is more sexual desire
 during pregnancy, especially toward the end, than at any other
 time. she never refused normal intercourse to her husband, but
 any abnormal or perverted method of sexual gratification is
 repellent. she was awakened one night about the third month of
 pregnancy by her husband inserting his penis in ore; the child
 was born with palate defect and she is herself inclined to
 believe that this incident was the cause of the defect. though
 she desires normal intercourse, she has seldom obtained complete
 gratification. for a long time she disliked seeing or touching
 the penis, and the feel, and especially the smell, of the semen
 produced nausea and even vomiting. (she has a very delicate sense
 of smell as well as of taste; though fond of the scent of
 flowers, no sexual feelings are thus aroused.) withdrawal and the
 use of condoms are unsatisfactory to her, and mutual masturbation
 gives no relief and produces headache. feelings of friendship for
 her husband have been most potent in arousing the sexual
 emotions, and she has had most pleasure in intercourse after a
 day spent in bicycling together. she has been for many months at
 a time without sexual intercourse, and during such periods has
 suffered much from pain in the head; this, however, she has now
 completely surmounted. she eventually discovered that her
 husband's abstinence from marital intercourse was due to
 infidelity. this led to a definite separation. she still
 occasionally experiences sexual desire, but has no inclination to
 masturbate. her life is full and busy, affording ample scope for
 her energies and intelligence; moreover, she has her children to
 train and educate. she herself believes that her sexual life is
 at an end.
 history xiii.—g. r., army officer. "i am  years of age. my
 parents married at the ages of  and , and my father is now 
 and my mother ; both are particularly strong and healthy in
 body and mind. i am of old lineage on both sides, and know of no
 disease, defect, or abnormality among any of my ancestors or
 relations, except that my mother's family has a slight tendency
 to drink and excess, the present members of it all being
 considered eccentric. i have one brother and one sister living
 (brother unmarried, sister with several children) and am the
 youngest of a family of five. my brother is abnormal, but i don't
 know exactly in what way or from what cause. i have a strong
 suspicion that he masturbates to excess. my father is artistic
 and my mother musical. i have no aptitude for either, but
 appreciate both enormously, though not until about ten years ago.
 my principal reading is religion, science, and philosophy, with
 an occasional standard novel, or a modern novel of the 'improper'
 type by way of relaxation. i became a convinced and militant
 rationalist about five years ago, but have been an unbeliever
 since i left school. i was anemic and threatened with bowel
 complaint at the age of , and was in consequence taken abroad
 for my health. i am now strong and vigorous, with great powers of
 endurance, and enjoy all forms of sport and exercise,
 particularly hunting, pig-sticking, and polo. i drink a lot, and
 am never fitter than when eating, drinking, and taking exercise
 in what most people would call excess. it takes more alcohol than
 i can hold to make me drunk when in england; but not so in the
 east. i have been told that i am very good-looking.
 "when i was about  or  i was constantly chaffed by my older
 companions about putting my hand down my trousers and playing
 with my privates. i don't remember getting an erection, nor at
 what age this first occurred with me. at one time my brother and
 i used to play about with my sister's underclothing, and took
 great pleasure in it, but we never saw her genitals. she told us
 that on carefully examining herself one day she was glad to find
 that she had a small penis like boys had—doubtless the clitoris.
 when in france, at the age of  to , i began to notice the
 sexual parts of animals, and was very keen to know what mares
 kept between their hind legs. later on i took great pleasure with
 another boy in feeling the teats of a she-ass, and, by myself,
 the penis of a donkey, as i had seen the french grooms do; but i
 took no interest in my own penis. i used to put my finger as far
 up the anus as it would go, and got a vague satisfaction from it.
 i went to a small private school at the age of , having been
 previously told by my mother of the manner of birth of men and
 animals, of which i was quite ignorant till then. she made no
 mention of the part taken by the father, and i never thought
 about it. even then i was left with the impression that one was
 born through the navel. i was initiated at school, and used to
 handle the penis of the boy who told me. on several occasions i
 did fellatio for him, and liked it, but he never offered to do
 the same for me, and i don't think he got much satisfaction out
 of it. soon after this i became conscious of pleasurable
 sensations when lying on my stomach with an erection, and used
 occasionally to gratify myself that way, caring little for the
 school tradition that it was 'wicked' and bad for one. on one
 occasion, when talking at night with another boy, we compared our
 organs, both in erection, and i then for the first time thought
 of trying what i had heard vaguely mentioned, viz., two boys
 playing at man and woman. i lay on him with my penis on his
 stomach and almost at once had an orgasm with emission, and
 experienced acute pleasure, though both he and i supposed that i
 had involuntarily micturated. i was  when this happened. i did
 it once more with him before i left, this time the other way up,
 so as to spare him the unpleasantness. i used to like kissing and
 hugging the smaller boys, and had a great eye for good looks. on
 going home for the holidays i masturbated with my hand out of
 curiosity to see what happened when the orgasm occurred, and then
 only did i fully understand the nature of the act. after this the
 rush and strangeness of a large public school distracted my
 attention, but i heard about wet dreams, masturbation, and
 homosexuality from the other boys, and soon became thoroughly
 initiated. i believe the tone of my house, if not of the whole
 school, was exceptionally bad; though it may only be that i saw
 more of it because i was attracted by it, and that other schools
 are the same really. things involving certain expulsion if found
 out were done more or less in public, and i have myself openly
 got into bed with or masturbated other boys, and on more than one
 occasion have helped forcibly to masturbate small boys or to hold
 them while others had connection with them, the idea of the last
 two acts being that the boy would thereby be seduced and become
 available for, and willing to perform, homosexuality. before i
 became big enough to have boys myself i masturbated frequently
 (on one occasion three times in the day), and invariably by lying
 on my stomach without the use of the hands. in having connection
 with other boys i used to do it between the thighs or on the
 stomach, and i never heard of any other way at that school.
 pædicatio would disgust me, and, moreover, would deprive me of
 the principal pleasure of intercourse, viz., the feeling of lying
 face to face and stomach to stomach. of course, the satisfaction
 used to be mutual, but, though good-looking, i was never the
 passive party only, like some small boys who might be called
 professionals and whom i used to pay for their services. i went
 back after i had left and had a boy in the dark whom i had never
 seen before, having been told that he was all right. i used to
 have a very genuine affection for any party to my pleasure,
 though i took delight in torturing one in particular, but for
 what reason i cannot say. for one boy i developed a deep love,
 which lasted long after we had left school and had ceased all
 sexual connection. this love was as strong as anything i have
 ever felt since.
 "i don't remember whether it was while i was at school or later
 that i first began again to take a sexual interest in animals. i
 used to masturbate a good deal and was always trying to find new
 ways of doing it and new substances to lie on. it was while
 feeling the vulva of a young mare that the brilliant thought
 struck me of trying to copulate with her, and thus getting the
 advantage of the soft vagina. it afforded me great satisfaction
 and i had an emission, though i did not then, nor at any other
 time with any other animal, succeed in penetrating properly. i
 afterward did the same with other mares and with a certain cow
 whenever i got a safe opportunity, which was not as often as i
 could have wished. i have not had connection with an animal for
 about ten years, but would have no objection to doing so, and
 feel sure i could perform the act properly now. after i left
 school at , i occasionally had longings for boys, but it was
 the exception and not the rule. i continued to masturbate, but
 not to excess, and used to make ineffectual efforts to stop it,
 but never succeeded for very long. when i was confirmed, at the
 age of , i became intensely religious, and was so remorseful at
 my first lapse from virtue that i burnt my leg with a red-hot
 poker, and i bear the scar still. on leaving school i went to
 germany and there had my first coitus with a woman, a fat old
 german who gave me very little satisfaction. my next, a jewess,
 gave me more than i asked for, in the shape of a soft chancre. in
 my ignorance i never had it treated, but it must have been very
 mild, for it disappeared of its own accord. when cramming in
 england i occasionally went home with a prostitute, but did not
 care much about them and could not afford good ones. on one
 occasion i was impotent. it may have been through drink, but it
 disgusted me with myself. i liked seeing the women naked, and
 always insisted that they should strip, especially the breasts,
 which i liked large and full. i had not learned to kiss on the
 lips, and had no desire to kiss the body, except the breasts,
 which i was generally too shy to do. but as i nearly always wore
 a condom and found penetration difficult i did not much enjoy the
 actual coitus. i am fully convinced that if women had been more
 accessible, if i had not thought myself bound to use preventives
 in self-defense, and if the act had not been looked upon with
 such disfavor by those in authority over me, i should have
 masturbated less or not at all, and would not have been tempted
 to bestiality. when i was  i had coitus with a girl who was not
 a prostitute for the first time. i was violently excited and
 enjoyed it more than anything i had yet experienced, in spite of
 the facts that she would not undress and insisted on withdrawal
 before emission. on one other occasion only have i had coitus
 with a non-professional unmarried woman. shortly after this i
 caught syphilis from a girl of the streets. i was circumcised and
 stayed in a private hospital for six weeks. it never went beyond
 the primary stage, and i have felt no ill effects from it, except
 that i have got a hydrocele in the right testicle. of course,
 this incident necessitated the use of a condom on every occasion,
 and it greatly spoiled my pleasure. about this time a
 brother-officer older than myself made advances to me. he
 compared me to a greek statue, and wanted to kiss me. i would
 have nothing to do with him, but was glad to have his confessions
 of homosexuality and somewhat surprised to learn that he was not
 alone in the regiment. i afterward fell in love with his sister,
 and he married and had children. he was bisexual in his
 inclinations, but was really in love with me for a short time.
 "i had little to do with professionals until i went to south
 africa, and though i was fond of ladies' society, and liked by
 ladies, i looked upon them as something apart, especially married
 women, and never attempted to take liberties with them; though i
 used to with shopgirls, etc., in my cramming days, and had often
 been in love. in south africa i first began really to enjoy
 coitus, and on going to india continued to do so; in fact, i
 thought sexually of nothing else and rarely masturbated,—perhaps
 once in three weeks. i would go to brothels wherever they were
 available, durban, cape town, colombo, calcutta, bombay, and at
 one time preferred black women to white. i used to have horrible
 orgies with my brother-officers, and on one occasion i ordered
 six women to my bungalow in order to celebrate my birthday, and
 made a present of them to five of my friends after dinner. during
 this period, and until i went home, i rarely spoke to a lady, the
 chief exception being no. , a brother-officer's wife, with whom
 i began to be in love.
 "shortly after the south african war i fell violently in love
 with a young brother-officer, 'z.' it amounted to a passion and i
 was forced to make overtures to him. he did not understand, being
 ignorant of homosexuality and quite virile, and would have
 nothing to do with me, though he was very nice about it. this
 lasted for about a year, and then, thinking no doubt that he had
 better stop it, as i was really making myself very ridiculous and
 was mad with love, he threw me up altogether. i was intensely
 miserable for some time, and then i recovered and we made it up,
 and are now firm friends. i still want to kiss and stroke him
 when i see him naked, but would do nothing more. i went home by
 way of japan after several years' absence from home, taking the
 women of the eastern ports as i went, until i contracted
 gonorrhea in the tokio yoshiwara. i could not get rid of it, and
 arrived home in that state, having been deprived of the pleasure
 of trying several new races on the way in consequence. in england
 i rushed into a society which i had quit on such different terms,
 and it received me with open arms. i very soon began a flirtation
 with a married woman, and she completed my education in kissing
 which had been begun by the japanese harlots. i was just coming
 to the point with this woman when i met no.  again, and my love
 for her was at once renewed. i told her so, but i knew that she
 did not return it. i then became attracted to no. , a girl older
 than myself, whom i had known all my life. i kissed her and
 fondled her breasts; but she would not allow anything else, until
 one night, when in the train with her, i got my hand down farther
 than she intended. it ended in my performing cunnilingus on her
 first, and then obtaining satisfaction between her thighs—a
 large step to take after the former limitations. previous to this
 i had on several occasions obtained an emission, without meaning
 to, by lying on her fully dressed. she was aware of my disease,
 which by that time had become a gleet and did not inconvenience
 me in any way. from that time until i went back to india we went
 through the same performance whenever possible, i masturbating
 her sometimes with the finger, sometimes with the tongue, and
 having connection with various parts of her body, including the
 breasts, but always with a condom on account of my disease. she
 used to strip for my edification, and we frequently spent the
 night in the same bed. i was attracted to her mentally, but not
 very much physically; that is to say, that if circumstances had
 not thrown us together i should never have picked her out from
 other girls as being sexually attractive to me. i returned to
 india, and to no. , though i kept faithful to no.  in word and
 deed for five months, but gradually the overmastering influence
 of no.  reasserted itself over me. and then i met no. . we were
 attracted to each other at first acquaintance, and the attraction
 was mental and sexual. she was married and in love with another
 man, but that did not prevent her from kissing me. i felt her
 breasts, masturbated her, and had emissions by lying on her, but
 she drew the line at one thing, viz., kissing on the lips; and i
 drew it at coitus. we arranged a trip together during which i
 went to bed with her, but never had coitus, though we both had
 frequent orgasms in other ways. before starting on this trip i
 had thought that i should not see no.  again, and she let me
 kiss her, to my unspeakable joy. circumstances, however,
 intervened, and i went straight to no.  after parting with no.
 , told her all i had done, and then kissed her again, leaving
 her just before her real lover, with whom she was then living,
 arrived. later i returned again to no. , now in child to her
 lover. we lived together for three nights in spite of this. she
 then went home, and i had no connection with any woman for two
 years, except one black woman, being consumed with love and
 worship for no. . i was much in society, but never had any luck.
 at the end of this time i was traveling one night with a young
 officer ('x'), slight and effeminate and preferring men to women,
 with whom i had been until then on friendly but not intimate
 terms. i watched him undress and go to bed, and then, having
 myself undressed, went over to his bunk and put my hand under his
 clothes. he at once responded, and i got into his bed, both of us
 being in a frenzy of passion and surprise. but i was fairly sure
 of my ground or i would not have dared to take the risk. i used
 often to go to his bed after this, and on one occasion had coitus
 with a girl on a chair at a ball and the next night with my young
 officer. i scarcely knew the girl, and don't know her name now,
 but i took her measure, made her excited by manipulation and
 kissing, and then got her consent. i did not harm her, even if i
 had been the first, for orgasm occurred before i had penetrated
 beyond the lips. x surprised me by telling me that he had had
 connection with three other officers in my regiment, as well as
 with several others in the same station. he would not tell me
 their names, but i guessed easily enough. he used to drink
 heavily, and once i got into his bed when he was in a drunken
 stupor and he was quite unaware that i was there for some time. i
 myself was drinking too much at this time, and was frequently
 drunk before dinner. in the hot weather that followed i had one
 orgy in bombay which lasted three nights. i started on a greek
 and a pole and finished up with a japanese, two brother-officers
 accompanying me. afterward i was much alone during the day in my
 bungalow, and used to become possessed by intense desire. i
 masturbated occasionally, but by this time took but little
 pleasure in it, always craving for the moist human vagina. i had
 often heard, and myself quoted, the pathan proverb 'women for
 breeding; boys for pleasure; melons for delight,' and one day
 when seeking for some novelty with which to masturbate, and my
 eye being caught by a melon put ready for me to eat, it flashed
 across me to try whether the proverb was in any way true. i found
 it most satisfactory, and practised it several times after that,
 the pepita (papaye or pawpaw) being the nearest approach to the
 human vagina. the opportune arrival of a fairly good-looking
 punkah woman, however, put an end to this form of enjoyment by
 providing me with what i wanted. soon afterward i went home
 again, taking the japanese at bombay on my way.
 "i had kept up a correspondence with no.  all this time, but we
 had made a compact that whatever each did until we met again was
 not to count, and i knew that she had had at least one liaison
 since our parting, and was in entire ignorance of the state of
 her feelings toward me. therefore, while trying to arrange a
 meeting with her, i took the first thing that chance threw in my
 way, thinking a bird in the hand better than the off chance of a
 better one in the bush. this was no. , with whom i spent three
 days at the seaside after having first had coitus with her in my
 own home while she was in the monthly state. immediately on
 parting from her i came home to receive no. . the first time we
 were alone she kissed me, and this was followed by mutual
 confessions and coitus, though at first she said my affair was
 too recent. i agreed not to have connection again with no. , and
 kept to this until when staying in the same house again with her
 i was tempted beyond my powers; and i may add that she gave me no
 assistance in keeping this promise, of which she was fully
 cognizant. i at once wrote and confessed to no. , and she very
 naturally would have nothing more to do with me. but i managed to
 reconcile her, and we afterward lived together for three days in
 the country, as well as in london and in her own house. meanwhile
 no.  had been making advances to me which i could not well
 refuse, being a very old friend. nos.  and  were on one
 occasion staying together at my house, just after i had been
 faithless to no.  with no. . i could not very well sleep with
 them both, so at the earnest entreaty of no.  i went to her room
 first, told her my reasons for not having connection with her,
 left her in tears, and then went and slept with no. . this is
 the only transaction i have ever concealed from no. ; but no. 
 knows my whole story and accepts the situation of being only
 second so long as i give her satisfaction whenever possible.
 about this time i again met no.  and kissed and masturbated her
 in a cab, but she would not allow me to go home with her. at the
 bidding of no.  i now broke entirely with no. , to the great
 grief and astonishment of my sister, whose friend she was.
 shortly after this i again returned to india, where i quarreled
 hopelessly with no. , and i don't know to this day what my fault
 was, except that she had got tired of me. her influence over me
 is, however, too great to be so easily broken, and i would return
 to her tomorrow if she moved a finger in reconciliation. during
 the following hot weather i slowly but surely, albeit quite
 unconsciously, obtained an influence over no. , and it ended by
 her falling desperately in love with me and allowing me to do
 what i liked. i did not love her, and told her about no. , whose
 image always remained in the back of my vision, whatever i was
 doing. she also accepted the situation, and i don't think has any
 grievance against me. for my part i have nothing but thanks and
 gratitude and as much love as i am capable of to give her, and
 all the other women with whom i have had any sexual relations.
 the following is a short account of the above women:—
 "no. . had coitus before marriage, for love and with full
 knowledge of the nature of the act. agreement with her husband
 not to have coitus rigidly adhered to by both. has had connection
 with five other men since marriage. very passionate, but faddy
 and particular. slow at producing orgasm. likes being in bed
 naked, and liked me once for having kissed her mons veneris.
 thin, with undeveloped breasts. brilliant, good-looking. artistic
 and highly intellectual. never masturbated, and did not know of
 homosexuality among women; very sensitive to touch on the
 pudenda.
 "no. . has had sexual relations, but never coitus, with many
 men. mutually masturbated with one man. masturbated herself
 frequently, and took a long time to produce orgasm, even with
 cunnilingus, which delighted her immensely. after having it
 performed, she would stoop down and passionately kiss my lips.
 fond of prolonged kisses, during which the tongue played a
 prominent part. tall and fully developed, but no looks. clever,
 masculine brain, and strong physically. skillfully concealed her
 passionate nature, which, however, was long in developing and was
 long kept in check by maidenly modesty.
 "no. . innocent before marriage, and hated her fiancé even to
 touch her, which feeling still persists. has had liaisons with
 many men, and several miscarriages, one legitimate, others
 illegitimate, and one illegitimate child. does not masturbate
 herself, but readily yields to its seduction when performed by
 others. the most passionate woman i have ever met. good, typical,
 womanly figure, but thin and weak. not much looks, but very
 fascinating to men. clever and intellectual.
 "no. . coitus only with her husband before myself. not very
 passionate. i know nothing about masturbation or homosexuality in
 her case. very broad hips, large breasts, and well-developed
 nates. deserted by her husband. no children. rather foolish and
 weak-minded. penetration difficult owing to long labia majora.
 "no. . knows all about homosexuality of both sexes and wants to
 know more about everything. probably masturbates. several
 children. in love with her husband at first, but now tired of him
 and took to other men for variety and because her husband had
 ceased to give her sexual pleasure. very passionate; has slow
 orgasm; likes nakedness and contact of body. very large vagina.
 broad hips and full breasts. intellectual, but not so by nature.
 artistic and very musical.
 "no. . absolutely innocent before marriage. was practically
 raped by her husband on her marriage night. this disgusted her
 with the whole performance, and she could not bear her husband's
 caresses. during pregnancy she was frightened because she did not
 know what was going to happen, i.e., how the child was going to
 be born; and no one enlightened her,—doctor, nurse, or mother.
 did not know the meaning of the words sexual feeling, and never
 thought about sexual matters at all until marriage. i roused her
 passion, put things in their true light, made her have an orgasm,
 and told her what it meant. the orgasms at first made her cry and
 nearly faint, and she thereafter became intensely passionate.
 very excited at cunnilingus, which i practised on her more than
 once. she confessed that the orgasm was stronger and more
 complete during coitus than during masturbation, which relieved
 my mind. she volunteered to strip naked and has but little
 shyness with me. cannot bear her husband yet. she admits that she
 was only half a woman before she knew me, but now regrets her
 marriage. short, thin, and slight, with narrow hips and no
 breasts. quick woman's wit, but not intellectual.
 "of the prostitutes i have known, perhaps  in number, the
 japanese easily take the palm. they are scrupulously clean, have
 charming manners and beautiful bodies, and take an intelligent
 interest in the proceedings. also they are not always thinking
 about the money. perhaps the kashmiris come next, though the
 chinese run them very close. some of the more expensive london
 women are bearable, but they are such harlots! the white women in
 the east are insupportable, and small wonder, for they consist of
 the dregs of the european and american markets. my list comprises
 english, french, german, italian, spanish-american, american,
 bengali, punjabi, kashmiri, kaffir, singhalese, tamil, burmese,
 malay, japanese, chinese, greek, and pole.
 "i naturally prefer to satisfy myself with a woman, a friend and
 a lady of my own class; but in the absence of the best i gladly
 take the next best available, down the scale from a lady for
 whom i do not care to prostitutes of all classes and colors, men,
 boys, animals, melons, and masturbation. i would as cheerfully
 have connection with my sister, or any other female relative. i
 have frequent erotic dreams about the most extraordinary
 subjects—male and female relations, casual acquaintances of both
 sexes, and animals. when i have got an intrigue in hand with a
 woman, i have no wish to masturbate, and often restrain myself
 when i know that i am going to have access before long to
 prostitutes. after coitus it takes a long time before i am ready
 for the next, sometimes two hours; and the first is always very
 quick, nearly always too quick for the woman. with a strange
 woman i have difficulty in maintaining erection at the instant of
 penetration, and this has often given me trouble.
 "i know that most women like, and few dislike, being touched by
 me. my favorite colors are green and red, and i can whistle quite
 well.
 "i would be very glad to know whether i may be considered
 sexually normal or not, but i do not desire any opinion on the
 morality of my acts, for the simple reason that without knowing
 all the circumstances it would be impossible to judge. but i
 cannot help saying that i do not consider anything i have done is
 wrong in itself, and i am quite certain that i have never harmed
 in any way any of the ladies with whom i have had relations. i am
 certain, if i had made promises which i knew i could not keep, i
 might have married one of them. but the result would have been
 great unhappiness to both, quarrels, and ultimate separation or
 divorce—and she realized that as well as i did. i may seem
 egotistical in my attitude and assurance toward ladies, but i
 only speak the honest truth; and i know that no. , for instance,
 has only gratitude and worship to give me for having opened her
 eyes. i have made her promise to have intercourse with her
 husband as soon as she can bear it, and i have satisfied myself
 that i have not started her on the road to sexual perversion. so
 much in self-explanation. i may add that i do not deliberately
 seek 'affaires de cœur,' and that, when they come my
 way, i do my utmost to use all consideration for the lady,
 thinking, as i do, that i owe them a far bigger debt than i shall
 ever be able to pay."
 history xiv.—j. e., professional man, aged . public school and
 university education, in which he did well. from age of  or 
 had strong sexual emotions, and from  sexually pleasurable
 dreams, though no emission till  or . he remembers the
 association of sexual excitement with whipping, either at sight
 or imagination of it, and this feeling was certainly shared by
 boys aged  to  at his private boarding-school and others at
 the public school later on. his nurse-maid used to invent excuses
 for beating his nates with a long lead-pencil when he was aged
 about , and he saw occasional whippings with clothes removed in
 the family nursery.
 when nearly  he was initiated into masturbation, which at once
 coincided with rapid mental development and success at school. he
 has practised it ever since under same conditions and
 restrictions as marital intercourse. religion has never acted as
 any restraint, and the best restraint to all young people, in his
 opinion, is to warn them on hygienic grounds. (he became a
 freethinker at , partly on observing the inconsistency of
 religious persons in this connection. he was twice set upon by
 catholics when , who attempted mutual masturbation.) he can
 vaguely remember some such warning when very young from his
 mother.
 no intercourse with women till age of , though strong
 homosexual feelings from  upward, associated with feminine
 youths. these feelings were quite distinct from feelings of
 affection and friendship for more virile youths. an attack of
 gonorrhea at  was followed by an operation for circumcision,
 which had beneficial effects, but did not prevent an attack of
 syphilis at age of , caught at a guaranteed state establishment
 in france. intercourse almost always with prostitutes, on
 prudential and worldly grounds, though what he approves would be
 greater laxity between boys and girls, with proper safeguards
 against undesired offspring. he is now happily married. he only
 indulges in masturbation at times when intercourse is impossible
 (e.g., childbirth). it is then practised once or twice a week
 in the early morning; overnight it causes troubled sleep, brain
 activity, and constipation. this seems ethically more desirable
 unless the wife were to condone physical infidelity, which she
 would not, and even then there might be risks of venereal
 disease. his general health and working power are in all respects
 excellent, as the venereal diseases were speedily and thoroughly
 cured. homosexual feeling has entirely disappeared since
 marriage.
 history xv.—g. d., english; aged . "my earliest essays in
 juvenile vice were due not so much to unguarded as to unguided
 ignorance. i slipped where my natural protectors suspected no
 danger, and i fell because i had never been warned of the
 treacherous nature of the ground. before or soon after i was 
 years old, the example of an elder brother, who had lately begun
 to go to school as a day-boy, initiated me into the mysteries of
 masturbation, which seemed to me then as harmless as it was
 fascinating; and the novel pleasure was almost daily indulged in,
 after i had acquired sufficient dexterity to accomplish the act
 within a reasonable time, without a twinge of conscience, either
 in that brother's company or when alone. decency demanded secrecy
 in the gratification of what soon became an imperious desire,
 and the preliminary operations included, almost from the first,
 mutual fellatio and approximation of the excited organs; but
 similar privacy was very properly sought during the performance
 of other bodily acts associated with those 'less honorable
 members,' and it appeared to me quite as natural and right for us
 to amuse ourselves together in that way as for a married couple
 to hide their most intimate embraces from the observation of
 others. indeed, i went farther than that, and even came to regard
 the absence of all shame between us as akin to the primeval
 innocence which adam and eve exhibited before the fall. i
 believed for long that we two were specially privileged and
 possessed a peculiar sense denied to other boys, for i had never
 heard of masturbation till i learnt, not the word indeed, but the
 thing itself.
 "my curiosity about the real nature of sexual union in the case
 of human beings set my intelligence to work at the interesting
 problem, and by carefully studying certain parts of the bible,
 lemprière's classical and other dictionaries, as well as by
 persistently watching when i could the amorous proceedings of
 domestic animals, i learnt enough to make its most prominent
 features pretty clear before i was  years of age. i was then
 all eagerness to have the opportunity of inspecting at close
 quarters the genitals of women or young girls, and a stay at the
 seaside when i was  made the latter at least feasible. when the
 shore was nearly deserted, between  and  p.m., the daughters of
 the fisherfolk used to besiege the bathing machines and disport
 themselves in the water, bathing and paddling in various stages
 of nudity. i would pretend that my whole attention was being
 given to the making of miniature tunnels in the sand, while all
 the time i slyly peeped at what i most desired to see, whether in
 front or from behind, as the dancing damsels stood upright or
 stooped till their haunches were higher than their heads. i had
 already read something somewhere about the clitoris, and wanted
 especially to see it, but indistinct glimpses were all that i
 could obtain; nor was it until i visited an anatomical museum,
 which then existed at the top of the haymarket in london, that i
 learned, a good many years later, from several life-sized models
 there displayed, the characteristic features of that part, as
 well as the abnormal modifications to which it is subject, either
 congenitally or in consequence of profligate habits. i was , i
 think, when i first came to know that girls can masturbate as
 well as boys.
 "long after i had realized why the terms male and female are so
 distinguished, my imagination was occupied with the possible
 postures in which the act of copulation may be accomplished by a
 man and woman; from horace, lucretius, martial, aristophanes,
 and, above all, from ovid's ars amatoria i obtained much, but
 not always very clear, information while still a schoolboy. this
 was supplemented later by photographic pictures from pompeiian
 brothels and photographs from life, purchased at florence and
 gloated over one night, with twice-repeated masturbation, and
 afterward destroyed in a revulsion of shame.
 "but while continuing to practise self-abuse (with a certain
 degree of restraint indeed, but seldom less often than once or
 even twice a week), after i had been made fully aware of its
 perils by dr. adam clarke's alarming comments on genesis xxxviii,
 , when i was about  or , i never had connection with a woman
 until i married somewhat late in life. this abstinence was not
 due to any frigidity of disposition, but from prudential and
 religious motives, and, to some extent perhaps, from the
 imperfect but genuine satisfaction afforded by solitary
 indulgence. my imagination, like that of young j. j. rousseau, as
 set forth in his confessions, was allowed free scope for its
 exercise, but in practice i confined myself to what seemed to me
 comparatively innocent as compared with fornication. i was never
 an unreserved 'exhibitionist' like rousseau, but i have on more
 than one occasion turned toward a hedge and pretended to make
 water, when a girl had just passed me on the road, showing a
 turgens cauda if she should chance out of curiosity to look
 back, as once, at any rate, happened.
 "i watched with interest the first indications of puberty in my
 own person. i had, of course, seen the pubic hair on many of my
 own sex, but i was  when i first saw a naked woman. she was
 standing at the door of her machine, wringing out her
 bathing-dress, as i swam past, and her face was hidden by the
 awning then used, so that she could not see me. a slight effusion
 of limpid mucus began to characterize the orgasm, at the age of
  or  (before any ejaculation of semen was experienced), such
 as exuded later from the urethra when salacious excitement
 reached a certain pitch, even though the final climax might be
 postponed or prevented altogether. i found it a refinement of
 luxury to prolong the period of tumescence as far as possible, by
 frequently checking a too rapid progress toward the goal. by this
 practice of repeated arrest when the orgasm was imminent, and the
 mental debauchery which was its habitual accompaniment, i believe
 i did my nervous system more damage than by anything else—even
 the early age at which the dangerous indulgence became
 established. nocturnal emissions (the sequel of lascivious
 dreams) commenced when i was about , at which age i had my
 first experience of an involuntary discharge when awake, under
 the influence of purely mental emotion; but this latter mode of
 escape did not often happen, and later on ceased altogether. my
 muscular strength was not impaired by too frequent indulgence,
 and i acquired some athletic prowess on the football field and on
 the running path, both as a boy and as a young man. walking tours
 were for long my favorite recreation, even after the bicycle
 became an increasing attraction. my health, however, suffered in
 other ways from too constant absorption in lustful thoughts,
 which found vent in erotic verses and tales, generally destroyed
 soon after they were written. i have been subject since i was a
 boy to more or less prolonged fits of mental depression. how far
 i have inherited this tendency (my father and his father both
 married first cousins, and a neurotic diathesis has been
 characteristic of our family), or how far it has been aggravated
 by pernicious habits, i cannot say; cause and effect have no
 doubt acted and reacted on each other.
 "as i grew toward adolescence i endeavored to make self-abuse as
 close an imitation as possible of sexual intercourse by such
 methods as may be easily imagined. my biological studies (i won a
 scholarship and took honors at my university) were directed with
 most intent predilection toward the reproductive system,
 particularly the modifications of the copulatory organs in
 different animals and the diverse manner of their employment. the
 sexual instinct, whether in its normal or abnormal
 manifestations, is a subject which has always had a strong
 attraction for me, nor has it lost its fascination with the
 growth of years (i am now ) nor the competition of other
 interests.
 "my very limited experience of the sexual system in women would
 lead me to believe that the clitoris is the only peculiarly
 sensitive part of the female genitalia, coition giving no
 pleasure unless 'the trigger of love' is simultaneously
 manipulated, as can be done when intromission is effected a
 tergo; that the mind of a normally healthy maiden is altogether
 free from sexual excitement of a physical kind, and that little
 curiosity is felt about the precise modus operandi of conjugal
 intercourse; but, nevertheless, i have good reason to believe
 that this, if not an unusual type, is by no means the only one
 that exists.
 "as to sexual inversion my personal experience has been confined
 to two or three grandes passions for boys, the first of which
 possessed me when between the ages of  and , and involved,
 when i was , the most intense mental emotion, of a romantic
 kind, tinged with poignant jealousy and vexation at comparative
 coldness toward myself. these love passages never led me into
 indelicate behavior (i was once threatened with such treatment
 myself by a stranger whose acquaintance i made one day at the
 british museum, when a lad of . he took me to his bedroom at an
 inn, locked the door, and showed me a collection of coins, giving
 me some, and, while doing so, attempted to take indecent
 liberties; but i pretended that i must catch a certain train,
 unlocked the door, and made a hasty escape), nor was any
 gratification sought beyond occasional kisses and other innocent
 endearments, though such caresses would sometimes excite an
 erection, which i carefully concealed. these amours were,
 however, no outcome of perverted instinct, nor were they any bar
 to fancies for the opposite sex which affected my imagination
 rather than my heart."
 history xvi.—this history is given in the subject's own words:
 a. n.,  years of age, a university graduate, devoted to learning
 and interested in philosophy and theology. he is happily married
 and the father of an only daughter. since puberty he has enjoyed
 excellent health.
 "looking back he finds the beginnings of sexual feeling obscure.
 this feeling is by no means identical in its progress with the
 knowledge of the phenomena of sex generally. the latter he
 acquired thus: his mother told him at a very early age the
 outlines of the phenomena of birth and explained to him (perhaps
 at that time unnecessarily) that the genital organs of little
 girls were different from his own. this piece of knowledge led to
 his asking, when  years old, a little girl cousin who came to
 live with the family (he was an only child) and who shared his
 bed to let him see her genitalia. this she readily did and also
 invited him to coitus, which she described as a 'nice game.' he
 complied, but without, of course, any feeling of pleasure or any
 understanding of the nature of what he was doing. shortly after
 this he went to a day school, where, amid the extraordinarily
 coarse conversation of the boys, he was initiated into all the
 more obvious phenomena of sex. but still it was only a matter of
 intellectual curiosity. as such it had a strange fascination for
 him, and to this day he remembers many of the obscene words and
 phrases, as, for example, a set of indecent verses beginning
 'william, the milkman, sat under a tree,' describing coitus,
 though some of the details were yet misunderstood by him. that up
 to his tenth or eleventh year no real sexual desire was awakened
 is plain from the fact that there was no desire for any
 repetition of attempts at coitus with his cousin, though he did
 indeed, again out of curiosity, finger her genitals sometimes, a
 thing which she, grown evidently more fastidious, reported to his
 mother, who gravely reprimanded him, telling him that it was the
 'beginning of all evil.'
 "desire was awakened gradually and, as i have said, obscurely.
 not only at school, but among his own cousins, especially two
 girls (other than the one above mentioned) and a boy, the
 conversation was lascivious in the extreme, though words never
 proceeded to deeds as between the boys and the girls. he was
 soon, however, about his fifteenth year, so far as he can
 remember, initiated into the practice of masturbation, first,
 sleeping with his boy cousin, the two used to play at 'husband
 and wife,' and then, more directly, a neighbor, a heavy, sensual
 type of boy, took him aside one day and drawing out his own penis
 asked him 'if he knew how to make some buttermilk.' out of
 curiosity at first, and to obtain the new and voluptuous
 sensation afterward, he began assiduously to practise this vice,
 which, as he afterward found out, was very common, if not
 universal about him. that it was morally reprehensible he had not
 at that time the ghost of a notion; he considered that it
 belonged to the category of the 'dirty' only. his father quite
 neglected this development, believing, i suppose, in the
 superstition of the 'innocence of childhood.'
 "this practice of masturbation went on assiduously to his
 sixteenth year, when its true nature and danger were revealed to
 him by a good clergyman who prepared him for confirmation. he had
 at this time gone far, in both solitary vice and vice 'à deux,'
 with his male cousin, with whom he practised even 'fellatio' and
 'intromissio in anum.' but now he began to struggle against it
 and made some headway, but never entirely shook it off before his
 marriage at , so deeply rooted was the hold it had on him.
 especially at the time between sleeping and waking, or while
 lying sleepless at night—when the monks prayed 'ne polluantur
 corpora'—did its attacks come insidiously upon him. he would
 struggle for weeks and then would come a relapse. on one occasion
 he slept with a young uncle who amused himself, thinking he was
 asleep, by playing with his penis until he had an emission. a. n.
 hailed the occasion with keen joy—he caustically argued that he
 experienced the pleasure without being culpable in its
 production! then on 'coming to himself' he would agonize over his
 vice, remembering, for example, that, while he had rejoiced in
 what had been done, the very cousin who some time before used to
 share his sin was genuinely annoyed at the same uncle's
 attentions when it was he who suffered them.
 "looking back over the whole period of his youth and adolescence,
 he can trace the psychological effect of what was going on
 secretly, in his relations to girls and women. in a word, these
 relations were sentimental only. he often imagined himself in
 love; but it was imagination only. he was in love with a wraith,
 not a girl of flesh and blood. he hesitated to regard in any
 sexual way any girl of whom he had a high opinion; sexual desire
 and 'love' seemed for him to inhabit different worlds and that it
 would be a pollution to bring them together. in hours of
 relaxation from the very hard intellectual work which he was at
 this time engaged on at school and at the university, he was
 quite content with the society of quite young girls or even
 children when most of his friends would have sought out females
 of their own age. nothing could have been farther from his
 desires or intention than any lascivious or, indeed, unseemly act
 toward any female in whose company he might be: no mother need
 have hesitated to trust her daughter in his company. i firmly
 believe that the discipline of the same bed which gibbon
 (decline and fall, ed. bury, vol. ii, p. ) makes so merry
 over could have been endured by him without difficulty. his
 outward conduct was in all these respects most seemly and
 decorous, yet night after night he could masturbate, his
 imagination glowing with visions of female nakedness.
 "curiously the one and only actual female for whom he felt any
 desire at the earlier period (aged  to ) began to be the
 cousin who lived in the house. on one occasion he touched her
 breasts, on another her naked thighs—and that was all! as she
 grew to puberty, she would have allowed far more liberties, but
 he contented himself with a sly glance now and again, when he
 could procure it, at her swelling bosom. the fear of putting her
 with child was ample to keep him away from her bed. later on even
 so much as the foregoing occurred no more, and, as i have said,
 his outward life became absolutely decorous.
 "consequently he was in no danger of having dealings with
 prostitutes. the preliminaries, the conversation of such women,
 especially their drinking habits, would have been disgusting and
 repugnant to him in the extreme. he would have shunned the
 possibility of acquiring venereal disease like the plague. but he
 was never free from solitary vice; he secretly envied those who
 had occasions for coitus in what i may call a seemly and cleanly
 manner, friends in the country with farm girls, etc., of whom he
 had heard. he indulged also in lascivious reading, the obscene
 when he could procure it, rather than the merely suggestive,
 which has never been to his taste. he was familiar with quite a
 large number of latin and greek indecent passages, knew the
 broader farces of the canterbury tales and of the decameron,
 and, later, the 'contes' of la fontaine and the facetiæ of
 poggio. as ste.-beuve says of gibbon, i think, he acquired an
 'erudite and cold' sort of obscenity in this way.
 "all this, of course, is only one half, and by no means always
 the dominant half, of his nature. he was often repentant for
 these delinquencies, and he was sincerely religious. he was also
 fond of serious learning and contrived to take a first-class
 university degree. yet, ever and anon, the deeply sensual side of
 his nature made itself felt. scotched for a time it could be, but
 killed never.
 "yet, i do not think it could be said that he had the sexual
 instinct in any really high degree. it was more like a small fly
 that makes a large buzz than any considerable factor in his
 constitution. he had a companion about this time of whom such a
 remark is even more true. this man's mind was replete with all
 manner of risky stories, all sorts of sexual details. he would
 take long walks with girls of loose character, talk with
 prostitutes at home and abroad, and yet, i believe, he never
 proceeded to coitus.
 "such then, was the subject of this notice up to the time of his
 marriage. two men, one might say, in one skin. one learned, one
 merely obscene; one a pattern of decorousness, the other a
 self-polluter.
 "on the sexual side he was as one knowing everything there is to
 know—yet knowing nothing. like the boy-hero in wedekind's
 frühling's erwachen, he had been long in egypt, yet he had
 never seen the pyramids. he began to distress himself with
 questions as to whether he was yet capable; whether his recurring
 vice had not permanently injured him; whether he had made himself
 unfit for marriage. so shy and reserved was he about his secret
 that he could never have brought himself to mention it to a
 medical man. 'what! he! the good, the religious! the wholly moral
 and decorous!' (such was, indeed, the reputation he had among his
 friends); 'he, the victim of a vice so black!' no, no! 'secretum
 meum mihi,' he cried.
 "fortune, however, was kind to him. he was at an early age free
 from financial worries, which had almost crushed him earlier in
 his career, and he met in course of time the family from which he
 selected his excellent wife.
 "the society in which he lived was of all english classes, i
 should suppose, the most reticent in matters of sex—the
 respectable, lower middle class; shopkeepers and the like, with a
 tradition of homely religion and virtue. the classes a little
 higher in the scale (to which, by the way, his mother had
 belonged) could far better sympathize with one in his position.
 well, the family of his future wife was of a higher class and,
 what is far more, of foreign origin, for whom a large number of
 our english 'convenances' do not exist. to them sex was frankly
 recognized as a factor in life, and the mother of this household,
 as he grew more intimate, broached subjects which he had never,
 in such a manner, discussed before. it is unnecessary to give
 here any general history of his relationships with this
 household, as they have nothing to do with the matter in hand.
 after some time he became engaged to the youngest daughter, two
 years his senior, a woman of remarkable beauty and splendid
 development, one who attracted him as none other had done, both
 on account of her intellectual and social qualities and her
 physical beauty (he had hitherto despaired of finding the two
 combined in one person), for she is certainly the most beautiful
 woman with whom he has ever been acquainted.
 "he now began to make the practical acquaintance of a woman—and
 one who, in impulses, temper, manner, and habit of thought,
 differed toto cælo from the girls he had known in his old home.
 her sexual nature was ripe and developed, and it is lucky that
 the engagement was of short duration, or the strain and
 anticipation of that time might have been injurious to the health
 of both. as usual, in his outward relations toward women, so
 toward his fiancée, he was prepared for chaste caresses only.
 this, however, did not suffice for her hot and passionate nature.
 they went as far as possible short of actual coitus.
 "after a few months, however, the marriage took place, and, at
 first, this brought him bitter disappointment and seemed to
 confirm his worst fears. he found himself quite unable to have
 pleasure or satisfactory coitus; quite incapable, with any
 erection that he could command, of introducing his well-developed
 penis into his wife's extremely narrow and contracted vagina.
 about a fortnight after the marriage, however, on his return from
 their short wedding tour, he felt much stronger and copulated
 with her, especially in the early mornings, so satisfactorily
 that she soon found herself with child. coitus now began to be
 much more pleasurable for him, but to his wife still attended
 with pain.
 "after nine months of married life, the child, the only offspring
 of the marriage, a healthy girl, was born. the stress of this
 time, the upsetting of his wife's health, her nervous breakdown
 and consequently uncertain temper, seemed for a period of nearly
 two years effectually to repress any sexual desire in the
 husband, and this period is perhaps the chastest of his life.
 desire seemed to be the one thing absent. the revulsion of
 feeling in his wife was remarkable. the erstwhile amorous
 fiancée, who could hardly wait until marriage to test her
 lover, became now the wife and mother who hardly wished to be
 touched by her husband.
 "her health, however, gradually improved and a more normal state
 of affairs was brought about, which has continued to the present
 day, broken only by periods of abstention, chiefly caused by the
 attacks of anemia and menstrual irregularities from which his
 wife suffers from time to time. ordinarily, he enjoys coitus once
 or twice in the month, hardly oftener, taking one month with
 another. at one time he exemplified in his own person the saying
 omne animal post coitum triste, but now happily this depression
 of spirits is rarely felt. sometimes he has felt a depression of
 spirits, a general discontentedness, before experiencing a strong
 erection; in these cases coitus has cleared his spirits. he would
 naturally look upon coitus as an evacuation, although he
 recognizes the imperfectness of that view. for one thing he is
 constantly sorry, viz., that the act gives no pleasure to his
 wife, and that he has never been able to induce a crisis with her
 by normal means. in this state of affairs, knowing that 'après
 coup' she was still unsatisfied, he slipped into the practice of
 rubbing the clitoris with his fingers until the emission takes
 place. to do this, they assume the position 'ille sub, illa
 super.' from his own limited marital experience, he has never
 been able to understand the stories of women who masturbate
 several times a day, as his wife would be physically incapable
 (so he believes) of anything of the kind, and only easily reaches
 the crisis in any circumstances during the first few days after
 the menstrual flow has ceased. in fine, while agreeing
 theoretically with sir richard burton and others that the eastern
 style of coitus (directed with a view to the pleasure of your
 partner) is the right one, it is one of his standing regrets that
 he is unable to practise it. in the place of the twenty minutes
 required by the women of india (according to burton) he is happy
 if he can give two or three at the most, much as he would wish to
 prolong a pleasure as keen to himself as he could desire it to be
 to his dear and excellent spouse."
 history xvii.—r. l., american; aged ; height,  ft.  in.;
 weight, about  lbs.; occupation, teacher; somewhat neurotic; a
 slight myopia associated with acute astigmatism and muscular
 weakness of the eyes, producing a tendency to migraine. uric acid
 diathesis, producing occasionally severe neuralgia, particularly
 in the intestines. these symptoms have been more or less constant
 since very early childhood. general health very good. not
 inclined to indulge in athletic sports, but prefers sedentary
 occupations and recreations.
 "my early ideas of sexual things are not very clear in
 recollection. i think that when  or  years of age i had a
 knowledge of the common or vulgar terms for intercourse and for
 the genital organs. boys of my own age and slightly older would
 discuss sex relations, and i had a general knowledge that, in
 some way connected with the sexual act, 'babies were made.' we
 would tell, occasionally, lewd stories, and a few times attempted
 sexual practices with one another. not till after puberty did i
 ever attempt masturbation. i must have been  or  years old
 before i learned that there was a difference in the sex organs of
 boys and girls. up to this time i had supposed that intercourse
 was per anum. i attended a public school with both sexes. talk
 among my boy associates was often nasty and concerned the sexual
 act with girls. at about  years i began to have erotic day
 dreams. i always had a sentimental attachment for some girl
 acquaintance whom i would idealize and with whom i would imagine
 myself having sex relations. as a matter of fact, there was no
 real sexual feeling about this. as i was very shy and timid
 naturally, i never made any kind of advances toward any of them,
 and they were entirely ignorant of any sentiments of affection in
 me.
 "pubertal changes commenced, i presume, about the age of ½
 years. i place it at this period from the following
 circumstances, which are fixed very strongly in my memory: i had,
 as a child, a soprano voice that was praised considerably by
 older friends, and about which i was inordinately conceited, i
 enjoyed greatly taking part in operettas, cantatas, etc. the
 dramatic instinct, if so it may be called, has always been marked
 with me, and amateur dramatics are still my chief diversion. when
 i was about the age mentioned above my voice changed quite
 rapidly, greatly to my distress of mind, as i was obliged to give
 up taking a part for which i had been cast in a school
 entertainment. the memory of that disappointment is still
 poignant. other changes, such as the appearance of the pubertal
 hair, must have made no impression on my mind, as i cannot
 recollect anything in connection therewith. no involuntary
 emissions occurred. indeed, during periods of continence in later
 life, when the sexual tension has been very strong, i have had
 very few such emissions.
 "as a lad of  or , i had heard frequent allusions to
 masturbation by other boys who were older, but always in a way
 that indicated contempt. yet there is no doubt now in my mind
 that the practice was very general. i think that i was probably
 about  when i decided to try the act. i think that there was
 little sex impulse in this decision. the animating purpose was
 rather curiosity. i succeeded in producing the complete orgasm
 and found it pleasurable, though there was a considerable shock
 of surprise at the ejaculation of semen. as nearly as i can
 estimate in my memory of an event as far back as this was, this
 was the beginning of definite sexual sensibility in me. i cannot
 but believe, however, that it would have been aroused sooner or
 later in some other way. thereafter i would imagine myself
 embracing some of the girl friends to whom i have referred above,
 and, when excited, would masturbate. the act was in every
 instance a psychic intercourse. for some time i did not know that
 the practice was considered harmful. i indulged whenever i felt
 the inclination. this at times was rather frequent; again only at
 considerable intervals. i did know that it was looked upon as
 being unmanly, and never admitted, except to perhaps two or three
 boy friends, that i ever indulged. with these boys i practised
 mutual masturbation a few times. there was no homosexual feeling
 connected with these acts in any of us. it was only that the
 normal method of gratifying our desires was not available. i know
 the subsequent history of each of these boys, and there has been
 nothing to indicate any perverted instinct in any of them. about
 the age of  i heard a talk on sexual matters by a traveling
 evangelist, who portrayed the effects of masturbation in fearful
 colors. i now realize that he was an ignorant though
 well-intentioned man; but the general effect of his talk upon me
 was a bad one. one of the results of the habit, according to his
 statements, was insanity. therefore i expected at any moment to
 lose my mind. i felt that i must stop the practice at once, but
 the matter became so great an obsession that again and again i
 broke my resolutions for reform. i undertook exercise, dieting,
 the reading of serious literature: all of which i had seen
 referred to in books as methods of lessening sexual desire. the
 object of these disciplinary practices was always the thing most
 prominently in mind, and so they were of no avail. fortunately i
 entered college a little later, and the affairs of school life
 gradually took a commanding place in my thoughts, and the
 practice was not so much in mind. i did not, however, completely
 break away from it until almost the time of my marriage. if the
 present attitude of the scientific medical world toward the
 subject had been known to me, i do not believe that any evil
 would have come to me from the practice. at a later period of my
 life, say between  and , i would not indulge the habit for a
 considerable interval. at times i did not notice the presence or
 lack of desire. but then there would come periods when i would be
 under a severe sexual tension. this would be marked by intense
 nervousness, an inability to fix my attention upon any one thing,
 and a great desire to have intercourse. an act of masturbation at
 such a time would generally give relief. however, when i yielded
 to this form of relief, there would always follow feelings of
 profound self-reproach and of self-repugnance. had i had
 nocturnal emissions they might have relieved me; but, as i have
 said before, they very rarely occurred. when, rarely, one did
 occur i would be greatly frightened, for i had the old, erroneous
 idea that they meant serious weakness and always ascribed them to
 my bad habit. that my habit of masturbation had any relation to
 the rarity of the involuntary emissions would, of course, be a
 matter of pure conjecture. in passing from the discussion of
 personal masturbation, i wish to say that my associations with
 boys as a pupil and as a teacher lead me to believe that the
 practice is practically universal. when discussing the hygienic
 evils of prostitution with boy pupils i have noted that, whereas
 not infrequently a boy will voluntarily protest that he has never
 had intercourse, there has always been a significant silence when
 masturbation is mentioned. i have never heard a boy make a
 denial, direct or indirect, that he had indulged in the practice.
 but it has seldom been a perversion. it has rather been, as in my
 own case, an available means of relieving a sexual impulse.
 "during my college life i associated with many boys who had more
 or less regular sexual relations with prostitutes or with girls
 who were not virtuous. their attitude toward the practice was an
 immoral one. the ethical aspect of irregular sexual relations
 never concerned them. it certainly did not concern me. what i
 have learned through my conversations on the subject with my
 pupils makes it evident to me that this is the common feeling of
 most boys of the adolescent period. i think of two things which
 operated strongly to prevent my entering into sexual relations
 with girls during this period of my life. one was an esthetic
 repugnance to the average prostitute. these are the women most
 easily available to the youth whose sexual desires are developed.
 i do not remember ever having seen an avowed prostitute who did
 not seem repulsive to me. i confess to an inclination to
 priggishness. i preferred to associate with people whom i called
 'nice people.' it was fortunate for me that i was thrown into the
 society of a rather rough crowd of youths, who knocked a great
 deal of this snobbishness out of me. but it did act to prevent my
 having recourse to prostitution. a second preventive was my
 natural timidity in making advances to people. this has been a
 trait that i have never completely overcome. in my professional
 life this has been some detriment to my advancement. in the
 matter of sex relationship it tended to prevent my taking
 advantage of association with and even of advances from girls
 who, not prostitutes, were nevertheless not virtuous. there were
 a number of such in the town and neighborhood in which i lived,
 and i undoubtedly could have had sexual relations with them if i
 had only been able to overcome my shyness. the desire was not
 wanting. i really craved intercourse with them. it was simply a
 matter of cowardice. there was one girl whom i knew very well,
 with whom i was on friendly terms, who i knew had had sexual
 relations with other boys. she showed, at times, a marked
 preference for me, and i am sure would have welcomed any advances
 that i should have made. a number of times i sought her company
 with the intention of suggesting intercourse, but my resolution
 always failed.
 "all through my college course i was much in the society of
 girls. we were in class together, associated very freely in
 society, frequently studied together. this is the most usual
 state of things in the western part of our country. but they were
 simply comrades: sex thoughts never arose in connection with such
 association. and i am quite certain that this was the general
 attitude of the other boys. although the talk among the boy
 students was at times, very frankly and crudely, about sexual
 relations, no breath of scandal ever touched one of the college
 girls. again my experience as teacher and student brings a
 conclusion that coeducation of the sexes does not affect, in one
 way or the other, the strictly sexual life of the male student. a
 very intimate friend who has had a varied experience in school
 work has told me recently that his conclusions are the same.
 "when i was about  years old i became acquainted with a very
 beautiful girl, four years my junior. our acquaintance very
 rapidly developed into deeper affection, and about five years
 later we were married. during all this time very little of the
 physical aspects of love entered into our attachment. my
 sweetheart had much of the same shyness as was so pronounced in
 my own character. for several years i think that the thought of
 marriage was never distinctly present in our minds. a formal
 betrothal between us did not take place until within a year and a
 half of our marriage. yet each of us had a very distinct
 understanding of the feelings of the other. but until our
 betrothal there were none of even those very innocent expressions
 of endearment common, i imagine, to all lovers. i am sure that
 during this period of our attachment no thought of any physical
 relations between us was ever in my mind; or, at any rate, was
 promptly banished if it occurred. yet all this time my sex
 desires were very strong and at times became an obsession. never,
 though, were they directed toward my sweetheart. the first time
 that we engaged in the endearments and caresses allowed to lovers
 i became conscious, after a time, of a state of sexual
 excitement. i experienced an erection. it was absolutely reflex;
 no thought had entered into it. i was at once overwhelmed with a
 feeling of shame. i felt that i had been guilty of unthinkable
 indecency toward my betrothed. then there arose a fear that it
 might be noticed. (men at that time wore abominably tight
 clothing.) as a matter of fact, i now know that there was no real
 danger of this, for she was absolutely ignorant of the nature of
 the male sexual organs. but i made a pretext for withdrawing from
 the room and tried to adjust my clothing so that no exposure
 could occur. i was fearful of coming into close proximity to her
 again, lest there should be a recurrence of the feeling. as a
 matter of fact it did occur a number of times, but my good sense
 finally suggested the explanation and after a time it ceased to
 trouble me. the thought was latent in my mind that sexual
 excitement was necessarily more or less indecent at all times,
 and i could not reconcile its manifestation with a pure love.
 "i have said that my sexual desire was strong. up to the time of
 marriage it was never gratified in the normal manner. my esthetic
 abhorrence of prostitutes continued to prevent its gratification
 in that manner. no other opportunity offered. i am positive that
 moral considerations did not enter into the matter at all. i
 think now that it was strange that the thought that it would be
 disloyal to my promised wife to have connection with other women
 did not affect me. but i am sure that it did not. i am inclined
 to think that conscientious scruples very rarely enter into the
 average young man's considerations of contemplated sexual
 relations.
 "as the time of my marriage drew near, thoughts of the physical
 relationship of husband and wife became, of course, more
 insistent. the idea of establishing sexual relations was not at
 all a pleasant one. i dreaded it as an ordeal. i wondered if it
 would be possible for us to retain the same love and affection
 for one another after such intimate relations were established.
 this was a recurrence of the fallacious notion that there was
 something inherently indecent in sexual things. i am in hopes
 that other ideas are replacing this wrong one, in the minds of
 the younger generation, as the result of the saner and franker
 discussion of sex. by a great effort, i had practically stopped
 masturbating. at times i felt almost maddened by desire. but
 never did the prospect of marriage seem desirable from this point
 of view. up to the very day of our wedding my affection for my
 betrothed seemed free from sexual desire. but my physical being
 was craving sexual companionship.
 "theoretically i knew a great deal of the nature of intercourse.
 practically i was absolutely ignorant. in some ways i was better
 informed, on matters that a new husband should know, than the
 average man entering the married life. a physician's library had
 been at my disposal, and i had read somewhat extensively on
 physiology and hygiene. my chosen lines of study had given me a
 theoretical knowledge of the anatomy of the female genital organs
 that was fairly thorough. i knew a little about the physiology of
 reproduction and rather less of intercourse. fortunately, i
 learned in the course of my reading that the first sexual
 approaches were likely to be quite painful to a woman, and that
 great care should be exercised at this time. i tried to put into
 practice what little i had learned in theory and i imagine that
 we got through the introductory attempts with less than the
 average difficulties. our first efforts were not satisfactory to
 either of us. my wife was absolutely unprepared so far as any
 definite knowledge of the act was concerned. i sincerely hope
 that the prudish notions of the past generations will give way to
 more sensible views in the future, and that the girl becoming a
 wife will be just as chaste, but wiser in matters of such
 importance to her happiness. i presume that my timidity was a
 valuable asset at this time; for i was afraid to force matters in
 any way, and time and repeated attempts finally overcame our
 difficulties. and when our sexual relations were once
 established, the whole tenor of my life was changed. all the
 former sexual unrest disappeared. my former feeling toward sexual
 relations was altered. they no longer seemed that which, though
 very desirable, was yet necessarily indecent. fortunately, after
 the first few weeks, they have been quite pleasurable to my wife.
 i am sure that our sexual life since marriage has been a large
 factor in deepening the love that has made our married life an
 ideal one. as i look back at the first year of marriage, i wonder
 that we got through it so well. my knowledge of sexual hygiene
 was a strange mixture of fact and nonsense. if the frequency of
 acts of intercourse advocated by some of the authorities i have
 lately read is correct, then we must have passed the bounds of
 moderation. but it is certain that our general health has been
 very good: better in both cases than before marriage.
 "in reviewing these phases of the development of my sexual life,
 one or two conclusions seem to me to be strongly emphasized. it
 was unfortunate that the real sexual desire was aroused as early
 and in the manner that it was. whether this would have been
 prevented by more definite education in the hygiene and the
 purpose of the function, i can only conjecture. i believe that
 mine was and is the common experience of boys. i am decidedly of
 the opinion that there should be instruction given of the anatomy
 of the genital organs and of the hygiene of intercourse, and this
 shortly after the youth has reached puberty. how this is to be
 done is a grave question. it will require tact and knowledge not
 possessed by the average teacher and parent. however it is done,
 it should be honest, frank, and free from piosity.
 "i am certain that, in my own case, rather frequent intercourse
 is decidedly beneficial. any prolonged abstinence always brings
 about the same nervous disturbances that i have referred to
 above. it is fortunate for me that this repetition of the act is
 satisfactory to both concerned."
 history xviii.—e. w., dentist, aged , of new england puritan
 stock. height,  ft. ½ in.; weight,  lbs. spare and active,
 of nervobilious temperament.
 "my earliest recollection is being punished for 'playing with
 myself' when i could not have been more than  or  years of age.
 i distinctly remember my exultation on discovering that i could
 excite myself (while my hands were tied behind my back for
 punishment) by rubbing my small but erect penis against the
 carpet while lying on my stomach. at this time, of course, i knew
 nothing of sex or of what i was doing. i did what my desires and
 instincts at that time prompted me to do. however, punishments
 and lectures failed utterly to break up this habit, and, though i
 always wished and tried faithfully to obey my parents, i soon
 grew to indulge quietly in bed when i was thought to be asleep.
 the matter apparently passed out of the minds of my parents as
 soon as they ceased to detect me further in the act, and they
 regarded it as abandoned. i now feel reasonably certain that this
 precocity was due to an adherent foreskin which covered the glans
 tightly almost to the meatus, and so kept up a continual
 irritation.
 "i have no recollection that anyone ever taught me the habit, and
 i know beyond a doubt that no one ever learned of the habit or
 even a word as to the possibility of autoexcitement through word
 or deed of mine. my recollection of the sensations is that there
 was a short period of excitation, usually by rubbing, which was
 not particularly, often not at all, pleasurable, and this was
 followed by a single thrill of pleasure that extended all over
 my little body. the curious thing was, however, that there seemed
 to be no limit to the number of times i could consecutively
 produce this sensation. my recollection is perfectly clear of how
 i would lie in bed of a morning and thus excite myself time after
 time. as i grew older this condition, of course, changed.
 masturbation was not a consuming passion with me at this or any
 other time. i enjoyed it and felt that in it i had a means of
 entertainment when other sources of enjoyment were not at hand.
 "by the time i was  or  i had figured out the difference in sex
 in animals and suspected that 'all was not as it should be' in
 some portions of a girl's anatomy. this suspicion was suddenly
 confirmed one never-to-be-forgotten morning, when i induced my
 dearest playmate, a little girl, to urinate in my presence. i was
 more thunderstruck than excited over this discovery, and it led
 to no results in any other way, nor did we ever again unveil
 ourselves to each other. at this time i began to learn from the
 older boys the pitiful, childish vulgarities and common terms of
 sex, and to invent and exchange rhymes and stories that were
 pathetic in their attempts at vulgarity.
 "at the age of  a buxom servant-girl threw out some vague hints
 to me,—i was very tall for my age,—and tried to induce me to
 take liberties with her, at least to the extent of telling her
 vulgar stories, but i would not rise to the lure. i believe that
 the thing which held me in check was fear of discovery by my
 parents and the consequent humiliation. a short time previous to
 this my father had enlightened me as to the means and manner of
 reproduction and had encouraged me to talk to him and to my
 mother on such subjects rather than with anyone else. i think
 this had a great influence for good, as it made me feel that i
 had some authoritative knowledge and that i was trusted by my
 parents. my determination not to prove entirely unworthy of their
 trust has been the anchor that has held through all the storms
 and temptations of youth and young manhood.
 "about the age of puberty i began to long for more realistic
 experiences and tried through a period of a year or so the
 disgusting experiments of intercourse with animals, using hens
 and a cow for this purpose. details are of no importance, and i
 spare myself their repetition. my better nature or general mental
 development soon overcame my desires in this direction, and the
 practice was abandoned.
 "with the dawning of the power of emission i noticed that the
 adherent foreskin before alluded to, which had never been
 examined during all these years (as i had discovered that i was
 different from other boys and so was shy about exposing myself),
 began to trouble me by being painful during erections.
 accordingly i took a buttonhook and tore all the adhesions loose.
 a very painful though ultimately entirely satisfactory
 operation!
 "(i may mention in this connection that my two sons were
 afflicted with adherent foreskins to such an extent as to render
 circumcision necessary a few days after birth, in order that the
 function of urination might become fully established.)
 "as my powers developed i had my first wet dream at about the age
 of , and was much surprised thereat. my father, however, told
 me not to be alarmed and soothed my anxious fears, which were
 easily aroused by my guilty feelings on account of my habit of
 masturbation, in which i still indulged from one to three times a
 week.
 "between the ages of  and  my father had the good judgment to
 require a large amount of active outdoor labor from me, as well
 as sending me to excellent schools. certain kinds of study had a
 distinct effect upon the sexual organs, namely, difficult latin
 and german translations and problems in fractions. i considered
 at the time that it was because my mind wandered from the subject
 i was studying. now i am perfectly sure it was because my mind
 focused on the subject i was studying. at any rate the fact
 existed, and when alone in my room, wrestling with a knotty
 problem, i used almost as a rule to keep myself in the most
 violent state of erection for long periods—an hour or
 so—sometimes ending with an emission, but more often i forced
 myself to forego this climax through fear of overindulgence.
 during these years my curiosity as to the exact nature of the
 female organs was something terrible, and i wasted many hours and
 much ingenuity in the attempt to surreptitiously gratify it. my
 perseverance in the face of failure along this line was surely
 worthy of a nobler cause.
 "i was much in the society of girls of my own age or older during
 these years and until i was . i found with them a keen and
 entirely pure and wholesome enjoyment utterly separate and apart
 from the desires and indulgences which i have been describing. i
 never cared for any girl who was 'forward' or in any way
 unladylike, and the idea of taking any undue liberties with any
 of my youthful sweethearts was as remote from my thoughts as a
 trip to the moon. perhaps i can say this better and more
 distinctly by stating that i would be perfectly willing to have
 my wife know of, or my boys repeat, any action that i ever took
 with any woman.
 "i spent my spare time in their society and lavished upon my girl
 companions every cent i could spare, but had no thought of
 immediate sex desire or gratification. at the age of  i went as
 an apprentice in my present profession of dentistry. whenever it
 became necessary for me, in assisting at the operating chair, to
 touch a lady's hair or face, i would be seized with the utmost
 confusion and could with difficulty control my hands so that they
 did not tremble. this soon wore off as i came to a realization of
 the true professional spirit and attitude toward all patients,
 and, needless to say, has now become a matter of the utmost
 indifference to me.
 "from  to  i attended a professional school in a large city,
 remote from my home, where i was an utter stranger. during these
 years i devoted myself to my professional studies and to music
 with much diligence. i took an active part in all student life
 and problems save only that of the 'eternal feminine.'
 "frequently i have been out with a crowd of 'the boys' when they
 headed for a brothel, and have been the only one to turn back or
 to remain on the sidewalk as the door closed behind my last
 companion. i say this not in self-praise, but in the same spirit
 of accuracy which has prompted me to put down everything
 concerning this greatest mystery of our natures as i have
 experienced it and worked it out.
 "it was during these three years at school that i placed upon
 myself the most stringent and effective curbs to my sex nature. i
 somehow never could 'get my own consent' to go to a brothel or
 stay with a 'soiled dove,' for i had by this time firmly resolved
 that i would bring to my wife, whoever she might turn out to be,
 a clean body at least. i limited myself in my autoexcitement to
 one emission a week and on one or two occasions went two weeks
 without inducing an emission. spontaneous nocturnal emissions
 were quite common during these years. i cannot state just how
 frequent they were, but perhaps one a week would be a fair
 average.
 "shortly after graduation at the age of  i became engaged to
 the woman who is now my wife. (she was  at the time of our
 engagement, brunette, well developed, and with a wisdom and charm
 that have held me a willing captive for ten years and no prospect
 of escape!)
 "with our engagement began for each of us that divine and
 mysterious unfolding of the nature of one to the nature of the
 other. our engagement lasted two years and a half and, ignorant
 as we both were, i am sure that it was none too long. never shall
 i forget the surprise i felt—to say nothing of the delight—when
 i discovered that my sweetheart was as anxious to find out the
 uttermost facts about me as i was to explore the divine mystery
 of her sweet body.
 "we lived in different towns and i used to spend sundays at her
 home. i slept in a room adjoining that occupied by my betrothed
 and a friend. there was a transom with clear glass over the door
 which connected these two rooms, and to have stood upon the foot
 of the bed and looked through this transom would have been the
 easiest thing in the world, and was such an opportunity as i
 would have given years of my life to have obtained in my
 adolescence; but now that the chance was afforded me to freely
 spy upon the chamber of my future bride my soul revolted, for the
 feeling was upon me that not until it was revealed to me because
 she could no longer bear to keep it concealed from me would i
 look upon the blessed vision of her maiden loveliness. nor was i
 disappointed, for gradually we became acquainted with each
 other's bodies, and this gradual unveiling of each to the other
 led, during the last months of our engagement, to mutual manual
 manipulations, excitement and gratification. intercourse did not
 take place until the second night after our marriage, and our
 first baby was born nine months and three days after our
 marriage, though my wife was ten days past the cessation of her
 period at the time of my first entering.
 "since marriage i have made it my first duty to study my wife's
 inclinations and desires with regard to our sexual relations, and
 can say that now, after seven years of married life, and after
 she has borne me two sons, we are enjoying a fullness of
 happiness that neither of us would have believed possible during
 the first year of our married life.
 "i have found that the woman must have the entire charge of the
 time and number of approaches in a week or month, and that when
 she is for any reason disinclined to the sexual act the husband
 must keep away, no matter how he feels about the matter. also the
 man must be sure that his wife reaches the orgasm or is at the
 point of it before he allows himself to 'let go.'
 "our meetings have averaged eight or nine a month. during the
 latter months of pregnancy they were nil, and in the month
 following an enforced separation of several weeks they were
 fourteen. we have never tried nor had the slightest curiosity to
 know how far we could indulge ourselves.
 "for myself i seem to demand a gratification of the sexual desire
 rather oftener than my wife, and when i feel i cannot get a good
 night's rest without first being relieved of my seminal burden,
 while at the same time my wife is disinclined to the sexual act,
 i have her perform manual manipulation until relief is effected.
 mind, i say relief, for the emission gives me very little
 pleasure under these circumstances, but it does give relief. in
 my present health i find i cannot sleep well if i go over more
 than two nights without an emission. my wife understands my
 condition, and is entirely willing to assist me in this way when
 she feels she cannot give me the gratification which i crave. we
 have come to see sex matters as they are, and respect and
 reverence have taken the place of ignorance and fear.
 "to sum up, owing to lack of circumcision the sex instinct
 developed too soon and out of all proportion during my early
 youth. i cannot see that masturbation has ever had the slightest
 bad effect upon my health or mental state (except as i was
 constantly loathing myself more or less for being unable to stop
 it).
 "the husband must subordinate himself to the wife in order to
 obtain the highest good and pleasure of both.
 "i have always been successful in my undertakings. stood at the
 head of my class at school, and in my professional work graduated
 with highest honors. i have a memory for prose or verse that is
 the cause of envy to many of my friends. the facts here set down
 are recorded in the interest of advancing study along this most
 important but neglected and ignored line. that they have been
 truthfully recorded without favor to the black or light on the
 white is my sincere belief."
 history xix.—e. b. parents sound; strong constitution in mother,
 moderately so in father; vigorous and healthy, but of refined
 nature. breast-milk for six months.
 "age -. took great delight in the little waterworks. severely
 punished for this. interest in the parts morbidly increased
 thereby.
 "age . earliest recollection of 'counter-erection'—the penis
 shrinking tensely into itself, producing local and general
 discomfort. this resulted from certain kinds of
