 now known to be wrong. a comparatively small quantity of
 proteid matter, such as is easily obtained from vegetable food,
 is ample for the general needs of the body. increased muscular
 exertion requires but a slight increase of this food
 constituent. it is the carbohydrates, or carbohydrates and fats
 that should be eaten in larger quantity, as these are the main
 source of muscular energy. the fact that animals, capable of
 the most prolonged and powerful exertion, thrive on vegetables
 of comparatively low proteid value, and that millions of the
 strongest races have subsisted on what most englishmen would
 consider a meagre vegetarian diet, should have been sufficient
 evidence against the earlier view.
a comparison of flesh and vegetable food, shows in flesh an
 excessive quantity of proteid matter, a very small quantity of
 glycogen (the animal equivalent of starch and sugar) and a
 variable quantity of fat. vegetable food differs much, but as a
 rule it contains a much smaller quantity of proteid matter, a
 large proportion of starch and sugar and a small quantity of
 fat. some vegetable foods, particularly nuts, contain much
 fat.
investigation of the digestive processes has shown that the
 carbohydrates and fats entail little strain on the system;
 their ultimate products are water and carbon dioxide, which are
 easily disposed of. the changes which the proteids undergo in
 the body are very complicated. there is ample provision in the
 body for their digestion, metabolism, and final rejection, when
 taken in moderate quantity, as is the case in a dietary of
 vegetables. the proteids in the human body, after fulfilling
 their purpose, are in part expelled in the same way as the
 carbohydrates; but the principal part, including all the
 nitrogen, is expelled by the kidneys in the form of urea (a
 very soluble substance), and a small quantity of uric acid in
 the form of quadurates.
there is reciprocity between the teeth and digestive organs
 of animals and their natural food. the grasses, leaves,
 &c., which are consumed by the herbivora, contain a large
 proportion of cellulose and woody tissue. consequently, the
 food is bulky; it is but slowly disintegrated and the
 nutritious matter liberated and digested. the cellulose appears
 but slightly acted upon by the digestive juices. the herbivora
 possess capacious stomachs and the intestines are very long.
 the carnivora have simpler digestive organs and short
 intestines. even they consume substances which leave much
 indigestible residue, such as skin, ligaments and bones, but
 civilised man, when living on a flesh dietary removes as much
 of such things as possible. the monkeys, apes, and man
 (comprised in the order primates have a digestive canal
 intermediate in complexity and in length to the herbivora and
 carnivora. a certain quantity of indigestible matter is
 necessary for exciting peristaltic action of the bowels. the
 carnivora with their short intestinal canal need the least, the
 frugivora more, and the herbivora a much larger quantity. the
 consumption by man of what is commonly called concentrated food
 is the cause of the constipation to which flesh-eating nations
 are subject. most of the pills and other nostrums which are
 used in enormous quantities contain aloes or other drugs which
 stimulate the action of the intestines.
highly manufactured foods, from which as much as possible of
 the non-nutritious matter has been removed is often advocated,
 generally by those interested in its sale. such food would be
 advantageous only if it were possible to remove or modify a
 great part of our digestive canal (we are omitting from
 consideration certain diseased conditions, when such foods may
 be useful). the eminent physiologist and bacteriologist, elie
 metchnikoff, has given it as his opinion that much of man's
 digestive organs is not only useless but often productive of
 derangement and disease. in several cases where it has been
 necessary, in consequence of serious disease, to remove the
 entire stomach or a large part of the intestines, the digestive
 functions have been perfectly performed. it is not that our
 organs are at fault, but our habits of life differ from that of
 our progenitors. in past times, when a simple dietary in which
 flesh food formed little or no part, and to-day, in those
 countries where one wholly or nearly all derived from vegetable
 sources and simply prepared is the rule, diseases of the
 digestive organs are rare. the englishman going to a tropical
 country and partaking largely of flesh and alcohol, suffers
 from disease of the liver and other organs, to which the
 natives and the few of his own countrymen, living in accordance
 with natural laws are strangers.
indigestible matter—food is never entirely
 digested. as a reason against confining ourselves solely to
 vegetable food, it has been stated that such is less perfectly
 digested than animal food and that it therefore throws more
 work on the digestive organs. it is also urged that on this
 account a greater quantity of vegetable food is required. we
 have shown elsewhere that, on the contrary, vegetarians are
 satisfied with a smaller amount of food. man requires a small
 quantity of woody fibre or cellulose in his food to stimulate
 intestinal action and prevent constipation.
it is difficult to determine how much of a food is
 unassimilated in the body. this is for the reason of the
 intestinal refuse consisting not only of undigested food, but
 also of residues of the digestive juices, mucus and epithelial
 debris. these latter have been shown to amount to from
 one-third to one-half of the whole of the fæces, which is
 much more than had previously been supposed.
john goodfellow has shown that of very coarse wholemeal
 bread quite  per cent. was undigested, whilst bread made from
 ordinary grade wholemeal showed . per cent. such a method of
 analysis was adopted as it was believed would exclude other
 than the food waste. the experiments were made on a person who
 was eating nothing but the bread. it seems probable that a
 smaller proportion would have remained unassimilated had the
 bread not formed the sole food. it is advisable that wheatmeal
 he ground as finely as possible, the coarse is not only to a
 less extent assimilated but apt to irritate the bowels.
 notwithstanding that fine white bread gave only . per cent.
 and a coarse white bread . per cent. of waste, a fine
 wheatmeal bread is more economical as the same quantity of
 wheat produces a greater weight of flour richer in proteid and
 mineral matter. from a large number of experiments with man, it
 has been calculated that of proteids there is digested when
 animal food is eaten  per cent., from cereals and sugars 
 per cent., from vegetables and fruits  per cent. the
 difference between the proportions digested of the other food
 constituents was much less. although there is here a
 theoretical advantage in favour of animal food, there are other
 considerations of far more importance than a little
 undigestible waste. the main question is one of health. in some
 dietary experiments of a girl aged , living upon a fruit diet,
 of whom we have given some particulars elsewhere, professor
 jaffa gives the following particulars. during the ten days
 trial the percentages absorbed were proteids ., fat .,
 nitrogen free extract , crude fibre , ash ., heat of
 combustion in calories .. he says, "generally speaking, the
 food was quite thoroughly assimilated, the coefficients of
 digestibility being about the same as are found in an ordinary
 mixed diet. it is interesting to note that  per cent. of the
 crude fibre appeared to be digested. the results of a number of
 foreign experiments on the digestibility of crude fibre by man
 are from  to . per cent., the former value being from
 mixed wheat and rye, and the latter in a diet made of rice,
 vegetables and meat."
notes on the table of analysis.—under calories are
 shown kilo-calories per pound of food. in the analysis marked u
 the crude fibre or cellulose is included with the
 carbo-hydrate, the figures being those given in atwater's
 table. he has found that from  to  per cent. of the crude
 fibre was digested, according to the kind of food. the term
 fibre or cellulose in analytical tables is not a very definite
 one. it depends upon the details of the method of analysis. in
 the analyses other than u, the cellulose is excluded in
 calculating the calories. nutrient ratio is the proportion of
 the sum of the carbo-hydrate and fat, compared with the proteid
 as . the fat has first been multiplied by . to bring it to
 the same nutrient value as the carbo-hydrate.
u indicates that the analyses are taken from the united
 states department of agriculture experimental station, bulletin
 , the tests being chiefly made by dr. w.o. atwater, or under
 his direction. they are average analyses of several samples.
 the refuse consists of such parts as are rejected in preparing
 the food; the outer leaves, skin, stalk, seeds, &c., of
 vegetables; the shell of eggs; the bone, &c., of meat. e,
 indicates that the edible portion only of the food has been
 analysed, and under refuse, in brackets, is shown the quantity
 rejected before the analysis was made.
there is considerable variation in the same kind of food,
 according to the variety of seed and conditions of growth
 &c., especially is this the case with wheat and flour;
 whenever it has been possible the average of the analyses of
 many samples have been given. the method of analysis has not
 always been uniform, frequently the cellulose is included with
 the carbo-hydrates, and the proteid sometimes includes a very
 appreciable quantity of non-proteid nitrogenous matter. this is
 the case in the analysis of the mushrooms. g.—analyses
 are by john goodfellow; it will be noticed that the wheatmeal
 bread is not made from the same flour as the whole-meal.
 d.—b. dyer, average of  fine and coarse oatmeals. s,
 from u.s. cons. reports, . c.—a.h. church. the walnut
 kernels are in the dried condition as purchased; originally of
 the same composition as shewn in the fresh kernels.
 c.d.—cavendish or figi variety of banana, analysis by
 d.w.m. doherty, n.s. wales. p.—a. petermann, u.s. cons.
 banana flour, musca paradisiaca variety. this is widely
 used in central america. the flour is from the unripe fruit,
 and contains starch . per cent.; on ripening the starch is
 converted into sugar. k.—konig, mean of  analysis.
 milk:—average of many thousand analyses of the pure.
 butter.—made without salt. l, from the "lancet," , i,
 p. . oysters at / per dozen. the . per cent. includes
 . glycogen (animal starch). the shell was of course
 excluded, also the liquid in the shell. apples.—the
 refuse includes seeds, skin, &c., and such edible portion
 as is wasted in cutting them away; the analysis was made on the
 rest.
cookery.—flesh is easier to digest raw. a few,
 on the advice of their doctors, eat minced raw flesh, raw beef
 juice and even fresh warm blood. such practice is abhorrent to
 every person of refinement. cooking lessens the offensive
 appearance and qualities of flesh and changes the flavour;
 thorough cooking also destroys any parasites that may be
 present. raw flesh is more stimulating to the animal passions,
 and excites ferocity in both man and animals. if the old
 argument was valid, that as flesh is much nearer in composition
 and quality to our own flesh and tissues, it is therefore our
 best food, we do wrong in coagulating the albuminoids,
 hardening the muscle substance and scorching it by cooking.
fruits when ripe and in good condition are best eaten raw;
 cooking spoils the flavour. food requiring mastication and
 encouraging insalivation is the best. food is frequently made
 too sloppy or liquid, and is eaten too hot, thus favouring
 indigestion and decay of the teeth. the cereals and pulses can
 only with difficulty be eaten raw. when cooked in water the
 starch granules swell and break up, the plant cells are
 ruptured, the fibres are separated and the nutritious matter
 rendered easy of digestion. the flavour is greatly improved.
 cooking increases our range and variety of food. the civilised
 races use it to excess and over-season their dishes, favouring
 over-eating.
if baking powders are used they should only be of the best
 makes. they should be composed of sodium bicarbonate and
 tartaric acid, in such correct proportions that upon the
 addition of water only sodium tartrate and carbon dioxide
 (carbonic acid) should result. some powders contain an excess
 of sodium bicarbonate. self-raising flours should be avoided.
 they are commonly composed of—in addition to sodium
 bicarbonate—acid calcium phosphate, calcium
 superphosphate and calcium sulphate. common baking powders
 often consist of the same ingredients, and sometimes also of
 magnesia and alum. these are often made and sold by ignorant
 men, whose sole object is to make money. calcium superphosphate
 and acid calcium phosphate very frequently contain arsenic, and
 as the cheap commercial qualities are often used there is
 danger in this direction. a good formula for baking powder is,
 tartaric acid  ozs., sodium bicarbonate  ozs., rice flour 
 to  ozs. the last is added to baking powders to improve the
 keeping quality and to add bulk. the ingredients must be first
 carefully dried, the sodium bicarbonate at not too high a
 temperature or it decomposes, and then thoroughly mixed; this
 must be preserved in well closed and dry bottles. another
 formula, which is slow rising and well adapted for pastry, is
 sodium bicarbonate  ozs., cream of tartar  ozs., rice flour
 about  ozs. custard powders consist of starch, colouring and
 flavouring. egg powders are similar to baking powders but
 contain yellow colouring. little objection can be taken to them
 if they are coloured with saffron; turmeric would do if it were
 not that it gives a slightly unpleasant taste. artificial
 colouring matters or coal tar derivatives are much used,
 several of these are distinctly poisonous.
drinks.—it is better not to drink during
 eating, or insalivation may be interfered with; a drink is
 better taken at the end of a meal. the practice of washing down
 food with hot tea is bad. the refreshing nature of a cup of hot
 tea, coffee, or cocoa is to a very great extent due to the
 warmth of the water. the benefit is felt at once, before the
 alkaloid can enter the blood stream and stimulate the nerve
 centres. hot water, not too hot to cause congestion of the
 mucous membrane, is one of the best drinks. when the purity of
 the water supply is doubtful, there is advantage in first
 bringing it to the boil, as pathogenic bacteria are destroyed.
 some find it beneficial to drink a cup of hot water the first
 thing in the morning; this cleanses the stomach from any
 accumulation of mucus.
if fruit, succulent vegetables, or cooked food, containing
 much water be freely used, and there be little perspiration, it
 is possible to do without drinking; but there is danger of
 taking insufficient water to hold freely in solution the waste
 products excreted by the body.
aerated drinks, except a very few of the best, and
 non-alcoholic beers and wines, are generally unwholesome, from
 their containing preservatives, foaming powders, artificial
 flavourings, &c.
stimulants.—tea and coffee contain an alkaloid
 theine, besides volatile oils, tannin, &c. cocoa contains
 the milder alkaloid, theobromine. they stimulate the heart and
 nervous systems; tea and coffee have also a diuretic effect.
 formerly they were erroneously thought to lessen tissue waste.
 these alkaloids, being purins, are open to the general
 objections named elsewhere. stimulants do not impart energy or
 force of any kind, but only call forth reserve strength by
 exciting the heart, nervous system, &c., to increased
 activity. this is followed by a depression which is as great,
 generally greater, than the previous stimulation. except,
 perhaps, as an occasional medicine, stimulants, should be
 avoided. analysis of cocoa shows a good proportion of proteids
 and a very large quantity of fat. the claim that it is a
 valuable and nutritious food would only be true if it could be
 eaten in such quantities as are other foods (bread, fruits,
 &c.). were this attempted, poisoning would result from the
 large quantity of alkaloid. the food value of half a spoonful
 or thereabouts of cocoa is insignificant. certain much
 advertised cocoa mixtures are ridiculous in their pretentions,
 unscientific in preparation, and often injurious.
cereals.—the most valuable is wheat, from its
 proteid being chiefly in the form known as gluten. from its
 tenacity, gluten enables a much better loaf to be produced from
 wheat than from any other cereal. the outer part of the grain
 is the richest in mineral matter and proteid. wheatmeal bread
 shows a considerably higher proteid value than white. a large
 proportion of the proteid in the outer coats of the wheat berry
 is, however, not digested, and in some experiments the waste
 has been enough to quite nullify its seeming advantage over
 white bread. coarsely ground, sharp branny particles in bread
 irritate the intestines, and cause excessive waste of
 nutriment; but finely ground wheatmeal is free from this
 objection, and is beneficial in preventing constipation. the
 comparative value of white and brown bread has been much
 discussed; it depends both on the quality of the bread and the
 condition of the digestive organs. experiments on the digestion
 of bread and other things, have often been made on persons
 unaccustomed to such foods, or the foods have been given in
 excessive quantity. to those accustomed to it good wheatmeal
 bread is much pleasanter, more satisfying, and better flavoured
 than white; indeed, the latter is described as insipid. most
 bakers' bread is of unsatisfactory quality. flour and bread
 contain very little fat, the absence of which is considered a
 defect. this is remedied by the addition of butter, fat or oil,
 or by nuts, &c., which are rich in oil. these may be mixed
 with the flour prior to cooking, or used afterwards.
oats contain a substance called avenin, apparently an
 alkaloid, which has an irritating action; the quantity is
 variable. it is to this that the so-called heating effect of
 oatmeal on some persons is due.
prepared cereals or breakfast foods.—analyses
 were made of  of these cereal preparations by weems and ellis
 (iowa state college agricultural bulletin, ). they report
 that the foods possess no nutritive value in excess of ordinary
 food materials; that the claim made for many pre-digested foods
 are valueless, and no reliance can be placed on the statement
 that they are remedies for any disease.
oatmeal and other cereals are sold in packets as being
 partially cooked. we do not doubt that they have been subjected
 to a dry heat, but this has scarcely any effect on their starch
 and other constituents. the difference is a mechanical one. in
 rolled oats the grains are so cracked and broken, that on
 boiling with water, the water readily penetrates and more
 quickly cooks them throughout. there are other prepared cereal
 foods, but we doubt whether they are thoroughly cooked after
 the short boiling directed on the labels. they are a great
 convenience where it is difficult to get the time necessary for
 cooking the ordinary cereals. coarsely ground wheat is too
 irritating when made into porridge, but there are some
 granulated wheats sold in packets, which are quite suitable.
 the ralston breakfast food is excellent. they are rich in the
 phosphates and salts, found in the outer part of the grain. one
 cereal preparation called grape nuts, has had its starch
 converted into maltose and dextrin (maltose being a sugar), by
 a scientific application of the diastase of the grain. it is
 consequently easier of digestion and requires no cooking. it is
 beneficial for some forms of indigestion. there are several
 competing foods of less merit, the starch being less perfectly
 changed; one at least of which is objectionably salt. properly
 cooked starch is readily digested by healthy persons, and for
 them malted food is of no special value.
pulse, or legumes, includes haricots and other beans,
 peas and lentils. the proteid contained is that variety known
 as legumin, which is either the same, or is closely allied, to
 the casein of milk and cheese. pulse is very rich in proteid,
 the dried kinds in general use, contain  or  per cent. the
 richest is the soy-bean, which is used in china and japan, it
 contains  per cent., besides  per cent. of fat. pulse
 requires thorough cooking, haricots taking the longest time.
 split lentils are cooked sooner, and are better digested; this
 is chiefly due to the removal of the skins. the haricots,
 bought from small grocers who have a slow sale, are often old,
 and will not cook tender. pulse is best adapted to the
 labouring classes; the sedentary should eat it sparingly, it is
 liable to cause flatulence or accumulation of gas in the
 intestines, and constipation. haricots are easier to digest
 when mashed and mixed with other food. pulse was formerly
 stated to leave much undigested residue. recent experiments
 have shown that it is satisfactorily digested under favourable
 conditions. strümpell found beans in their skins to leave
 a large proportion of proteid matter unabsorbed. lentil meal
 mixed with other food was digested in a perfectly satisfactory
 manner. another experimenter (rubner) found that when even the
 very large quantity of -/ pound of dried split peas per day
 were eaten, only  per cent. of proteid matter was unabsorbed,
 which compares very well with the  per cent. of proteid left
 from a macaroni diet, with which the same man was fed at
 another time. had a reasonable quantity of peas been eaten per
 day, the quantity undigested would probably have differed
 little from that of other foods.
nuts are, as a rule, very rich in oil and contain a
 fair proportion of proteid; when well masticated they are a
 very valuable food. walnuts are one of the best, and the
 kernels can be purchased shelled, thus avoiding much trouble.
 they can be finely ground in a nut-mill and used for several
 purposes, mixed in the proportion of about two ounces to the
 pound of wheatmeal they produce a rich flavoured bread. they
 can also he used in sweet cakes and in rich puddings to
 increase their food value, lightness and taste. pine kernels
 being very oily, can be used with flour in the place of lard or
 butter.
fruits are generally looked upon as luxuries, rather
 than as food capable of supplying a meal or a substantial part
 of one. they are usually eaten only when the appetite has been
 appeased by what is considered more substantial fare. fresh
 fruits contain a larger proportion of water than nearly all
 other raw foods, and consequently the proportion of nourishment
 is small; but we must not despise them on this account. milk
 contains as much or more water. certain foods which in the raw
 state contain very little water, such as the pulses and cereals
 when cooked absorb a very large quantity; this is particularly
 the case in making porridge. cabbage, cauliflower, spanish
 onions and turnips, after cooking contain even  per cent. of
 water. roast beef contains on an average  per cent., and
 cooked round steak with fat removed  per cent. of water. it
 is customary at meal times to drink water, tea, coffee, beer,
 wine, &c. when a meal contains any considerable quantity of
 fresh fruits there need be no desire to drink. notwithstanding
 that fruits contain so much water, a dietary consisting of
 fruits with nuts, to which may be added bread and vegetables,
 will contain less water than the total quantity usually
 consumed by a person taking the more customary highly cooked
 and seasoned foods. an advantage is that the water in fruits is
 in a wholesome condition, free from the pollution often met
 with in the water used for drinking purposes. raw fruits favour
 mastication, with its consequent advantages, whilst cooked and
 soft food discourages it. plums and what are termed stone
 fruits, if eaten in more than very small quantities, are apt to
 disagree. persons with good digestions can take fruit with
 bread, biscuits and with uncooked foods without any
 inconvenience. fruit is more likely to disagree when taken in
 conjunction with elaborately cooked foods. many cannot take
 fruit, especially if it be acid, at the same time as cereal or
 starchy substances, and the difficulty is said to be greater at
 the morning's meal. if the indigestion produced is due to the
 acid of the fruit preventing the saliva acting on the starch,
 scientific principles would direct that the fruit be eaten
 quite towards the end of the meal. the same consideration
 condemns the use of mint sauce, cucumber and vinegar, or
 pickles, with potatoes and bread, or even mint sauce with green
 peas. bananas are an exception, as not interfering with the
 digestion of starch. bananas are generally eaten in an unripe
 condition, white and somewhat mealy; they should be kept until
 the starch has been converted into sugar, when they are both
 more pleasant and wholesome. nuts and fruit go well together.
 for a portable meal, stoned raisins or other dried fruit and
 walnut kernels or other nuts are excellent.
what has been called a defect in most fruits, is the fact
 that the proteid is small in proportion to the other
 constituents. this has been too much dwelt upon, owing to the
 prevailing exaggerated idea of the quantity of proteid
 required. the tomato contains a large proportion, though the
 water is very high. bananas, grapes and strawberries contain to
 each part of proteid from  to  parts of other solid
 nutritive constituents (any oil being calculated into starch
 equivalents); this is termed the nutritive ratio. although this
 may seem a small proportion of proteid, there are reasons for
 believing that it is sufficient. taking the average of 
 analyses of american apples, a nutritive ratio of  was
 obtained. if it were suggested that life should be sustained on
 apples alone, this small quantity of proteid would be an
 insurmountable difficulty. as the addition of nuts or other
 nutritious food sufficiently increases the proteid, no
 objection can with justice be made against the use of fruit. a
 study of our teeth, digestive organs and general structure, and
 of comparative anatomy, points to fruits, nuts and succulent
 vegetables as our original diet.
the potash and other salts of the organic acids in fruits
 tend to keep the blood properly alkaline. where there is a
 tendency to the deposition of uric acid in the body, they
 hinder its formation. citric, tartaric, malic and other organic
 acids exist in fruits in combination with potash and other
 bases, as well as in the free state. the free acids in fruits,
 when eaten, combine with the alkalies in the intestinal tract,
 and are absorbed by the body and pass into the blood, not as
 acids, but as neutral salts. here they are converted into
 potassium carbonate or some other carbonate. fruit acids never
 make the blood acid but the reverse. fruit salts and acids are
 antiscorbutic. fruits have often proved of the greatest benefit
 in illness. what is known as the grape cure has been productive
 of much good. lemons and oranges have also been of great
 benefit. strawberries have been craved for and have proved of
 the greatest advantage in some extreme cases of illness when
 more concentrated food could not be endured. fruit is coming
 into greater use, especially owing to its better distribution
 and lessened cost. fruit is not as cheap as it should be, as it
 can be produced in great abundance at little cost, and with
 comparatively little labour. the price paid by the public
 greatly exceeds the real cost of production. a very large
 proportion, often the greater part of the cost to the consumer,
 goes in railway and other rates and in middle-men's profits. it
 is commonly cheaper to bring fruit from over the sea, including
 land carriage on either side, than it is to transport english
 produce from one part of our country to another. english
 homegrown fruit would be cheaper were it not for the difficulty
 of buying suitable land at a reasonable price, and the cost of
 transit. for the production of prime fruit there is a lack of
 sufficient intelligence, of scientific culture and
 co-operation.
vegetables—using the name in its popular
 sense—contain valuable saline constituents or salts. by
 the usual method of cooking a large proportion of the salts is
 lost. it is better to steam than to boil them. the fibrous
 portion of vegetables is not all digested, but it is useful in
 stimulating the peristaltic action of the bowels and lessening
 any tendency to constipation. vegetables are more especially
 useful to non-vegetarians to correct the defects of their other
 food.
the potato belongs to a poisonous order—the
 solanacæ. there is a little alkaloid in the skin,
 but this is lost in the cooking. the eyes and sprouting
 portions contain the most and should be cut out.
fungi.—there are about a hundred edible species
 in this country, but many of the fungi are poisonous, some
 intensely so. it can scarcely be expected that these lowly
 organised plants, differing so much in their manner of growth
 from the green or chlorophyll bearing plants, can be
 particularly nourishing. it is only the fructifying part, which
 appears above the ground, that is generally eaten. it is of
 very rapid growth. of  edible fungi of  species, obtained in
 the belgrade market, the average amount of water was . per
 cent., leaving only . per cent. of solid matter; the average
 of fat was . per cent. the food value of fungi has been
 greatly over-rated. in most of the analyses given in text-books
 and elsewhere, the total nitrogen has been multiplied by .
 and the result expressed as proteid. the amount of nitrogen in
 a form useless for the purpose of nutrition is about a third of
 the whole. of the remainder or proteid nitrogen, it is said
 much is not assimilated, sometimes quite half, owing to the
 somewhat indigestible character of the fungi. an analysis of
 the common mushroom gave proteids . per cent., amides
 (useless nitrogenous compounds) . per cent., and water .
 per cent. the fungi are of inferior nutritive value to many
 fresh vegetables and are much more expensive. their chief value
 is as a flavouring.
milk and eggs are permissible in a vegetarian
 dietary, and as a rule, vegetarians use them. eggs, with the
 exception of such as are unfertile, are of course alive; but
 they have no conscious existence, and cannot be said to suffer
 any pain on being killed and eaten. an objection to their use
 as food is, that on an egg and poultry farm, the superfluous
 male birds are killed, and as the hens become unprofitable
 layers they are also killed. a similar humane objection applies
 to the use of cow's milk by man. the calves are deprived of
 part of their natural food, the deficiency being perhaps made
 up by unnatural farinaceous milk substitutes. many of the
 calves, especially the bull calves, are killed, thus leaving
 all the milk for human use. when cows cease to yield sufficient
 milk they too are slaughtered. milch cows are commonly kept in
 unhealthy houses, deprived of exercise and pure air, crowded
 together, with filthy evil smelling floors reeking with their
 excrements, tended by uncleanly people. with no exercise and a
 rich stimulating diet they produce more milk; but it is no
 matter for surprise that tuberculosis is common amongst them.
 when the lesions of tubercle (consumption) are localised and
 not excessive, the rest of the carcase is passed by veterinary
 surgeons as fit for food; were it otherwise, enormous
 quantities of meat would be destroyed. as butcher's meat is
 seldom officially inspected, but a very small part is judged by
 the butchers as too bad for food. in mitigation it may be said
 that poultry lead a happy existence and their death is, or
 should be, quickly produced with but little pain, probably less
 pain than if left to die from natural causes. the same cannot
 be said of cattle and sheep when the time arrives for their
 transport to the slaughter man's. it is argued by vegetarians
 who take milk and animal products that they are not responsible
 for the death of the animals, as they do not eat their flesh.
 as vegetarians profit by conditions in which the slaughtering
 of the animals is a part, they cannot be altogether exonerated.
 cow's milk is prone to absorb bad odours, and it forms a most
 suitable breeding or nutrient medium for most species of
 bacteria which may accidentally get therein. by means of milk
 many epidemics have been spread, of scarlet fever, diphtheria,
 cholera, and typhoid. occasionally milk contains tubercle
 bacilli from the cows themselves. by boiling, all bacteria,
 except a few which may be left out of consideration, are
 destroyed. such a temperature, however, renders the milk less
 digestible and wholesome for infants. by heating to ° f.
 or ° f. for a few minutes, such pathogenic germs as are
 at all likely to be in milk (tubercle, typhoid, diphtheria,
 &c.) are killed, and the value of the milk is but little
 affected: this is called pasteurising. it was until quite
 recently a common practice to add boric acid, formaldehyde and
 other preservatives; this has injured the vitality and caused
 the death of many infants. they have not yet gone quite out of
 use.
for infants the only satisfactory food is that of a healthy
 mother. on account of physical defects in the mother, or often
 for merely selfish reasons, the infant is deprived of its
 natural food. many attempts have been made to bring cow's milk
 to approximately the same composition as human milk. it can be
 done by adding water, milk sugar and cream of known
 composition, in certain proportions. great difficulties are met
 with when this is put into practice. the simplest method is
 that of professor soxhlet. the proper quantity of milk sugar is
 added, but instead of adding the right quantity of cream or
 fat—a very difficult thing to do—the equivalent
 quantity of extra milk sugar is used. although not
 theoretically satisfactory, in practice it answers very well.
 we have found it to agree very well with infants. to cow's milk
 of pure average quality, add half its volume of water
 containing . per cent. of milk sugar; or, what amounts to
 the same thing, to a pint of cow's milk add one and a quarter
 ounce of milk sugar and half-a-pint of water. it is preferable
 to pasteurise by placing the bottle of milk in a vessel of
 water. this water is to be heated until the milk shows a
 temperature of about ° c. or ° f., but must not
 exceed ° c. or a change in the albumen of the milk takes
 place which affects its digestibility. keep at this temperature
 for about ten minutes. if not required at once, a plug of
 cotton wool should be placed in the neck of the bottle, and it
 should be kept in a cold place until required. professor
 soxhlet does not advise the addition of lime water. the
 proteids are not of the same composition as in human milk (the
 calf being a ruminating animal)—and it is a common plan
 to add water or barley water to milk until it is so watered
 down that it cannot curdle into tough curds. an infant has thus
 either to distend its stomach with a large quantity of watery
 nourishment, or else to get insufficient food. sometimes it is
 necessary to peptonise the milk a little. at the leipzig
 infants hospital, and also the hygienic institute, they give to
 infants, up to  months old, prof. soxhlet's mixture, except
 that an equal volume of water is added to the milk. milk,
 cheese, and especially hen's eggs contain a very large
 proportion of proteid. when added to food poor in proteid they
 improve its nutritive quality. it has often been said, and with
 truth, that some vegetarians by the profuse use of animal
 products, consume as much, or even more proteid of animal
 origin than the average person who includes flesh food in his
 dietary. an excess of proteid from these sources is less
 injurious as eggs contain no purins, and milk but a very small
 quantity. in support of the use of animal products, it may be
 said that we have become so fond of animal foods and
 stimulating drinks, that the use of milk, butter, cheese and
 eggs renders the transition to a dietary derived from the
 vegetable kingdom much easier. by means of these, cooked dishes
 can be produced which approach and sometimes can scarcely be
 distinguished from those of cooked flesh.
in the present state of society, when really good vegetarian
 fare is difficult to procure away from home, eggs, cheese, and
 milk are a great convenience.
digestion.—the digestive juices contain certain
 unorganised ferments, which produce chemical changes in the
 food. if the food is solid, it has to be liquefied. even if
 already liquid it has generally to undergo a chemical change
 before being fitted for absorption into the body. the
 alimentary canal is a tubular passage which is first expanded
 into the mouth, and later into the stomach. as the food passes
 down, it is acted upon by several digestive juices, and in the
 small intestine the nutritive matter is absorbed, whilst the
 residue passes away.
the saliva is the first digestive juice. it is alkaline and
 contains a ferment called ptyalin. this acts energetically on
 the cooked and gelatinous starch, and slowly on the raw starch.
 starch is quite insoluble in water, but the first product of
 salivary digestion is a less complex substance called
 soluble-starch. when time is allowed for the action to be
 completed, the starch is converted into one of the sugars
 called maltose. in infants this property of acting on starch
 does not appear in effective degree until the sixth or seventh
 month, and starch should not be given before that time. only a
 small quantity should be provided before the twelfth month,
 when it may be gradually increased. dr. sims wallace has
 suggested that the eruption of the lower incisors from the
 seventh to the eighth month, was for the purpose of enabling
 the infant—in the pre-cooking stage of man's
 existence—to pierce the outer covering of fruits so as to
 permit his extracting the soluble contents by suction; and
 accordingly when these teeth are cut we may allow the child to
 bite at such vegetable substances as apples, oranges, and sugar
 cane. dr. harry campbell says that starch should be given to
 the young, "not as is the custom, as liquid or pap, but in a
 form compelling vigorous mastication, for it is certain that
 early man, from the time he emerged from the ape till he
 discovered how to cook his vegetable food, obtained practically
 all his starch in such a form. if it is given as liquid or pap
 it will pass down as starch into the stomach, to setup
 disturbance in that organ; while if it is administered in a
 form which obliges the child to chew it properly, not only will
 the jaws, the teeth, and the gums obtain the exercise which
 they crave, and without which they cannot develop normally, but
 the starch will be thoroughly insalivated that much of it will
 be converted within the mouth into maltose. hard well baked
 crusts constitute a convenient form in which to administer
 starch to children. a piece of crust may be put in the oven and
 rebaked, and spread with butter. later, we may give hard plain
 biscuits." dr. campbell continues, that he does not say that
 starch in the pappy form, or as porridge, should find no place
 whatever in man's dietary at the present day, but we should
 arrange that a large proportion of our food is in a form
 inviting mastication.
the teeth perform the very important function of breaking
 down our food and enabling it to be intimately incorporated
 with the saliva and afterwards with the digestive juices. the
 anglo-saxon race shows a greater tendency to degeneracy in the
 teeth than do other races; the teeth of the present generation
 are less perfect than those of previous generations. a dentist
 writes (lancet, -, p. ) "i have had the
 opportunity of examining the teeth of many natives in their
 more or less uncivilised state, from the red indians of north
 america, the negroes of africa, to the more civilised chinese,
 japanese, and indians of the east, and i have usually found
 them possessed of sound teeth, but so soon as they come under
 the influence of civilised life in washington, montreal,
 london, paris and other cities, their teeth begin to
 degenerate, though their general health may remain good." in a
 long article on mastication in the lancet (-, p.
 ) from which we have already quoted, dr. harry campbell gives
 as the effect of thorough and efficient mastication, that it
 increases the amount of alkaline saliva passing into the
 stomach, and prolongs the period of starch digestion within
 that organ. that it influences the stomach reflexly by
 promoting the flow of gastric juice. that the frequent use of
 the jaws and the tongue, during the period of growth, cause the
 jaws to expand. if the jaws are not adequately exercised during
 this period, owing to the use of soft food, they do not reach
 their normal size, the teeth are overcrowded, do not develop
 fully, and are prone to decay. the effect of vigorous
 mastication is to stimulate the circulation in the tooth pulp,
 which promotes nutrition and maintains a firm dental setting.
 dr. campbell writes: "i am perfectly at one with dr. wallace,
 in believing that the removal of the fibrous portion of food is
 the main cause of the prevalence of caries among moderns."
when the food reaches the stomach, gastric juice is
 secreted. this juice contains a ferment called pepsin and
 hydrochloric acid. pepsin is only active in an acid media.
 starch digestion proceeds in the stomach to such a
 time—stated as from  to  minutes—when the acid
 gastric juice has been poured out in sufficient quantity to
 neutralise the alkalinity of the saliva. the gastric juice acts
 upon the proteids only. after a time the liquefied contents of
 the stomach are passed into the first portion of the small
 intestine, called the duodenum. here it meets with the
 pancreatic juice, which like the gastric juice attacks
 proteids, but even more energetically, and only in an alkaline
 media. the proteolitic ferment is called trypsin. the
 pancreatic, the most important of the digestive fluids,
 contains other ferments; one called amylopsin, takes up the
 digestion of any remaining or imperfectly converted starch left
 from the salivary digestion. amylopsin is much more powerful
 and rapid than the ptyalin of the saliva, especially on
 uncooked starch. its absence from the pancreatic juice of
 infants is an indication that starch should not be given them.
 another ferment, stearopsin, emulsifies fats. the bile is
 alkaline and assists the pancreatic juice in neutralising the
 acid mixture that leaves the stomach; it also assists the
 absorption of fats. the digestion of proteids is not completed
 in the stomach. there are some who look upon the stomach as
 chiefly of use as a receptacle for the large mass of food,
 which is too quickly eaten to be passed at once into the
 intestines; the food being gradually expelled from the stomach,
 in such quantities as the duodenal digestion can adequately
 treat. a frequently used table, showing the time required for
 the digestion of various foods in the stomach, is of little
 practical value. there is ample provision for the digestion of
 food, there is a duplication of ferments for the proteids and
 starch. in health, the ferments are not only very active, but
 are secreted in ample quantities. the digestive or unorganised
 ferments must not be confused with the organised ferments such
 as yeast. the latter are living vegetable cells, capable of
 indefinite multiplication. the former are soluble bodies, and
 though capable of transforming or digesting some thousands of
 times their mass of food, their power in this direction is
 restricted within definite limits. another and preferable name
 for them is enzymes.
the action of saliva on starch is powerfully retarded by
 tea, this is due to the tannin. coffee and cocoa are without
 effect. tea infused for two minutes only, was not found to have
 sensibly less restraining effect than when infused for thirty
 minutes. on peptic digestion both tea and coffee had a powerful
 retarding effect. when of equal strength cocoa was nearly as
 bad, but as it is usually taken much weaker, its inhibitory
 effect is of little consequence.
bacteria are minute vegetable organisms, which exist in the
 dust of the air, in water and almost everywhere on or near the
 surface of the earth. they are consequently taken in with our
 food. they exist in the mouth; those in carious teeth are often
 sufficient to injuriously affect digestion and health. the
 healthy gastric juice is to a great degree antiseptic, but few
 bacteria being able to endure its acidity. when the residue of
 the food reaches the large intestine, bacteria are found in
 very great numbers. the warmth of the body is highly favourable
 to their growth. they cause the food and intestinal
 debris to assume its fæcal character. should the
 mass be retained, the bacterial poisons accumutate and being
 absorbed into the body produce headaches, exhaustion,
 neurasthenia and other complaints. proteid matter, the products
 of its decomposition and nitrogenous matter generally, are
 especially the food of bacteria; this is shown in the
 offensiveness of the fæces of the carnivora,
 notwithstanding their short intestines, compared with that of
 the herbivora. also in the difference of the fæces of the
 dog when fed on flesh and on a nearly vegetable diet. on a rich
 proteid diet, especially if it consists largely of flesh, the
 bacterial products in the intestines are greater than on a
 vegetable diet. on the latter such a disease as appendicitis is
 rare. professor elie metchnikoff, of the pasteur institute,
 thinks that man's voluminous and highly developed large
 intestine fulfils no useful purpose, and on account of its
 breeding a very copious and varied bacterial flora, could with
 advantage be dispensed with. he also has said that man, who
 could support himself on food easily digestible, has a small
 intestine which is disproportionately fully developed. instead
 of having between  and  feet of small intestine, man might
 do with one-third of that length. according to him, there is a
 disharmony of our food and our digestive system. referring to
 such views, and the desire of some surgeons to remove the
 vermiform appendix and portions of the intestines upon too
 little provocation, sir w. macewin, m.d., f.r.s. (b. medical
 jrn., ,  p. ) says:—"is this human body of
 ours so badly constructed that it contains so many useless
 parts and requires so much tinkering? possibly i may be out of
 fashion with the times, as i cannot find such imperfections in
 the normal human body as are alleged. on the contrary, the more
 one looks into the human body and sees it work, the better one
 understands it and the more one is struck with the wondrous
 utility, beauty, and harmony of all its parts." our food we can
 change, but not our organs-except by a dangerous surgical
 operations. our teeth with our complex and very long intestines
 are adapted for fibrous, bulky and solid food. on such food
 mankind has lived for an immense period of time. it is true
 that there are several theoretical advantages in cooked
 vegetable foods; but unfortunately there is a want of
 conformity with our digestive organs. if a flesh diet is taken,
 the incongruity is greater. concentrated food causes
 constipation. an active man, leading an out-of-door life, can
 take unsuitable food with little or no apparent inconvenience,
 the movements of his body favouring intestinal action; whilst
 the same food to a sedentary person will prove distinctly
 injurious.
some persons have such a vigorous digestion that they can
 consume almost any food, even that which is obviously
 unsuitable; not only bad in kind but excessive in quantity.
 other persons have to be very careful. many have boasted that
 they can take of what they call the good things of life to
 their full, without bad effect. we know of such men who have
 been much esteemed for their joviality and good nature, but who
 have broken down in what should have been a hearty and useful
 middle life. there are others who were poorly equipped for the
 battle of life, with indifferent constitutions, never having
 had the buoyancy and overflowing of animal spirits; but who, by
 conserving such strength as they had, have outlived all their
 more healthy but less careful comrades. the errors of the
 parents are often most evident in the children or
 grandchildren. there are many persons who cannot eat of some
 particular food, although it may be quite wholesome to others.
 sometimes it is a psychological rather than a physiological
 disability, which may he overcome by an effort of the will. at
 other times it seems to have no connection with the
 imagination, although it is not always possible to give a sound
 reason for it. in the main, of course, there are principles of
 dietetics applicable to all alike, but in regard to details,
 everyone should make rules for himself, according to his
 experience. when there appears no real reason for an
 idiosyncrasy, a little humouring of our taste and digestion
 will often overcome it, to our advantage. it is generally those
 of delicate constitution who are most sensitive. some cannot
 eat oatmeal except in small quantity. olive and other vegetable
 oils, even when of good quality cannot be taken by many people,
 whilst others find them quite as wholesome, or even better than
 butter. vegetarians can generally detect lard in pastry both by
 its taste and its after effects, although those accustomed to
 this fat do not object to it. it is also surprising how some
 individual's tastes and habits will vary at different periods
 of their lives.
one form of dyspepsia is due to undigested starch remaining
 in the stomach and causing an excessive secretion of
 hydrochloric acid. as long as proteid food is present, the
 pepsin and acid expend themselves on it, and are removed
 together. the undigested starch continues to stimulate gastric
 secretion, and the acid residuum causes pain, heartburn and
 flatulence. if there be also any butyric acid, or some other
 fatty acid, derived from milk, butter, cheese, &c., there
 will be acid eructations. for this form of indigestion there
 are several methods of treatment. first; the very thorough
 cooking of all starchy food, and it is an advantage to take a
 little good extract of malt, either at the time of eating or
 directly afterwards. the diastase of the malt has the same
 action on starch as the ptyalin in the saliva. it is better,
 scientifically, to have the farinaceous food at about °
 f. (as hot as the mouth can bear will do), and then to add malt
 extract. on keeping the mixture warm, from a few minutes to
 half an hour or more, the starch is digested and rendered
 soluble. such food is not very pleasant to take. the food known
 as grape nuts has been treated in a similar manner. the use of
 malt extract, however, seems a clumsy substitute for salivary
 digestion. second; the eating of starch in the form of hard and
 dry biscuits, crusts and other hard food, which demand thorough
 mastication and insalivation, and the keeping in the mouth for
 a long while, during which the saliva has time to act. this is
 the best plan. third; the taking of sodium bicarbonate towards
 the end of the period of digestion, in order to neutralise the
 acid in the stomach. this gives relief, but does not cure, as
 the dose has to be repeated after each meal; in course of time
 the quantity of soda has sometimes to be increased to an
 alarming extent. fourth; the abstention from starchy foods and
 the substitution of an exclusive flesh dietary. in the
 "salisbury" treatment, raw minced beef is given. this method
 often gives immediate relief, but its ultimate effect on the
 kidneys and other organs is very bad.
no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to the number of
 meals into which the daily amount of food required should be
 divided. the stomach appears to work to the best advantage when
 it is full, or nearly so, and the appetite is appeased. three
 approximately equal meals seems to be a convenient division.
 dr. dewey and his followers advise only two meals a day, and it
 seems incontestable that many persons find the plan
 advantageous. these are generally adults with weak digestions,
 or elderly persons who, on account of their age and the
 sluggish action of their assimilative functions, require
 comparatively little food. children, on account of their
 vigorous vitality, rapid growth and hearty appetites, ought not
 to be restricted to this number. persons who have got into the
 pernicious habit of greatly over-eating, and whose stomachs
 have become distended and unusually large, sometimes find it
 easier to restrict their daily food to a healthy quantity by
 taking only two meals. the general objections against two meals
 are that either two little food is taken, or the ingestion of
 such a large quantity is bad for the stomach and causes it to
 press on the adjacent viscera. the large quantity of blood and
 nerve force drawn to the over-distended stomach, depletes the
 brain and nervous system, causing drowsiness and incapacity for
 mental and physical work. the carnivora, whose opportunity for
 obtaining food—unlike the herbivora—is irregular
 and often at long intervals, gorge themselves upon opportunity
 and are in the habit of sleeping after a meal. the frugivora
 and herbivora, however, are alert and ready to fly from their
 enemies should such appear. the conveying of so much
 nourishment to the liver and blood stream at one time, is
 probably a greater tax on them. a light lunch between the usual
 full meals has nothing to recommend it. the stomach is burdened
 to little purpose, often before it has finished with one meal
 another is imposed upon it, no time being left for
 recuperation.
dietaries.—the best proportions of proteids,
 carbo-hydrates and fats required for the nourishment of the
 body has not yet been conclusively decided. the common plan is
 to average the dietary of large bodies of persons, particualrly
 of soldiers and prisoners. these dietaries have been adjusted
 empirically (the earlier ones at least), and are generally
 considered as satisfactory. they are chiefly of english and
 german origin. another method is to laboriously analyse the
 injesta or food consumed and compare it with the dejecta or
 excretions, until a quantity and kind of food is found which is
 just sufficient to keep the body in equilibrium. this latter
 plan is the best, but to be quite satisfactory must be tried on
 a large number of suitable persons under varying conditions,
 both of quantity and kind of food. nearly all the experiments
 have been made on persons accustomed to a stimulating dietary:
 their usual food has included a considerable quantity of flesh
 and alcoholic drinks. sufficient attention has not been paid to
 the dietaries of the more abstemious races who partake of
 little if any flesh food. the standard daily dietary for a man
 of average weight, doing a moderate amount of work, is
 variously stated by the best authorities as proteids from 
 to  grammes, fat  to  grammes, and carbo-hydrates 
 to  grammes. there is a surprising difference of opinion on
 the amount of fat, but those who give least fat give the
 largest quantity of carbo-hydrate and vice-versa. dr. r.
 hutchison in "food and dietetics," sums up the quantities given
 by the highest authorities as follows:—-
proteid
 g. ( . oz.)
x
cal. =  g. n,
carbo-hydrate
 g. (. oz.)
fat
 g. ( . oz.)
 g. (. oz.)
total  g. n,
the nutrient ratio is  : .. for scientific purposes,
 metrical weights and measures are used, instead of the
 inconvenient english grains, ounces, pounds, &c. ( gramme
 = . grains;  ounce avoirdupois = . grains = .
 grammes). a calorie is a measure of the power of a food in
 generating heat and muscular energy (these two being
 convertible).
the calories used in food tables are kilo-calories,
 representing the amount of heat which would raise a kilogramme
 ( grammes) of water ° centigrade. this is the same as
 raising  pound weight ° fahrenheit. according to the
 table given,  grammes of dry proteid are required per day;
 this contains  grammes of nitrogen and  of carbon. when
 thoroughly consumed or utilised in the body, the heat or its
 equivalent in muscular work equals  kilo-calories. proteids
 have, of course, an additional value as tissue formers. the
 factors used here, of . and ., are those commonly employed;
 but the latest and most reliable research, taking account only
 of that part of the food which is actually available in the
 body, gives for proteid and carbo-hydrate  calories, and for
 fat . calories.
fat has a higher food value than the carbo-hydrates, as .
 : . = . or . :  = ., according to whether the old
 or new factors are used. in the table of analyses . was
 used. the standard dietary for a woman, or of a boy  to 
 years of age, is given as equivalent to eight-tenths that of a
 man; a child of  to  six-tenths; of  to  four-tenths. a
 man doing hard work requires one-tenth more. the following
 table gives three standard dietaries, and a few actual ones, in
 grammes per day. the food of persons in easy circumstances, and
 of working men in the receipt of good wages, approximate to the
 standard dietaries, except that the fat is higher and the
 carbo-hydrates proportionately less. this is due to an
 abundance of animal food. it was thought unnecessary to give
 them in detail:—
dr. alexander haig considers that  grammes of proteid is
 required by a man leading a decidedly active life.
notes.—(a) the japanese are of small stature
 and weight.
(b) one of a series of experiments by a.w. blyth,
 . ½ lbs. of wheatmeal per day was required for
 equilibrium; sedentary occupation, with a daily walk of six
 miles.
(c) see "a text book of physiology," by m. foster,
 th edition, part ii., p. ; the diet was bread, fruit and
 oil. the man was in apparently good health and stationary
 weight; only  per cent. of the proteids were digested,
 leaving the small quantity of  grammes available for real
 use. in commenting upon this, professor foster
 writes:—"we cannot authoritatively say that such a
 reduction is necessarily an evil; for our knowledge will not at
 present permit us to make an authoritative exact statement as
 to the extent to which the proteid may be reduced without
 disadvantage to the body, when accompanied by adequate
 provision of the other elements of food; and this statement
 holds good whether the body be undertaking a small or large
 amount of labour."
(d) the miller of billericay's case is quoted by dr.
 carpenter, and also by dr. pavy. it was reported to the college
 of physicians in  by sir george baker. a remarkable degree
 of vigour is said to have been sustained for upwards of
 eighteen years on no other nutriment than  oz. of flour, made
 into a pudding with water, no other liquid of any kind being
 taken.
a striking instance of abstemiousness is that of cornaro, a
 venetian nobleman, who died in the year  at the age of .
 up to the age of  he spent a life of indulgence, eating and
 drinking to excess. at this time, having been endowed with a
 feeble constitution, he was suffering from dyspepsia, gout, and
 an almost continual slow fever, with an intolerable thirst
 continually hanging upon him. the skill of the best physicians
 of italy was unavailing. at length he completely changed his
 habits of diet, and made a complete recovery. at the age of 
 he wrote a treatise on a "sure and certain method of attaining
 a long and healthful life." he says, what with bread, meat, the
 yolk of an egg and soup, i ate as much as weighed  ozs.,
 neither more nor less. i drank  oz. of wine. when  he was
 persuaded to increase his food by the addition of  oz. per
 day, and this nearly proved fatal. he writes that, instead of
 old age being one of weakness, infirmity and misery, i find
 myself to be in the most pleasant and delightful stage of life.
 at  i am always merry, maintaining a happy peace in my own
 mind. a sober life has preserved me in that sprightliness of
 thought and gaiety of humour. my teeth are all as sound as in
 my youth. he was able to take moderate exercise in riding and
 walking at that age. he was very passionate and hasty in his
 youth. he wrote other treatises up to the age of .
kumagara, lapicque and breis-acher, have, as the result of
 their experiments, reduced the quantity of proteid required per
  hours to  grammes. t. hirschfeld states, as the conclusion
 of his research, that it is possible for a healthy man (in one
 case for  days and in another for  days) to maintain
 nitrogenous balance on from  to  grammes of proteid per
 day. labbé and morchoisne (comptes rendus, th may,
 , p. ) made a dieting experiment during  days, upon
 one of themselves. the proteid was derived exclusively from
 vegetable food. the food consisted of bread, lentils, haricots,
 potatoes, carrots, chestnuts, endives, apples, oranges,
 preserves, sugar, starch, butter, chocolate and wine. at the
 commencement, the day's food contained . grammes of nitrogen
 = . proteid, which was gradually diminished. on the th day
 . g. n. = . g. proteid was reached; during this time less
 n. was eliminated, indicating that the proteid food was in
 excess of that required for the wear and tear of the body. as
 the quantity of nitrogenous food was diminished almost daily,
 the n. eliminated was found to diminish also. this latter was
 in slight excess of that absorbed; but when a day or two's time
 was allowed, without further reduction in the food, the body
 tended to adjust itself to the dimished supply, and there was
 an approximation of income and expenditure. the smallest
 quantity of food was reached on the nd day with . n. = .
 proteid, which was obviously too little, as . n. = .
 proteid was eliminated. on the st day . n. =  proteid
 was injested, and . n. was eliminated. the inference drawn
 from the research is that about  grammes of proteid per day
 was sufficient. the weight of the body remained practically
 constant throughout, and the subject did not suffer
 inconvenience. of course the full amount of calories was kept
 up; as each succeeding quantity of the proteid was left off, it
 was replaced by a proper quantity of non-nitrogenous food.
 these experiments were carried out in the usual approved
 scientific manner. it may, however, be urged against any
 generalised and positive conclusions as to the minimum quantity
 of proteid required for the body, being drawn from such
 experiments, that the period covered by them was much too
 short. a prolonged trial might have revealed some obscure
 physiological derangement. we are quite justified in concluding
 that the usual, so-called "standard dietaries" contain an
 unnecessarily large proportion of proteid. in some practical
 dietaries,  grammes and under have seemed enough; but for the
 ordinary adult man, who has been accustomed to an abundance of
 proteid, and whose ancestors have also, it is probably
 advisable not to take less than  or  grammes per day (½
 to  ounces). if it is desired to try less, the diminution
 should be very gradual, and a watch should be kept for any
 lessening of strength.
some comments may now be made upon the table of dietaries.
 that of the london sewing girl contained  grammes of proteid,
 which should have been ample, according to some of the
 authorities we have given; yet she was badly nourished. the
 food was doubtless of bad quality, and it appears deficient in
 carbo-hydrates; this latter is shown by the low number of
 calories. the long hours and unhealthy conditions of work, and
 not a deficiency of food constituents, is probably the cause of
 the bad health of such persons. there is no reason to think the
 proteid insufficient, although some persons have said as much.
 we have no particulars of the german vegetarians, but the
 calories appear satisfactory. in the poor german labourer's
 family the calories are too low. in dr. t.r. allinson's
 experiment on a wheatmeal dietary, it will not do to assume
 that less than  grammes of proteid would have been
 insufficient. it is probable that a smaller quantity of proteid
 would have been enough if the fat and carbohydrates had been
 increased. the calories are below the usual standard. in the
 succeeding example the calories are considerably higher, being
 not far from the usual standard, yet  grammes of proteid
 sufficed. it is a common error to place an undue value on the
 proteids to the extent of overlooking the other constituents.
 dr. alexander haig in "diet and food," p. , cites the case of
 a boy aged , fed on ¼ pints of milk per day. the boy lost
 weight, and dr. haig is of opinion that the quantity of milk
 was very deficient in proteid; more than twice as much being
 required. ¼ pints of milk contain about  grammes of
 proteid, whereas, according to the usual figures ( x /) a
 boy of this age requires  g. this quantity of  g. is
 however, higher, allowing for the boy's age, than that in
 several of the dietaries we have given in our table. a little
 consideration will show that dr. haig has overlooked the
 serious deficiency of the milk in the other constituents, which
 accounts for the boy's loss of weight. the quantity of milk
 contains only about  g. of total solid matter, whilst  g.
 is the necessary quantity. milk is too rich in proteid matter
 to form, with advantage, the sole food of a human being. human
 milk contains much less in proportion to the other
 constituents.
the old doctrine enunciated by justus von liebig was that
 proteid matter is the principal source of muscular energy or
 strength. he afterwards discovered and acknowledged his error,
 and the subject has since been thoroughly investigated. the
 makers of meat extracts and other foods, either from their own
 ignorance of modern research or their wish to take advantage of
 the lack of knowledge and prejudice of the public, call proteid
 matter alone nourishment. the carbo-hydrates and fats are
 equally entitled to be called nourishment.
our reason for devoting so much space to the consideration
 of the quantity of proteid matter required, is that in the
 opinion of many eminent writers it is the crux of
 vegetarianism. they have stated that it is impossible to obtain
 sufficient from vegetable foods alone, without consuming an
 excessive quantity of carbo-hydrates. we will summarise the
 argument as given in kirke's physiology, as edited by morrant
 baker, a standard work, and which is repeated in furneaux's
 "animal physiology," a book which is much used in elementary
 science schools: "the daily waste from the system amounts to,
 carbon , grains (or  grammes), and nitrogen,  grains
 (or  grammes). now let us suppose a person to feed on bread
 only. in order to obtain the necessary quantity of nitrogen to
 repair this waste he would have to eat nearly ¼ lbs.
 daily.... he would be compelled to take about double the
 quantity of carbon required in order to obtain the necessary
 weight of nitrogen.... next, let us suppose that he feeds on
 lean meat only. then, in order to obtain the necessary quantity
 of carbon, he must eat no less than ½ lbs. daily.... in
 this case we notice a similar waste of nitrogen, the removal of
 which would give an undue amount of work to the organs
 concerned.... but it is possible to take such a mixed diet of
 bread and meat as will supply all the requirements of the
 system, and at the same time yield but little waste material."
 (these extracts are from furneaux, the next is from kirke. the
 figures and argument is the same in each, but we have chosen
 those sentences for quotation which are the briefest and most
 suitable; certain calculations being omitted.) "a combination
 of bread and meat would supply much more economically what was
 necessary ... so that ¾ lbs. of meat, and less than  lbs. of
 bread would supply all the needful carbon and nitrogen with but
 little waste. from these facts it will be plain that a mixed
 diet is the best and most economical food for man; and the
 result of experience entirely coincides with what might have
 been anticipated on theoretical grounds only." professor
 huxley, in his "elementary physiology" uses almost the same
 figures and argument.
the adoption of this high proteid or nitrogen figure would
 lead to some ridiculous conclusions. one writer states that 
 eggs would contain sufficient flesh forming substance for a
 day's ration, but a very much larger quantity would be required
 to supply enough carbon. on the other hand, professor church
 says that, no less than  lbs. of pears would have to be eaten
 per day, to supply the necessary quantity of nitrogen; although
 the carbon would be in excess. the curious may calculate the
 proper quantity of each that would make a theoretically perfect
 dietary. people are apt to assume that what they themselves
 eat, or what their class, race, or nation eat, is the proper
 and necessary diet; at least as far as the elementary
 constituents and quantities are concerned. the error is in
 attempting to make a vegetarian diet, however contrary to
 common sense and the experience of the greater part of the
 earth's inhabitants, agree in composition with the ordinary
 lavish flesh dietary of the well-to-do european. it is
 significant that john bull is caricatured with a large abdomen
 and a coarse, ruddy, if not inflamed face, indicative of his
 hearty dining on flesh, coarse food and alcoholic drinks. an
 unhealthy short lived individual. even if we accept a high
 proportion of proteid, it is possible to combine purely
 vegetable foods so as to give the required quantity of the
 various constituents, without a superfluity of the
 carbo-hydrates. in "food grains of india," professor a.h.
 church shows by elaborate analyses and dietary tables, how this
 can be accomplished by various combinations of cereals, pulses,
 etc. he takes forster and voit's standard of  grains of
 nitrogen and , grains of carbon, with a suitable deduction
 for the smaller weight of the indians. in his examples of daily
 rations he gives from  to  ounces of various beans, balanced
 by the addition of the proper quantity of rice— to 
 ounces, and a little oil. such a large quantity of pulse
 appears to us excessive, and would cause discomfort to most
 persons. we much doubt whether those indians who are strict
 vegetarians could consume such quantities.
some valuable investigations were made on the diet of a
 family of fruitarians, at the californian agricultural
 experimental station, july, , by professor m.e. jaffa
 (bulletin ). the proportion of food, both proteid and
 carbo-hydrate used was surprisingly small. the research is
 particularly important, as the diet was not an experimental
 one, tried during a short period only; but that to which the
 family were accustomed. the family consisted of two women and
 three children; they had all been fruitarians for five to seven
 years, and made no change in their dietary during the
 experiment. they only had two meals a day, the food being eaten
 uncooked. the quantities of all the foods and other particulars
 are detailed in the bulletin. the first meal was at - a.m.,
 and always consisted of nuts followed by fruits. the other meal
 was about  p.m., when they usually ate no nuts, substituting
 olive oil and honey. the nuts used were almonds, brazil, pine,
 pignolias and walnuts; the fresh fruits were apples, apricots,
 bananas, figs, grapes, oranges, peaches and pears. other foods
 were dates, raisins, pickled olives, olive oil and honey. one
 person (b) ate a little celery and tomatoes, and another
 (c) a little cereal food. in the following table are
 given the average daily quantities of the food constituents in
 grammes:—proteids, fat, carbo-hydrate, crude fibre, value
 in calories and nutrient ratio. the crude fibre is classed as a
 carbo-hydrate and included in the calorie value, and also in
 calculating the nutrient ratio.
the last research extended over ten days; the period during
 which each of the other subjects was under observation was from
  to  days.
(a) the tentative standard for a woman at light work
 calls for  grammes of proteids and , calories; it is thus
 seen that the quantity of food eaten was far below that usually
 stated as being necessary. the subject, however, was a very
 small woman,  feet in height, taking almost no physical
 exercise. she believed, as do fruitarians generally, that
 people need far less raw than cooked food. (b) the food
 eaten was even less in quantity than in the previous dietary.
 one reason for this was the fact that the subject was, for part
 of the time at least, under great mental strain, and did not
 have her usual appetite. even this small amount of food,
 judging by her appearance and manner, seemed sufficient for her
 needs, enabling her to do her customary housework and take care
 of her two nieces and nephew, the subjects of the other
 experiments. (c) this girl was given cereals and
 vegetables when she craved them, but her aunt says she never
 looks nor feels so well when she has much starchy food, and
 returns to her next meal of uncooked food with an increased
 appreciation of its superiority. the commonly accepted dietary
 standard for a child  years old and of average activity, is
 not far from  grammes of proteids and , calories, yet the
 girl had all the appearance of being well fed and in excellent
 health and spirits. (d) during the  days of
 experiment, there was an increase in weight of  pounds, due to
 the fact that the family had been in straitened circumstances,
 and the food provided was more abundant during the study.
 (e) the subject had been very delicate as a baby. she
 was very small for her age, being  pounds under the average
 weight, and  inches less than the average height. it is
 interesting to note that her only gain in weight during the
 past year was made during this dietary and the one immediately
 following. this was due to her being urged to eat all she
 wanted, of what she most preferred, as the food was provided by
 those making the study. the proteid is less than the tentative
 standard for a child of  to  years old, but the subject
 appeared perfectly well and was exceedingly active. she
 impressed one as being a healthy child, but looked younger than
 her age. (ee) the subject is the same as in the previous
 experiment (e), but after an interval of  months, her
 seventh birthday occurred during the time.
professor jaffa, who made the investigation, says:—"it
 would appear that all the subjects were decidedly
 under-nourished, even making allowance for their light weight.
 but when we consider that the two adults have lived upon this
 diet for seven years, and think they are in better health and
 capable of more work than they ever were before, we hesitate to
 pronounce judgment. the three children had the appearance of
 health and strength. they ran and jumped and played all day
 like ordinary healthy children, and were said to be unusually
 free from colds and other complaints common to childhood. the
 youngest child, and the only one who has lived as a fruitarian
 almost from infancy was certainly undeveloped. she looked fully
 two years younger than she was. still, there are so many
 children who are below the average in development, whose
 dietaries conform to the ordinary standards, that it would be
 unfair to draw any conclusions until many more such
 investigations are made."
the research shows that not only is there need of a revision
 of the "standard" quantity of proteids, but also of the
 carbo-hydrates and fats. it is generally said by those who have
 no practical experience amongst vegetarians, that the latter
 require a much larger quantity of food than do those who
 include flesh. the truth is that vegetarians eat less, often
 much less. it is a common experience that vegetable food has a
 more staying power, and a much longer period can be allowed
 between meals, without the inconvenience that a flesh-eater,
 especially a flesh and alcohol consumer, suffers. this is due,
 in part at least, to its less stimulating character and its
 slower digestion. this fact has been shown by the success of
 vegetarians in feats of strength and endurance, and especially
 in the comparatively fresh condition in which they have
 finished long walking, cycling, tennis, and other matches.
 those who attempt to prolong their powers of endurance by flesh
 extracts and stimulating foods and drinks, usually finish in a
 very exhausted condition. the superior endurance and recovery
 from wounds, when compared with our english soldiers, of simple
 feeding men, such as the zulus, turks and japanese, has often
 been remarked. it is often said that vegetable food, as it
 contains more fibre and is slower of digestion, taxes the
 bodily organs more. if we attempted to eat uncooked, the more
 fibrous vegetables, the grains, and unripe fruit, it would be
 quite true, but it is not so of the ordinary food of
 vegetarians. a slowness of digestion does not necessarily imply
 a greater strain on the system. as vegetables, in particular,
 are for the longest period of time in the intestines, and
 undergo the greater part of their digestion there, a gentle and
 slow process of digestion in that organ may be more thorough.
 it may also entail less expenditure of nervous energy than if
 the food had been of such a stimulating character, as to be
 hurried along the digestive tract. digestion is for the most
 part a chemical process. if the food is of right kind and
 quantity, thoroughly masticated, assisted if necessary by
 cookery, and the digestive ferments are normal, digestion
 proceeds without any sensible expenditure or energy or
 consciousness of its accomplishment. there is nothing
 improbable in a flesh-eater requiring more food than a simple
 living vegetarian. his food contains more proteid, and
 excrementitious matter or extractives; these stimulate the
 digestive organs and overtax the excretory ones. generally, he
 is fond of condiments, salt, and elaborate cooking, often also
 of alcohol; if a man, probably of tobacco. he lives, as it
 were, at high pressure.
there are on record certain experiments which appear to
 indicate the necessity of a large proportion of proteid,
 especially when the diet has been of vegetable origin. these
 experiments are inconclusive, because the subject has been
 accustomed to an ordinary flesh diet, perhaps also to alcoholic
 drinks. the change to a comparatively non-stimulating diet
 cannot be made, and the digestive organs expected to adapt
 themselves in a few days. perhaps not even a month or a year
 would suffice, for some people, and yet that same diet would
 suit others. in some experiments the food has not been
 appetising, the subject has even taken it with reluctance or
 even loathing; an excess of some food has been eaten which no
 vegetarian or anybody else would think of using in a practical
 dietary.
sometimes persons on changing from an ordinary flesh
 dietary, lose weight and strength. generally, it is found that
 they have done little more than discontinue the flesh, without
 substituting suitable foods. authorities think it is from a
 deficiency of proteid, and recommend an addition of such foods
 as pulse, wheatmeal, oatmeal, eggs, milk, cheese, and such as a
 reference to the table of analyses, show a low nutrient ratio
 figure. this may also be due to an insufficiency of food eaten,
 owing to the comparatively insipid character of the food and
 want of appetite. in making a change to a vegetarian diet, such
 foods had better be taken that are rather rich in proteid, and
 that approximate somewhat in their flavour and manner of
 cooking to that used previously. a further change to a simpler
 diet can afterwards gradually be made, according to conviction,
 tastes and bodily adaptability. it must not be expected that a
 change, even an ultimately very advantageous one, will always
 meet with an immediate and proper response from digestive and
 assimilative organs which have been accustomed for many years,
 perhaps by inheritance for generations, to another manner of
 living. there are several preparations produced from
 centrifugalised milk—that is milk from which the butter
 fat has been removed, which consist chiefly of proteid. these
 have a value in increasing the proteid contents of foods which
 may be thought deficient. the addition of these manufactured
 products appear unnecessary, as most of our food contains an
 abundance of proteid, and we can easily limit the quantity or
 avoid altogether those that are thought defective.
the later apologists for a flesh diet have had to admit that
 it is not a physiological necessity; but they have attempted to
 justify its use by a theory somewhat as follows. it is
 admitted, that any excess of proteid over that necessary for
 its special province of producing tissue, is utilised as a
 force-producer, in a similar manner to the carbo-hydrates. when
 the molecule is split up, and the carbon utilised, the nitrogen
 passes off in the form of urea by the kidneys. the theory
 propounded is that at the moment the nitrogen portion is
 liberated, it in some manner stimulates the living protoplasm
 of the nerve cells in its immediate neighbourhood to a higher
 state of activity. these views are given by dr. hutchison in
 his book on "food," but there are no substantial grounds for
 them. it is only prompted by a wish to excuse a cherished
 habit. sir william roberts, m.d., in "dietetics and dyspepsia,"
 p.  says that "high feeding consists mainly in a liberal
 allowance of meat, and in the systematic use of alcoholic
 beverages, and that low-feeding consists in a diet which is
 mainly vegetarian and non-alcoholic," and he proceeds to say
 that the high-fed classes and races display, on the whole, a
 richer vitality and a greater brain-power than their low-fed
 brethren. that "it is remarkable how often we hear of eminent
 men being troubled with gout, and gout is usually produced
 either by personal or ancestral high-feeding." we can only
 spare room for a few remarks on this subject. intellectual and
 business ability brings wealth, wealth frequently leads to the
 pleasures of the table, but such habits are detrimental to
 sustained effort and clearness of mind. the children and
 grandchildren of such high livers are usually common-place,
 intellectually, and of deteriorated physique. the aristocracy
 who are generally high livers, notwithstanding their great
 advantages of education, travel and leisure, are not as a rule
 famed for their intellectual gifts. in the recent war the
 frugal living japanese soldier has proved himself the most
 enduring and bravest in history; whilst the japanese officers
 are more resourceful and tactful than the wealthier, high-fed
 russian officers, with their aristocratic lineage. what is
 called high-feeding, is of the greatest benefit to the doctors
 and the proprietors of remedies for digestive and nervous
 disorders.
food adjuncts and drugs.—in addition to the
 nutrients and the small quantity of indigestible fibre of which
 we have already written, food generally contains small
 quantities of substances which are difficult to classify, and
 whose action on the body is but imperfectly understood. many of
 these possess pungent or strong odours and flavours. to them,
 various fruits, meats, etc., owe much of their characteristic
 differences of taste. when pure the proteids and starches are
 devoid of taste. such oils and fats as are generally eaten have
 also but little flavour, providing they are free from rancidity
 and of good quality. the sugars differ from the other nutrients
 in possessing a more or less decided taste. the free vegetable
 acids also strongly affect the sense of taste, but they are
 only consumed in small quantities.
a drug may be defined as a substance which modifies the
 functions of the body or of some organ without sensibly
 imparting nourishment. this action may be one of stimulation or
 of depression. a drug is taken for its medicinal action, a food
 adjunct for its modifying action on food. it is impossible to
 give a quite satisfactory definition, or to draw sharp
 distinctions. for example, tea, coffee, alcohol and tobacco are
 sometimes placed in one group, and sometimes in another,
 according to opinion of their action and the definition of the
 terms food adjuncts, drugs and poisons. the difference of
 grouping often depends upon intensity rather than of kind of
 action. if taken frequently and not in quantity sufficient to
 have a markedly medicinal action, such things are generally
 called food adjuncts or supplementary foods, although much may
 be said in favour of a different view. the volatile oils of
 mustard, caraway, cloves, etc., are used in medicine; also the
 alkaloids of coffee and cocoa. even honey is used as a mild
 laxative for infants; that is, as a drug. the difference
 between a drug and a poison is one only of degree. some of the
 most esteemed drugs have to be administered in very small
 quantities, or they cause death; e.g., strychnine and
 morphine.
classifications are necessary for methodical study, and for
 assisting the memory in grasping large numbers of things which
 can be grouped together. classifications, however, are
 artificial, not due to natural lines of demarkation, but
 according to man's knowledge and convenience; hence a group is
 apt to approach and finally merge into another group, although
 on first consideration they appeared quite distinct. the
 disregard of this often leads to confusion and useless
 discussions.
plants, like animals, as the result of tissue change, have
 certain used-up or waste matters to get out of the way. animals
 have special excretory organs for the purpose; waste matter
 remains in the flesh and blood of dead animals. in plants are
 found a large number of powerful volatile oils, alkaloids,
 bitter resins, etc. many of these are, in all probability,
 excretory products of no assimilative value to the plant.
 certain volatile oils may attract insects, and in obtaining
 nectar from flowers insects assist fertilisation. agreeable
 volatile oils and flavouring substances in fruits attract birds
 and animals. the eating of the fruits cause the seeds, which
 are uninjured by passing through the digestive system, to be
 disseminated over wide areas to the advantage of the plant
 species. on the other hand, nauseous and poisonous alkaloids,
 oils, resins, etc., serve as a protection against the attacks
 of browsing animals, birds, caterpillars, snails, etc. these
 nauseous substances are most abundant in the bark, husk, skin
 and outer parts. it is commonly supposed that the food on which
 each animal, including man, subsists, is especially produced by
 nature for the purpose. this is an error, for each species of
 plant and animal lives for itself alone, and protects itself,
 with more or less success, against destruction by its
 competitors and enemies. each species of animal selects from
 its surroundings such food as is most suitable. such food may
 not be theoretically perfect; that is, it may not contain the
 maximum of nourishment free from innutritious matter; but
 during the long period of evolution, each species of animal has
 become possessed of organs suited to its environment. if to
 such animals be given food containing less indigestible matter,
 or food which is more readily digested by laboratory tests made
 independently of the living animal, their digestive system will
 be thrown out of gear, become clogged up or refuse to work
 properly, just as the furnace of a steam boiler, made to burn
 coal, will act badly with wood or petroleum. many scientific
 men have overlooked this fact, and have endeavoured to produce
 food substances for general consumption, in the most
 concentrated and soluble form, thinking such food would be more
 easily assimilated.
the volatile and essential oils are contained in
 minute quantity in a very large number of animal and vegetable
 foods. they contribute in part to the flavour of fruits. they
 are the cause of the pungency and aroma of mustard,
 horse-radish, cloves, nutmegs, cinnamon, caraway seeds, mint,
 sage and other spices. onions contain a notable quantity. when
 extracted the essential oils become powerful drugs. in moderate
 quantities they are stomachic and carminative, in larger
 quantities irritant and emetic. condiments and spices not only
 add flavour to food, but stimulate the secretion of gastric
 juice and peristaltic movement.
the alkaloids most used are those of tea, coffee,
 kola-nut, cocoa, coca, tobacco and opium. although the two last
 are generally smoked, they must be classed amongst the food
 adjuncts. it is of little consequence whether their active
 principles enter the body by the mouth and saliva or the lungs;
 their action on the blood and nervous system is the same.
the extractives, as they are called, comprise a
 number of bodies of varying nature. they especially exist in
 flesh and flesh extracts. amongst these are the purins. they
 will be treated at greater length hereafter.
alcohol is to some extent a true food, but its
 stimulant and other action quite overshadows any food value it
 may possess.
there are other bodies such as the resins and bitters. the
 active principle of indian hemp is a resin.
there is a great difference of opinion as to the extent to
 which stimulants may advantageously be used. it is remarkable
 that amongst nearly all nations, either alcohol in some form or
 one of the stronger alkaloids is in common use. from this fact
 it is sometimes argued that stimulants must supply a
 physiological need. the same method of reasoning will apply
 with greater force to the use of condiments. such conclusions
 appear to us to be scarcely warranted. if the extensive or even
 universal practice of a thing proves its necessity, then has
 there been justification, either now or in the past, for war,
 lying, avarice and other vices. it is strange that drugs
 differing so greatly in their immediate and obvious effects as,
 for example, alcohol and opium, or coffee and tobacco should be
 used. should it he said that only some of the much used
 stimulants are useful, there is an end to the argument based on
 their universal use. there is no doubt that the use of
 stimulants in more than very small quantities is distinctly
 injurious, and it is difficult to see what physiological
 advantage there can be in their habitual use, to what is
 vaguely called a moderate extent. sometimes they are taken for
 a supposed medical necessity, and where taste attracts, little
 evidence satisfies. those in the habit of taking them, if
 honest, must confess that it is chiefly on account of the
 apparent enjoyment. the ill-nourished and the depressed in body
 and mind crave most for stimulants. a food creates energy in
 the body, including the nervous system, and this is the only
 legitimate form of stimulation. a mere stimulant does not
 create but draws on the reserve forces. what was latent
 energy—to become in the natural course gradually
 available—under stimulation is rapidly set free; there is
 consequently, subsequent depletion of energy. there may
 occasionally be times when a particular organ needs a temporary
 stimulus to increased action, notwithstanding it may suffer an
 after depression; but such cases are so rare that they may be
 left out of our present argument, and stimulants should only be
 used, like other powerful drugs, under medical advice. in the
 last  years the use of alcohol by the medical profession has
 steadily diminished, its poisonous properties having become
 more evident.
there is a general similarity in the effects of stimulants
 on the digestive and nervous systems. the most largely used
 stimulant is ethyl alcohol, and as its action is best known, it
 may be useful to name the principal effects. alcohol in the
 form of wine and spirits, in small quantities, first stimulates
 the digestive organs. large quantities inflame the stomach and
 stop digestion. (beer, however, retards digestion, altogether
 out of proportion to the alcohol it contains.) alcohol
 increases the action of the heart, increases the blood
 pressure, and causes the vessels of the whole body to dilate,
 especially those of the skin; hence there is a feeling of
 warmth. it the person previously felt cold he now feels warm.
 the result of the increased circulation through the various
 organs is that they work with greater vigour, hence the mental
 faculties are brightened for a time, and the muscular strength
 seems increased. the person usually feels the better for it,
 though this is not always the case; some have a headache or
 feel very sleepy. it has been repeatedly proved that these good
 results are but transitory. the heart, although at first
 stimulated, is more exhausted after the action of the alcohol
 has passed away than it was at first. this is true of all the
 organs of the body which were stimulated. in consequence of the
 dilatation of the blood vessels of the skin, an unusual
 quantity of heat is lost and the body is cooled. after taking
 alcohol persons are less able to stand cold. when overtaken by
 snowstorms or subjected to excessive or prolonged cold, it has
 often happened that those who resorted to spirit drinking have
 succumbed, whilst the others have survived. insurance
 statistics have conclusively shown that teetotallers are longer
 livers than the so-called moderate drinkers. the terrible
 effects on both body and mind of the excessive drinking of
 alcohol, or the use of other strong stimulants or narcotics,
 are too obvious to need allusion to here; we are only concerned
 with what is vaguely called their moderate use.
the stimulation produced by tea and coffee is in some
 respects like that of alcohol. the heart is stimulated and the
 blood pressure rises. the kidneys are strongly affected in
 those unaccustomed to the drug, but this ceases after a week or
 more of use. their chief effect is on the brain and nervous
 system.
many have boasted that they can take of what they call the
 good things of life to their full, without any bad effect, and
 looking over a few years, or even many years, it seems a fact.
 some of us have known of such men, who have been esteemed for
 their joviality and good nature, who have suddenly broken down
 at what should have been a hearty middle life. on the other
 hand there are men who were badly equipped for the battle of
 life, with indifferent constitutions, who never had the
 buoyancy and overflow of animal spirits, but who with care have
 long outlived all their formerly more robust but careless
 companions.
simple versus highly-flavoured foods.—it is
 very difficult to decide to what extent condiments and
 flavourings should be used. these have stimulating properties,
 although differing from the more complex properties of alcohol
 and the alkaloids. the great differences in the dietetic
 practices of nations does not appear to be in conformity with
 any general rule. it varies with opportunity, climate and
 national temperament; though doubtless the national temperament
 is often due in part to the dietetic habits. some races are
 content with the simplest foods, large numbers subsist chiefly
 on rice, others on the richer cereals, wheat, oatmeal, etc.,
 and fruit. on the other hand there are races who enjoy stronger
 flavoured food, including such things as garlic, curry,
 pickles, pepper, strong cheese, meat extracts, rancid fats,
 dried and smoked fish, high game or still more decomposed
 flesh, offal and various disgusting things. the greenlanders
 will eat with the keenest appetite, the half-frozen,
 half-putrid head and fins of the seal, after it has been
 preserved under the grass of summer. in burmah and sumatra a
 mess is made by pounding together prawns, shrimps, or any cheap
 fish; this is frequently allowed to become partially putrid. it
 is largely used as a condiment for mixing with their rice.
 numerous examples of this sort could be given. there is
 scarcely anything that it is possible to eat, but has been
 consumed with relish by some tribe or other. the strongest
 flavoured, and to our minds most disgusting foods are eaten by
 the least intelligent and most brutal races. it is hunger that
 compels the poor african bushman to eat anything he can get,
 and the hottentot not only the flesh, but the entrails of
 cattle which die naturally, and this last he has come to think
 exquisite when boiled in beast-blood. all this shows a
 wonderful range of adaptability in the human body, but it would
 not be right to say that all such food is equally wholesome.
 the most advanced and civilised races, especially the more
 delicately organised of them are the most fastidious, whilst it
 is the most brutal, that take the most rank and strongly
 flavoured foods. even amongst the civilised there are great
 differences. the assimilative and nervous systems can be
 trained to tolerate injurious influences to a remarkable
 degree. a striking example is seen in the nausea commonly
 produced by the first pipe of tobacco, and the way the body may
 in time be persuaded, not only to tolerate many times such a
 quantity without manifesting any unpleasant feelings, but to
 receive pleasure from the drug. opium or laudanum may be taken
 in gradually increasing quantities, until such a dose is taken
 as would at first have produced death, yet now without causing
 any immediate or very apparent harm. nearly all drugs loose
 much of their first effect on continued use. not only is this
 so, but a sudden discontinuance of a drug may cause distress,
 as the body, when free from the artificial stimulation to which
 it has become habituated, falls into a sluggish or torpid
 condition. for the enjoyment of food two things are equally
 necessary, a healthy and keen appetite and suitable food;
 without the first no food, however good and skilfully prepared,
 will give satisfaction. the sense of taste resides in certain
 of the papilloe of the tongue, and to a much less degree in the
 palate. tastes may be classified into sweet, bitter, acid and
 saline. sweet tastes are best appreciated by the tip, acid by
 the side, and bitter by the back of the tongue. hot or pungent
 substances produce sensations of general feeling, which obscure
 any strictly gustatory sensations which may be present at the
 same time. to affect the taste the food must enter into
 solution. like the other senses, taste may be rendered more
 delicate by cultivation. flavours are really odours, and the
 word smell would be more appropriate. for example, what we call
 the taste of an onion, the flavour of fruit, etc. (independent
 of the sweetness or sourness of the fruit) is due to the
 nose.
much has been written on the necessity of making food tasty,
 so as to stimulate the appetite and digestion. it is urged that
 unless this is done food will not be eaten in sufficient
 quantity. innumerable receipts (some very elaborate) have been
 published for this purpose. all this is supposed to increase
 the enjoyment of food. the anglo-saxon race—the race
 whose dietary is the most elaborate—is especially subject
 to digestive derangements, and without good digestion and the
 consequent healthy appetite, no food will give full gustatory
 pleasure. the most wholesome food, and that which can be eaten
 most frequently without weariness, is mildly flavoured and
 simply prepared. plain bread is an example; whereas sweet
 bread, currant bread, etc., though agreeable in small quantity,
 or as an occasional delicacy, soon palls on the appetite. rice
 is the poorest and mildest flavoured of the cereals, it is
 therefore often, perhaps generally, made more tasty by the
 addition of fish, curry, etc. the bulk of the chinese live on
 rice, with the exception of only  or  ounces of fish per day,
 and they are a fine, big and strong race. the japanese labourer
 lives on similar food. in india rice is the food most in use,
 though many other cereals are eaten there. other races live
 chiefly on fruits. it appears that the digestive organs will
 perform their functions perfectly with the mildest flavoured
 food. there is nothing surprising in this. the strongest, most
 intelligent, and largest animals are those which feed on grass,
 herbs and fruits. even the african lion is no match for the
 gorilla. the lion and tiger are capable of great strength, but
 they cannot put it forth for long periods as can the herbivora.
 our most useful animal, the horse, can exert much more muscular
 energy, weight for weight, than any of the carnivora. the cost
 of feeding one of the herbivora is much less than that of one
 of the carnivora of the same weight. this is so whether we take
 the cost of purchasing the food; or the expenditure of time,
 labour and energy on the part of man or of natural forces in
 the production of the food. herbs, roots, corn and fruit are
 produced much more abundantly and freely than the corresponding
 quantity of sheep, deer, etc., on which the carnivora feed.
the restlessness, craving for novelty, and love of
 excitement, so characteristic of the anglo-saxon, and to a less
 extent of some other european races, has its correspondence in
 the food of these races. highly-seasoned and nitrogenous foods
 act as a stimulant and favour spasmodic, and for a time
 perhaps, great intellectual and physical exertion, with a
 succeeding period of exhaustion. simpler food favours long,
 sustained, uniform muscular strength, clearness of intellect,
 and contentment. let no one misunderstand us; we do not assert
 that all who live on simple food have either clear intellects
 or are contented, because there are other factors besides food,
 but that such qualities are more easily retained or obtained
 under that condition. it is well known that the over-fed and
 badly fed are the most irritable and discontented those living
 on a stimulating dietary consisting largely of flesh have their
 chief successes in feats of short duration. simple and
 abstemious living individuals or races excel in laborious work
 requiring endurance over long periods, such as long walking,
 cycling, and other athletic feats and long military
 campaigns.
the digestive and assimilative organs need the food
 constituents of which we have written, in proper proportion and
 quantity, and in a fairly digestible condition. within these
 very wide and comprehensive limits, the organs can be trained.
 very much of the great difference in food is due to the
 non-essential flavouring and stimulating part, rather than to
 that part which is essential and nourishing. what is the best,
 interests but few; whilst what is at present the pleasantest,
 influences the many. the ego, the superphysical conscious and
 reasoning entity should rule its material body, its temporary
 vehicle. the body, being the servant of the ego, just as a
 horse, dog, or other of the lower animals recognises its
 master, becomes a docile subject. the body can be led into good
 habits nearly as easily as into bad ones; often more easily, as
 bad habits are sometimes painfully acquired. the body being
 once habituated to certain movements, conditions, foods or
 drinks, within reasonable limits, derives pleasure therefrom
 and resists change. it is only when the food, etc.,
 transgresses certain elementary principles, that the result is
 more or less painful. we may on scientific principles condemn
 flesh-foods, stimulants and elaborately prepared foods; but
 after ruling all this out, there is still left a very great
 variety of foods and methods of preparing them: hereon each
 individual must form his own opinion. of the foods thus left,
 the same kind is not equally suitable to everyone, nor even to
 the same person at different periods.
a delicately balanced, fine-grained, high-toned mind and
 body responds to every tender influence, and is painfully
 jarred by that which is coarse. to such, fruits and delicately
 flavoured and easily digested foods are doubtless best and
 conducive to purity and clearness of thought. a coarse-grained,
 badly poised, roughly working body and spirit, is
 non-responsive except to loud or coarse impulses; and such a
 one's appetite is gratified, not by simple but by coarsely
 seasoned foods.
a person who is accustomed to a stimulating dietary of
 flesh-foods, especially if well-seasoned, finds a simple diet
 unsatisfying. should such persons dine off simple vegetarian
 food, there is a tendency to over-eating. the less stimulating
 food fails to rouse the digestive organs and to appease the
 appetite; although an ample supply of nourishment be consumed.
 this is the reason why so many imagine that it is necessary to
 eat a larger quantity of food if it be vegetable. should a
 distressing fulness and flatulence result from their
 over-feeding, they lay the blame to the vegetarian dietary
 instead of to themselves. most persons, on changing to a
 vegetarian dietary, commence by imitating flesh dishes in
 appearance and flavour and even in the names. there is the
 additional inducement that the food may be attractive and
 palatable to friends who lack sympathy with the aesthetic and
 humane principles of the diet. after a while many of them
 incline to simpler flavoured foods. they revert to the
 unperverted taste of childhood, for children love sweets,
 fruits, and mild-flavoured foods rather than savouries. one who
 loves savouries, as a rule, cares much less for fruits. by
 compounding and cooking, a very great variety of foods can be
 prepared, but the differences in taste are much less than is
 usually, supposed. the effect of seasoning instead of
 increasing the range, diminishes it, by dulling the finer
 perception of flavours. the predominating seasoning also
 obscures everything else. the mixture of foods produces a
 conglomeration of tastes in which any particular or distinct
 flavours are obscured, resulting in a general sameness. it is
 often stated that as an ordinary flesh-eater has the choice of
 a greater range of foods and flavours than a vegetarian, he can
 obtain more enjoyment, and that the latter is disagreeably
 restricted. certainly he has the choice, but does he avail
 himself of it to any considerable extent? no one cares to take
 all the different kinds of food, whether of animal or vegetable
 that are possible. of edible animals but a very few kinds are
 eaten. a person who particularly relishes and partakes largely
 of flesh-foods will reject as insipid and unsatisfying many
 mild-flavoured foods at one end of the scale. the vegetarian
 may abstain from foods at the opposite end of the scale, not
 always from humane reasons, but because they are unpleasant.
 thus there may be little to choose between the mere range of
 flavours that give enjoyment to each class of persons. the
 sense of taste is in its character and range lower than the
 sense of sight and hearing. the cultivation of the taste for
 savouries seems to blunt the taste for fruits and the delicate
 foods. the grass and herbs on which the herbivora subsist,
 seems to our imagination of little flavour and monotonous; but
 they eat with every sign of enjoyment, deliberately munching
 their food as though to get its full flavour. in all
 probability they find a considerable range of flavours in the
 great varieties of grasses commonly found together in a
 pasture.
our elaborate cooking customs entail a vast amount of
 labour. they necessitate the cost, trouble and dirt from having
 fires in great excess of that required for warmth: the extra
 time in preparing, mixing and attending to food which has to be
 cooked: and the large number of greasy and soiled utensils
 which have to be cleaned. cooked savoury food is generally much
 nicer eaten hot, and this necessitates fires and attention just
 previous to the meal. we have already said that soft cooked
 food discourages mastication and leads to defective teeth. our
 elaborate cookery is mainly due to our custom of eating so
 largely of flesh, whilst the eating of flesh would receive a
 great impetus on the discovery of the art of cooking. flesh can
 only be eaten with relish and with safety when cooked. such a
 large proportion of it is infected with parasites, or is
 otherwise diseased, that it would he dangerous to eat it raw,
 even were it palatable in such a state. in those countries
 where man eats flesh in a raw or semi-cooked form, parasitic
 diseases are common. there is not the least doubt that our
 habit of eating so much cooked food is responsible for much
 over-eating, hasty eating, dyspepsia and illness. in regard to
 the making of bread, porridge, and many other comparatively
 simple prepared foods, the advantages of cooking seem
 overwhelmingly great. with our present imperfect knowledge and
 conflicting opinions, it is impossible to arrive at any
 satisfactory conclusion, and the whole question requires
 careful and impartial investigation. experiments have been made
 with animals, chiefly pigs, with cooked and uncooked clover,
 hay, corn, meal, etc. (u.s. department of agriculture). it was
 found that the food was more or less diminished in
 digestibility by cooking. at least  separate series of
 experiments with pigs in different part of the country have
 been reported. in  of these trials there has been a positive
 loss from cooking the food. the amount of food required to
 produce in the animal a pound gain in weight was larger when
 the food had been cooked than when it was given raw. in some
 cases, the increased quantity of food required after cooking
 was considerable.
those who live on uncooked food contend that a smaller
 quantity of nourishment is required. as uncooked food requires
 more mastication and is eaten more slowly, there is a better
 flow of saliva and time is given for the digestive organs to be
 gradually brought into complete action, and finally for the
 appeasing of the appetite. in the case of the members of the
 fruitarian family, whose food was uncooked, and of whom we have
 previously written, the quantity of nutriment taken was much
 less than that thought necessary, even after making full
 allowance for their small stature and weight.
meat extracts.—justus von liebig, the great
 german chemist, was the first to attempt to make these on the
 commercial scale. he described a method in , and this not
 proving satisfactory, another one in . he stated that the
 only practicable plan on a manufacturing scale, was to treat
 the chopped flesh with eight to ten times its weight of water,
 which was to be raised to ° f. in another passage he
 says it is to be boiled for half-an-hour. after straining from
 all the undissolved meat fibre, etc., and carefully cleansing
 from all fat, the decoction is to be evaporated to a soft
 extract; such a preparation is practically free from albumin,
 gelatin and fat; all the nutritive principles except the saline
 matter having been extracted. liebig states that  pounds of
 meat are required to produce  pound of extract. in , he
 wrote "neither tea nor extract of meat are nutritive in the
 ordinary sense," and he went on to speak of their medicinal
 properties. druit, in , in describing the effect of a
 liquid preparation of meat, states that it exerted a rapid and
 stimulating action on the brain, and he proposed it as an
 auxiliary and partial substitute for brandy, in all case of
 great exhaustion or weakness attended with cerebral depression
 or despondency. in like manner, a feast of animal food in
 savages, whose customary diet was almost exclusively vegetable,
 has been described by travellers as producing great excitement
 and stimulation similar to that of intoxicating spirits.
 similar effects have been observed from a copious employment of
 liebig's extract. voit asserts, from the results of his
 experiments, that extract of meat is practically useless as a
 food, and other authorities are quite of the same opinion,
 although they may value it as a stimulant and drug. _the extra
 pharmacopæia_, , states that "liebig's extract or
 lemco consists of creatin, creatinin, globulin and urea, with
 organic potash and other salts. it has been much over-estimated
 as a food either for invalids or healthy persons; still it is
 often valuable as a flavouring to add to soups, beef-tea, etc.,
 and it is a nerve food allied to tea." meat extracts stimulate
 the action of the heart and the digestive processes, but as in
 the case of other stimulants there is a succeeding period of
 depression. the british medical journal says that the
 widespread belief in the universal suitability of concentrated
 beef-tea is frequently responsible for increasing the patient's
 discomfort, and is even capable in conditions of kidney
 inefficiency, of producing positive harm. some of the meat
 bases, the leucomaines, have been found to possess marked
 poisonous effects on the body. the manfacturers of meat
 extracts continue to mislead the public by absurdly false
 statements of the value of their products. they assert that
 their extracts contain the nutritive matter of ,  or 
 times their weight of fresh meat, or that one or two
 meat-lozenges are sufficient for a meal. one company, asserts
 by direct statement, or imply by pictorial advertisement, that
 the nutritive matter in an ox can be concentrated into the bulk
 of a bottle of extract; and another company that a tea-cup full
 is equivalent in food value to an ox. professor halliburton
 writes: "instead of an ox in a tea-cup, the ox's urine in a
 tea-cup would be much nearer the fact, for the meat extract
 consists largely of products on the way to urea, which more
 nearly resemble in constitution the urine than they do the
 flesh of the ox." professor robert bartholow has also stated
 that the chemical composition of beef-tea closely resembles
 urine, and is more an excrementitious substance than a food.
 those whose business it is to make a pure meat-broth, for the
 purpose of preparing therefrom a nutrient for experimenting
 with bacteria, cannot fail to recognise its similarity both in
 odour and colour to urine. little consideration is needful to
 show the untruthfulness and the absurdity of the statements
 made by manufacturers as to the food value of these extracts.
 fresh lean beef contains about  per cent. of solid nutriment
 and  per cent. of water. if lean beef be desiccated, one
 pound will be reduced to four ounces of perfectly dry
 substance; this will consist of about  per cent. of proteid
 matter and nearly  per cent. of fat including a little saline
 matter and the extractives. this is as far as it is possible to
 concentrate the beef. if it were possible to remove, without
 interfering with the nutritious constituents, the membraneous
 matter, the creatin, creatinine and purin bodies, we should
 reduce it to a little less than four ounces. it is very
 remarkable that the most nutritious matter of the beef, the
 muscle substance or proteid and the fat, are rejected in making
 liebig's extract, whilst the effete or waste products are
 retained. in bovril and some other preparations, some meat
 fibre has been added with the object of imparting a definite
 food value. hence in some advertisements, now withdrawn, it was
 alleged that the preparations were immensely superior in
 nutritive value to ordinary meat extracts. the bovril company
 extensively circulated the following:—"it is hard for
 ladies to realise that the beef tea they make at home from the
 choicest fresh beef contains absolutely no nourishment and is
 nothing more than a slight stimulant. it is so, however, and
 many a patient has been starved on beef tea, whether made from
 fresh beef or from the meat extracts that are sold to the
 public. from these bovril differs so much that one ounce of its
 nutritious constituents contains more real and direct
 nourishment than fifty ounces of ordinary meat extract." if
 analyses of meat extracts are referred to, it will be seen that
 the principal part of bovril is the meat bases and other things
 common to all such extracts, and which the company in their
 circular so emphatically condemn. if the meat fibre, which is
 the principal, if not the sole difference, is the only
 nourishing constituent, it is difficult to see the advantage
 over ordinary beef, which can be procured at a very small
 proportionate cost. concerning this added meat fibre, c.a.
 mitchell, in "flesh foods," writes: "as this amounts to at most
 some  or  per cent., it is obvious that a large quantity of
 the substance would be required to obtain as much unaltered
 proteid as is contained in an egg. on the other hand, it has
 been pointed out that there is nothing to show that flesh
 powder suspended in meat extract is more digestible than
 ordinary flesh in the same fine state of division, whilst the
 amount of flesh bases, the principal stimulating agents, is
 correspondingly reduced." concerning added albumin and meat
 fibre, a.h. allen, in "commercial organic analysis," vol. iv.,
 writes: "the amount of these constituents present in such a
 quantity of meat extract as is usually, or could be, taken at a
 time, is too insignificant to give it any appreciable value as
 nutriment." notwithstanding such statements by analysts and
 others, bovril is advertised to contain "the entire nourishment
 of prime ox-beef." the great extent of the extract of meat
 trade is shown by a circular issued by the lemco and oxo
 company. they give the number of their cattle killed since 
 as ,,; stock of cattle ,; employees in works,
 farms and branches, ,. this is only one out of many such
 companies. it is a sad thing that myriads of animals should be
 slaughtered with all the horrible and brutalising surroundings
 of the slaughter-house to such a purpose—the nutritious
 matter being nearly all wasted. reliance on these extracts is
 responsible for much sickness and death. instead of their
 preventing colds, influenza, and other complaints as is
 professed, they predispose to them by overloading the body with
 waste products, taxing the excretory organs and reducing the
 vitality. the following analyses of meat extracts are by otto
 hehner:—
some of the "liebig's extract of meat" so called, contains
 yeast extract; some even, is almost entirely, if not altogether
 made from yeast. the latter can be manufactured at a very low
 cost from brewers' and distillers' waste products, and there is
 a strong incentive for unscrupulous dealers to substitute it
 secretly. artificial meat extracts prepared from yeast have the
 appearance and taste of meat extracts, but some, at least, have
 a considerably sharper flavour. in one method of manufacture
 common salt is added, and this renders it unfit for use in more
 than very small quantities as a flavouring. j. graff has made
 analyses of ten yeast extracts, and contrasted them with meat
 extracts (see analyst , page ), and says, "it
 will be seen that the chemical composition of yeast extract
 does not greatly differ from that of meat extract." yeast
 extracts contain purin bodies, and are probably equally as
 injurious as meat extracts. such strong and rank flavours (the
 odour is suggestive to us of putrefaction) should be
 discouraged by those who would cultivate a refined taste in
 food.
flesh bases and waste products.—as the result
 of destructive metamorphosis or the wearing out of the body,
 there remain certain waste products which have to be expelled
 as soon as is possible. their retention and accumulation would
 soon produce death. a part is expelled by the lungs as
 carbon-dioxide, or as it is generally though less correctly
 termed, carbonic acid. upon the breaking down of the complex
 proteid and other nitrogenous matter, the nitrogen is left in
 comparatively simple combinations. these effete nitrogen
 compounds are commonly termed flesh bases or nitrogenous
 extractives. they exist in small quantity in flesh meat, but
 are concentrated and conserved in the making of beef-tea or
 beef-extract. the spleen, lymphatic and other glands, and
 especially the liver, break these down into still simpler
 compounds, so that the kidneys may readily separate them from
 the blood, that they may pass out of the body. by far the
 largest part of this waste nitrogen is expelled from the bodies
 of men and many other mammals in the form of urea. pure urea is
 an odourless transparent crystalline substance, of cooling
 saline taste like nitre. it is soluble in an equal volume of
 water, and is expelled from the body with great ease. in the
 herbivora the nitrogenous waste takes the form of another body
 called hippuric acid. the nearly solid light-coloured urinary
 excretion of birds and serpents consists of urates; this is
 uric acid in combination with alkalies. in man, in addition to
 the urea excreted, there is also a little hippuric and uric
 acid or compounds of these. uric acid is a transparent
 colourless crystalline body almost insoluble in water but
 soluble as urates in the presence of alkalies. as deposited
 from urine it is of a dull red sand-like appearance, as it has
 a great affinity for any colouring matter that is present.
it is only possible to make a brief reference to the chief
 organic bases. the xanthine bases are closely related to uric
 acid. some of these occur in small quantity in the urine and
 animal tissues, others, such as caffeine, occur in plants.
 creatine is a constant constituent of muscle substance. in
 fowl's flesh there is said to be . per cent., in cod-fish
 . per cent., and in beef . per cent. creatinine is
 produced from creatine with great facility; it exists in urine.
 both creatine and creatinine are readily soluble in water. a
 series of bases, closely allied to creatinine have been
 isolated from the flesh of large animals by a. gautier; they
 are known as gautier's flesh bases. when administered to
 animals, these act more or less powerfully on the nerve
 centres, inducing sleep and in some cases causing vomiting and
 purging in a manner similar to the alkaloids of snake venom,
 but less powerfully than the ptomaines. these bases are formed
 during life as a result of normal vital processes and are
 termed leucomaines.
another class of bases of an alkaloidal nature, are termed
 ptomaines; these differ from the leucomaines, being produced by
 putrefactive or bacterial agency from dead flesh. the poisoning
 which has occasionally resulted from the eating of sausages,
 pork-pies, tinned meats, etc., is due to their having contained
 ptomaines.
such quantities of waste products as are produced in the
 healthy body are excreted with ease, but it is otherwise in
 certain diseases. either specially noxious substances are
 produced, or the usual substances are in excessive quantity and
 not eliminated with sufficient rapidity; in consequence the
 body is poisoned. those who eat largely of flesh, introduce
 into their system the excretory matter contained therein, which
 super-added to the excretory matter resulting from the vital
 processes of the body puts an unusual and unnatural strain upon
 the liver and kidneys. it has been observed, that the eating of
 the flesh of some trapped animals has produced severe symptoms
 of poisoning. the pain and horror of having a limb bleeding and
 mangled in a most cruel steel trap, the struggles which only
 add to the misery, slowly being done to death during hours or
 even days of torture, has produced in their bodies virulent
 poisons. leucomaine poisons have also been produced by the
 violent and prolonged exertions of an animal, fleeing from its
 pursuers, until its strength was completely spent. cases are
 also known, where a mother nursing her infant, has given way to
 violent anger or other emotion, and the child at the breast has
 been made violently ill. we must not expect the flesh of any
 hunted or terrified animals to be wholesome. animals brought in
 cattle ships across the atlantic, suffer acutely. after rough
 weather they will often arrive in a maimed condition, some
 being dead. to this is added the terror and cruelty to which
 they are subjected whilst driven by callous drovers, often
 through a crowded city, to the slaughter house to which they
 have an instinctive dread. it is only to be expected that the
 dead flesh from such animals, should contain an unusually large
 quantity of the more poisonous flesh bases.
purin bodies.—the term purin has been applied
 to all bodies containing the nucleus
 cn. it comprises the xanthine group and
 the uric acid group of bodies. the principal purins are
 hypoxanthin, xanthin, uric acid, guanin, adenin, caffeine and
 theobromine. purins in the body may either result from the wear
 and tear of certain cell contents, when they are called
 endogenous purins; or they are introduced in the food, when
 they are distinguished as exogenous purins. these purins are
 waste products and are readily converted into uric acid. the
 production of some uric acid by tissue change is, of course,
 unavoidable; but that resulting from the purins in food is
 under control.
an excess of uric acid is commonly associated with gout and
 similar diseases. the morbid phenomena of gout are chiefly
 manifested in the joints and surrounding tissues. the articular
 cartilages become swollen, with ensuing great pain. there is an
 accumulation of mortar like matter about the joints. this is
 calcium urate (not sodium urate as is generally stated). these
 nodular concretions are called tophi or chalkstones.
very many are the hypotheses which have been propounded on
 the cause of gout and the part played by uric acid; many have
 had to be discarded or greatly modified. though much light has
 recently been thrown on the subject, there remains much that is
 obscure. the subject is one which is surrounded with great
 difficulties, and would not be suitable for discussion here,
 were it not for the following reason: certain views on uric
 acid as the cause of gout and several other diseases, are at
 the present time being pushed to the extreme in some health
 journals and pamphlets. unfortunately many of the writers have
 very little knowledge, either of chemistry or physiology, and
 treat the question as though it were a simple one that had been
 quite settled. our purpose is to clear the ground to some
 extent, for a better understanding of its fundamentals, and to
 warn against dogmatism. our remarks, however, must be brief. it
 is undeniable that great eaters of meat, especially if they
 also take liberally of alcoholic drinks, are prone to diseases
 of the liver and kidneys, about or soon after the time of
 middle life. flesh meat contains relatively large quantities of
 purins. purins are metabolised in the body to uric acid, about
 half of the uric acid produced in the body disappears as such,
 being disintegrated, whilst the other half remains to be
 excreted by the kidneys.
one view is that whilst the organs of the body can readily
 dispose of its endogenous uric acid, or that produced by its
 own tissue change, together with the small amount of uric acid
 derived from most foods, the organs are strained by the larger
 quantity introduced in flesh-food or any other food rich in
 purins: that there is an accumulation in the system of some of
 this uric acid. vegetable foods tend to keep the blood
 alkaline, flesh possesses less of this property; alkalinity of
 the blood is thought to be favourable to the elimination of
 uric acid, whilst anything of an acid nature acts contrarily.
 dr. alexander haig writes "i consider that every man who eats
 what is called ordinary diet with butcher's meat twice a day,
 and also drinks acid wine or beer, will, by the time he is ,
 have accumulated  to  grains of uric acid in his tissues,
 and possibly much more; and about this time, owing to the large
 amount of uric acid in his body, he will probably be subject to
 attacks of some form of gout or chronic rheumatism." dr. haig
 ascribes to the presence of uric acid in the system, not only
 gout and rheumatism, but epilepsy, hysteria, mental and bodily
 depression, diseases of the liver, kidneys, brain, etc.
the opinion of the majority of eminent medical men, during
 recent years, is that uric acid is not a cause, but a symptom
 of gout, that uric acid is not an irritant to the tissues, and
 that it is readily excreted in the healthy subject. some of the
 reasons for this latter and against the previously stated
 hypothesis, are as follows:—birds very rarely suffer from
 gout—the nodular concretions, sometimes found about their
 joints and which have been ascribed to gout, are of tuberculous
 origin—yet their blood contains more uric acid than that
 of man, and the solid matter of their excretion is mainly
 urates. if uric acid caused gout we should expect the disease
 to be common in birds. it is a remarkable fact that the waste
 nitrogen should be excreted in the form of uric acid or urates
 from such widely differing classes of animals as birds and
 serpents. birds have a higher body temperature than man, they
 are very rapid in their movements and consume a large amount of
 food proportionate to their weight. they live, as it were, at
 high pressure. serpents, on the other hand, have a low body
 temperature, they are lethargic and can live a long while
 without food. there is no obvious reason why some animals
 excrete urea and others uric acid. as uric acid is a
 satisfactory and unirritating form in which waste nitrogen is
 expelled from the body of the active alert bird, as well as
 from the slow moving reptile, it is surprising if a very much
 smaller quantity acts as a poison in man. many physicians are
 convinced that uric acid is absolutely unirritating. uratic
 deposits may occur to an enormous extent in gouty persons
 without the occurrence of any pain or paroxysms. urates have
 been injected in large amounts into the bodies of animals as
 well as administered in their food with no toxic result
 whatever, or more than purely local irritation. the most
 careful investigations upon the excretions of persons suffering
 from gouty complaints, have failed to show uric acid in the
 excretions in excess of that in normal individuals, except
 during the later stage of an acute attack. there is an excess
 of uric acid in the blood of gouty subjects; some eminent
 medical men say it is in the highest degree probable, that this
 excess is not due to over production or deficient destruction,
 but to defective excretion by the kidneys. the excess may arise
 from failure of the uric acid to enter into combination with a
 suitable substance in the blood, which assists its passage
 through the kidneys. under the head of gout are classed a
 number of unrelated disturbances in the gastro-intestinal tract
 and nutritive organs, whose sole bond of union is that they are
 accompanied by an excess of urates, and in well developed cases
 by deposits in the tissues. this is why there are so many
 different causes, curative treatments, theories, contradictions
 and vagaries in gout. there are good reasons for believing that
 uric acid is not in the free state in the body. in the urine it
 is in combination with alkalies as urates, perhaps also with
 some organic body. it has been shown that the blood of the
 gouty is not saturated with uric acid, but can take up more,
 and that the alkalinity of the blood is not diminished. the
 excess over the normal is in many cases small; it is said to be
 absent in some persons, and rarely, if ever reaches the
 quantity found in leukaemia. leukaemia is a disease marked by
 an excessive and permanent increase in the white blood
 corpuscles and consequent progressive anæmia. neither
 does the uric acid of gout reach the quantity produced in
 persons whilst being fed with thymus gland (sweetbread), for
 medical purposes. in neither of these cases are any of the
 symptoms of gout present. in the urine of children, it is not
 unusual to find a copious precipitate of urates, yet without
 any observed effect on them.
the symptoms of gout point to the presence of a toxin in the
 blood, and it is this which produces the lesions; the
 deposition of urates in the joints being secondary. this poison
 is probably of bacterial origin, derived from decomposing
 fæcal matter in the large intestine. this is due to
 faulty digestion and insufficient or defective intestinal
 secretions and constipation. this explains why excessive
 feeding, especially of proteid food, is so bad. the imperfectly
 digested residue of such food, when left to stagnate and become
 a mass of bacteria and putrefaction, gives off poisons which
 are absorbed in part, into the system. this bacterial poison
 produces headache, migraine, gouty or other symptoms. because
 of the general failure of gouty persons to absorb the proper
 amount of nutriment from their food, they require to eat a
 larger quantity; this gives a further increase of fæcal
 decomposition and thus aggravates matters. the voluminous bowel
 or colon of man is a legacy from remote pre-human ancestors,
 whose food consisted of bulky, fibrous and slowly digested
 vegetable matters. it was more useful then, than now that most
 of our food is highly cooked. about a third part of the
 fæcal matter consists of bacteria of numerous species,
 though chiefly of the species known as the bacillus coli
 communis, one of the less harmful kind which is a constant
 inhabitant of the intestinal tract in man and animals. this
 species is even thought to be useful in breaking down the
 cellulose, which forms a part of the food of the herbivora.
 flesh meat leaves a residue in which the bacteria of
 putrefaction find a congenial home. poisons such as ptomaines,
 fatty acids and even true toxins are produced. it is believed
 that there exists in the colons of gouty persons, either
 conditions more favourable to the growth of the bacteria of
 putrefaction, or that they are less able to resist the effect
 of the poisons produced. it has generally been found that milk
 is a very good food for gouty patients. this seems due to its
 being little liable to putrefaction, the bacterial fermentation
 to which it is liable producing lactic acid—the souring
 of milk. the growth of most bacteria, particularly the
 putrefactive kinds are hindered or entirely stopped by acids
 slightly alkaline media are most favourable. this explains how
 it is that milk will often stop diarrhoea.
dr. haig condemns pulse and some other vegetable foods,
 because, he says, they contain uric acid. pulse, he states,
 contains twice as much as most butcher's meat. vegetable foods,
 however, contain no uric acid and meat but a very small
 quantity. the proper term to use is purins or nucleins. dr.
 haig has used a method of analysis which is quite incapable of
 giving correct results. many vegetarians have accepted these
 figures and his deductions therefrom, and have given up the use
 of valuable foods in consequence. we therefore give some of the
 analyses of dr. i. walker hall, from "the purin bodies in food
 stuffs." the determination of the purins has proved a very
 difficult process. dr. hall has devoted much time to
 investigating and improving the methods of others, and his
 figures may be accepted with confidence.
the first column of figures indicates purin bodies in parts
 per ,, the second column purin bodies in grains per
 pound:—
sweet bread
liver
beef steak
beef sirloin
ham
chicken
rabbit
pork loin
veal loin
mutton
salmon
cod
lentils and haricots
oatmeal
peameal
asparagus (cooked)
onions
potatoes
the following showed no traces of purins: white bread, rice,
 cabbage, lettuce, cauliflower and eggs. milk showed a very
 small quantity, and cheese consequently must contain still
 less.
the researches of dr. hall show that the purins of food are
 metabolised or broken down by gouty patients, almost as well as
 by normal individuals, any slight retention being due to
 increased capillary pressure. a portion of the purins remain
 undigested, the quantity depending upon the particular purin
 and the vigour of the digestive organs. two rabbits had the
 purin hypoxanthin given to them daily, in quantities which if
 given to a man in proportion to his weight, would have been 
 and  grains respectively. these rabbits showed malnutrition,
 and after death degenerative changes were visible in their
 liver and kidneys. dr. hall has made a large number of personal
 experiments, and says that when he has taken large doses of
 purin bodies—such as  grains of hypoxanthin,  to 
 grains of guanin or  to  grains of uric acid, apparently
 associated symptoms of general malaise and irritability have
 frequently appeared. in gouty subjects such moderate or small
 quantities of purins which are without effect on the healthy
 subject, may prove a source of irritation to the already
 weakened liver and kidneys.
professor carl von noorden says of gout, "with regard to
 treatment we are all agreed that food containing an excess of
 purin bodies should be avoided, and those words embody almost
 all there is to be said as to dietetics. alcohol is very
 injurious in gout. salicylic acid is a dangerous remedy.
 alkalies in every form are utterly useless." dr. j.
 woods-hutchinson says, "the one element which has been found to
 be of the most overwhelming importance and value in the
 treatment of gout and lith¾mia, water, would act most
 admirably upon a toxic condition from any source; first, by
 sweeping out both the alimentary canal primarily, and the
 liver, kidneys and skin secondarily; and secondly, by supplying
 to the body cells that abundant salt-water bath in which alone
 they can live and discharge their functions." dr.
 woods-hutchinson proceeds to state, that the one active agent
 in all the much vaunted mineral waters is nothing more or less
 than the water. "their alleged solvent effects are now known to
 be pure moonshine." the value consists in "plain water, plus
 suggestion—not to say humbug—aided, of course, by
 the pure air of the springs and the excellent hygienic
 rules."
it is a common experience amongst rheumatic patients, that
 they cannot take lentils, haricots and some other foods;
 sometimes, even eggs and milk are inadmissible. this is not for
 the alleged reason that they contain purins, or as some misname
 it, uric acid; but because the digestive organs are unequal to
 the task. it will be seen, that although dr. haig's hypothesis
 of uric acid as a cause of gout and some other diseases is
 disputed by many eminent physicians, his treatment by excluding
 flesh and other foods which contain purins, and also pulse,
 which is difficult of digestion by the weakly, is a wise one.
 it has proved of the greatest value in very many cases.
digestion and nutrition is a complex process, and it may be
 faulty at various stages and in several ways; there may be
 either deficient or excessive secretions or inaction. thus
 there are exceptions, where gouty symptoms, including an
 excessive quantity of urates in the urine, have only been
 relieved by the giving up of milk foods or starch foods (see
 lancet, , i., p. , and , i., p. ).
those particularly interested in the subject of the purins
 and gout are referred to the lecture on "the meaning of uric
 acid and the urates," by dr. woods-hutchinson, in the
 lancet, , i., p. , and the discussion on "the
 chemical pathology of gout" before the british medical
 association at oxford (see british medical journal,
 , ii., p. ).
dr. george s. keith, in "fads of an old physician," has a
 chapter on rheumatic fever; he says that the disease is much
 more common than it was fifty years ago. he has never met with
 it in the young or old except when the diet had consisted
 largely of beef and mutton, and this although he has been on
 the outlook for at least forty years for a case of the disease
 in a child or youth who had not been fed on red meat. he speaks
 of it as being exceedingly common in buenos ayres and rosario
 in the argentine republic, amongst the young; and that it leads
 to most of the heart disease there. the amount of meat,
 especially of beef, consumed by old and young is enormous. the
 main evils there, were anæmia in children and neuralgia
 both in old and young. dr. haig relates how he suffered from
 migraine all his life, until the time of his discontinuing
 butchers' meat. as meat contains a comparatively large quantity
 of purins and other bodies called extractives, it is probable
 that such quantities have an injurious effect, quite apart from
 the question of uric acid production. that an excessive meat
 diet lessens the vitality of the body and pre-disposes to
 disease is undoubted, but opinions differ as to how the injury
 is brought about.
on thorough mastication.—we have written at
 some length on the quantity and constituents of food required
 per day and have criticised the usually accepted standards. we
 have since read a valuable contribution to the subject by mr.
 horace fletcher in his book, "the a.b.-z. of our own nutrition"
 (f.a. stokes & co., new york). ten years previous to the
 writing of the book, when of the age of , he was fast becoming
 a physical wreck, although he was trained as an athlete in his
 youth and had lived an active and most agreeable life. he had
 contracted a degree of physical disorder that made him
 ineligible as an insurance risk. this unexpected disability and
 warning was so much a shock, that it led to his making a strong
 personal effort to save himself. he concluded that he took too
 much food and too much needless worry. his practice and advice
 is, be sure that you are really hungry and are not pampering
 false appetite. if true appetite that will relish plain bread
 alone is not present, wait for it, if you have to wait till
 noon. then chew, masticate, munch, bite, taste everything you
 take in your mouth; until it is not only thoroughly liquefied
 and made neutral or alkaline by saliva, but until the reduced
 substance all settles back in the folds at the back of the
 mouth and excites the swallowing impulse into a strong
 inclination to swallow. then swallow what has collected and has
 excited the impulse, and continue to chew at the remainder,
 liquid though it be, until the last morsel disappears in
 response to the swallowing impulse. in a very short time this
 will become an agreeable and profitable fixed habit. mr.
 fletcher has been under the observation of several eminent
 scientific men. professor r.h. chittenden, of yale university,
 in his report refers to the experiments of kumagawa,
 sivén, and other physiologists; who have shown that men
 may live and thrive, for a time at least, on amounts of proteid
 per day equal to only one-half and one-quarter the amount
 called for in the voit standard (see p. ), even without
 unduly increasing the total calories of the food intake. such
 investigations, however, have always called forth critical
 comment from writers reluctant to depart from the current
 standards, as extending over too short periods of time.
dr. chittenden writes that he has had in his laboratory, for
 several months past, a gentleman (h.f.) who for some five
 years, practised a certain degree of abstinence in the taking
 of food and attained important economy with, as he believes,
 great gain, in bodily and mental vigour and with marked
 improvement in his general health. the gentleman in question
 fully satisfies his appetite, but no longer desires the amount
 of food consumed by most individuals. for a period of thirteen
 days, in january, he was under observation in professor
 chittenden's laboratory. the daily amount of proteid
 metabolised was . grammes, the body-weight ( pounds)
 remaining practically constant. analysis of the excretions
 showed an output of an equivalent quantity of nitrogen. in
 february a more thorough series of observations was made. the
 diet was quite simple, and consisted merely of a prepared
 cereal food, milk and maple sugar. this diet was taken twice a
 day for seven days, and was selected by the subject as giving
 sufficient variety for his needs and quite in accord with his
 taste. no attempt was made to conform to any given standard of
 quantity, but the subject took each day such amounts of the
 above foods as his appetite craved. the daily average in
 grammes was, proteid . (. ounces), fats .,
 carbohydrates ., calories ,. the total intake of
 nitrogen per day was ., while the output was .. it may be
 asked, says professor chittenden, was this diet at all adequate
 for the needs of the body—sufficient for a man weighing
  pounds? in reply, it may be said that the appetite was
 satisfied and that the subject had full freedom to take more
 food if he so desired. the body-weight remained practically
 constant and the nitrogen of the intake and output were not far
 apart. an important point is, can a man on such food be fit for
 physical work? mr. fletcher was placed under the guidance of
 dr. w.g. anderson, the director of the gymnasium of yale
 university. dr. anderson reports that on the four last days of
 the experiment, in february, , mr. fletcher was given the
 same kind of exercises as are given to the 'varsity crew. they
 are drastic and fatiguing and cannot be done by beginners
 without soreness and pain resulting. they are of a character to
 tax the heart and lungs as well as to try the muscles of the
 limbs and trunk. "my conclusion, given in condensed form, is
 this: mr. fletcher performs this work with greater ease and
 with fewer noticeable bad results than any man of his age and
 condition i have ever worked with." "to appreciate the full
 significance of this report, it must be remembered," writes
 professor chittenden, "that mr. fletcher had for several months
 past taken practically no exercise other than that involved in
 daily walks about town." sir michael forster had mr. fletcher
 and others under observation in his cambridge laboratories, and
 in his report he remarks on the waste products of the bowel
 being not only greatly reduced in amount, as might be expected;
 but that they are also markedly changed in character, becoming
 odourless and inoffensive, and assuming a condition which
 suggests that the intestine is in a healthier and more aseptic
 condition than is the case under ordinary circumstances. if we
 can obtain sufficient nourishment, as mr. fletcher does, on
 half the usual quantity of food, we diminish by half the
 expenditure of energy required for digestion. by thorough
 mastication the succeeding digestive processes are more easily
 and completely performed. what is also of great importance is
 that there is not the danger of the blocking up of the lower
 intestines with a mass of incompletely digested and decomposing
 residue, to poison the whole body. even where there is daily
 defæcation, there is often still this slowly shifting
 mass; the end portion only, being expelled at a time, one or
 more days after its proper period. all this improved condition
 of the digestive tract, leaves more vitality for use in other
 directions, a greater capacity for work and clearness of
 brain.
professor r.h. chittenden, in "physiological economy in
 nutrition," writes:—"our results, obtained with a great
 variety of subjects, justify the conviction that the minimum
 proteid requirements of the healthy man, under ordinary
 conditions of life, are far below the generally accepted
 dietary standards, and far below the amounts called for by the
 acquired taste of the generality of mankind. body weight,
 health, strength, mental and physical vigour and endurance can
 be maintained with at least one-half of the proteid food
 ordinarily consumed."
from these and other considerations, we see that it is not
 only unnecessary, but inadvisable to diet ourselves according
 to any of the old standards, such as that of voit, or even to
 any other standard, until they have been very thoroughly
 revised. we shall probably find that as the body becomes
 accustomed to simpler food, a smaller quantity of the food is
 necessary. the proportion of proteids to other constituents in
 all the ordinary, not over manfactured vegetable foods, such as
 are generally eaten, may be taken as sufficient. several
 cookery books have been compiled in conformity with certain
 proteid standards and also with some more or less fanciful
 requirements; these give the quantities and kinds of food which
 it is imagined should be eaten each day. theoretically, this
 should be calculated to accord with the weight, temperament,
 age and sex of the eater and the work he or she has to perform.
 the dietaries that we have seen have their proteid ratio placed
 unnecessarily high. this high proteid ratio can be got by the
 use of the pulses, but except in small quantities they are not
 generally admissible, and in some of the dietaries they are
 ruled out. the difficulty is got over by the liberal use of
 eggs, cheese and milk. to admit a necessity for these animal
 products is to show a weakness and want of confidence in the
 sufficiency of vegetable foods. some of these cookery books are
 of use in sickness, especially as replacing those of the
 beef-tea, chicken-broth, jelly and arrowroot order. they
 provide a half-way stage between flesh and vegetable food, such
 as is palatable to those who have not quite overcome a yearning
 for flesh and stimulating foods. the liberal use of animal
 products is less likely to excite the prejudice of the ordinary
 medical practitioner or nurse. possibly, also, a higher
 quantity of proteid may be required on first giving up flesh
 foods.
the use of salt.—one of the most remarkable
 habits of these times is the extensive use of common salt or
 sodium chloride. it is in all ordinary shop bread, in large
 quantity in a special and much advertised cereal food, even in
 a largely sold wheat flour, and often in pastry. it is added to
 nearly all savoury vegetable food, and many persons, not
 content, add still more at the time of eating. no dinner table
 is considered complete without one or more salt-cellars. some
 take even threequarters of an ounce, or an ounce per day. the
 question is not, of course, whether salt is necessary or not,
 but whether there is a sufficient quantity already existing in
 our foods. some allege that there is an essential difference
 between added salt and that natural to raw foods. that the
 former is inorganic, non-assimilable and even poisonous; whilst
 the latter is organised or in organic combination and
 nutritive. the writer is far from being convinced that there is
 a difference in food value. some herbivorous animals are
 attracted by salt, but not the carnivora. this has been
 explained by the fact that potassium salts are characteristic
 of plants, whilst sodium chloride is the principal saline
 constituents of blood and of flesh. in their food, the
 herbivora take three or four times as much potash salts as the
 carnivora. of course, the sodium chloride in the flesh of the
 herbivora and frugivora is obtained from the vegetable matter
 forming their food, and very few of them have the opportunity
 of obtaining it from salt-licks and mineral sources. they must
 have the power of storing up the sodium chloride from plants in
 sufficient quantity, whilst the potash salts pass away. there
 is no justification for saying that they are worse off by being
 deprived of salt. if the ape tribe can thrive without added
 salt why should not man? bunge considers that a restriction to
 vegetable food causes a great desire for salt. opposed to this,
 is the fact that certain tribes of negroes who cannot obtain
 salt, add to their vegetable food wood ashes or a preparation
 of wood ashes; this is chiefly potash. one preparation used in
 british central africa was found to contain about  per cent.
 of potassium chloride to only . per cent. of sodium chloride.
 it has been said that vegetarians consume more salt than those
 who take flesh food. we doubt this; we know of many vegetarians
 who have a strong objection to added salt, and have abstained
 from it for years. some find that it predisposes to colds,
 causes skin irritation and other symptoms. at many vegetarian
 restaurants the food is exceedingly salty; the writer on this
 account cannot partake of their savoury dishes, except with
 displeasure. nearly all who patronise these restaurants are
 accustomed to flesh foods, and it is their taste which has to
 be catered for. flesh, and particularly blood, which of course,
 is in flesh, contains a considerable quantity of sodium
 chloride; and most flesh eaters are also in the habit of using
 the salt cellar. these people are accustomed to a stimulating
 diet, and have not a proper appreciation of the mildly
 flavoured unseasoned vegetable foods. only those who have, for
 a time, discontinued the use of added salt, and lost any
 craving for it, can know how pleasant vegetables can be; even
 those vegetables which before were thought to be nearly
 tasteless, unless seasoned, are found to have very distinct
 flavours. it is then perceived, that there is a much greater
 variety in such foods than was previously imagined. it is
 commonly urged that salt and other condiments are necessary to
 make food palatable and to stimulate the digestive functions.
 we, on the contrary, say that condiments are the cause of much
 over-eating; and that if food cannot be eaten without them, it
 is a sign of disorganisation of the digestive system, and it is
 better to abstain from food until the appearance of a natural
 and healthy appetite. an excess of salt creates thirst and
 means more work for the kidneys in separating it from the blood
 prior to its expulsion. even should it be admitted, that
 certain vegetables contain too little sodium salts, a very
 little salt added to such food would be sufficient; there is no
 excuse for the general use of it, and in such a great variety
 of foods. it is thought that some cases of inflammation of the
 kidneys originate in excessive salt eating; certain it is that
 patients suffering from the disease very soon improve, on being
 placed on a dietary free from added salt and also poor in
 naturally contained sodium and potassium salts. it is also
 possible to cause the swelling of the legs (oedema), to which
 such invalids are subject, to disappear and reappear at will,
 by withdrawing and afterwards resuming salt-containing foods.
 the quantity of one-third of an ounce, added to the usual diet,
 has after a continuation of several days, produced oedema. in
 one patient, on a diet of nearly two pounds of potatoes, with
 flesh, but without added salt, the oedemia disappeared and the
 albumin in the urine diminished. as potatoes are particularly
 rich in potash salts, this case is significant, as showing
 contrary to expectations, that such quantity as they contained
 had not the irritating effect of added common salt. salt and
 other chlorides have been shown by several observers, to be
 injurious, not only in diseases of the kidneys, but also of the
 liver and heart. in these diseases the excess of salt is
 retained in the tissues, it causes a flow of fluid into them,
 and so produces oedema and favours the increase of dropsy. the
 good effect of milk in such diseases has long been known; it is
 probably due to its relative poverty in sodium and potassium
 chlorides. even in the case of three healthy men, by an abrupt
 change from a diet extremely rich in chlorides to one
 deficient, they were able to reduce the body-weight by as much
 as two kilos. ( lbs.  oz.); this was by the loss of an excess
 of water from their connective tissues. sodium chloride
 diminishes the solvent action of water on uric acid and the
 urates; but potassium salts, on the contrary, do not, they may
 even increase the action. although nearly all the medical
 experience recorded has to do with diseased persons, such cases
 are instructive; it is only reasonable to suppose, that more
 than a very small quantity of salt in excess of that natural to
 the food, is a source of irritation in the body, even of the
 ordinarily healthy individual.
summary.—enjoyment of food is dependent upon
 appetite quite as much as upon the nature of the food. better a
 simple repast with good appetite than sumptuous fare with bad
 digestion. there is indeed a causal relationship between
 simplicity and health. the savage likes the noise of the
 tom-tom or the clatter of wooden instruments: what a contrast
 this is to the trained ear of the musician. uncivilised man has
 little enjoyment of scenery or of animal life, except as in
 respect to their power of providing him with food, clothing or
 other physical gratification. what an enormous advance has
 taken place. in the case of the painter, his eye and mind can
 appreciate a wide range and delicacy of colour. man has
 improved on the crab-apple and the wild strawberry. from a wild
 grass he has produced the large-grained nutritious wheat.
 vegetables of all kinds have been greatly improved by long
 continued cultivation. in tropical and sub-tropical climates,
 where wild fruits are more plentiful, high cultivation is of
 less importance than in temperate regions. in sparsely
 inhabited or wild, temperate and cold regions, in times past,
 when deer and other animals were plentiful, and edible fruits
 few, flesh could be obtained at less labour; or such
 intelligence and industry as is required for the cultivation of
 fruits, cereals, and other foods scarcely existed. flesh almost
 requires to be cooked to be palatable, certainly this much
 improves its flavour. the eating of flesh tends to produce a
 distaste for mild vegetable foods, especially if uncooked. in
 process of time, not only flesh but vegetable foods, were more
 and more subjected to cooking and seasoning, or mixed with the
 flesh, blood or viscera of the animals killed. next, food was
 manufactured to produce a still greater variety, to increase
 the flavour, or less frequently to produce an imagined greater
 digestibility or nutritiveness. man has taken that which seemed
 most agreeable, rarely has he been intentionally guided by
 scientific principles, by that which is really best. only of
 late years can it be said that there is such a thing as a
 science of dietetics; although cookery books innumerable have
 abounded. of recent years many diseases have enormously
 increased, some even seem to be new. digestive disturbances,
 dental caries, appendicitis, gout, rheumatism, diabetes,
 nervous complaints, heart disease, baldness and a host of other
 diseases are due, in a great measure, to abuse of food. one of
 the most learned and original of scientific men, professor elie
 metchnikoff, in his remarkable book on "the nature of man,"
 referring to the variety of food and its complexity of
 preparation says that it "militates against physiological old
 age and that the simpler food of the uncivilised races is
 better.... most of the complicated dishes provided in the
 homes, hotels and restaurants of the rich, stimulate the organs
 of digestion and secretion in a harmful way. it would be true
 progress to abandon modern cuisine and to go back to the
 simpler dishes of our ancestors." a few have lived to a hundred
 years, and physiologists, including metchnikoff, see no
 inherent reason why all men, apart from accident, should not do
 so. most men are old at , some even at ; if we could add 
 or  years to our lives, what an immense gain it would be.
 instead of a man being in his prime, a useful member of the
 community, from about  to  or perhaps to ; he would have
 the same physical and mental vigour to  or  or even longer.
 this later period would be the most valuable part of his life,
 as he would be using and adding to the accumulated experience
 and knowledge of the earlier period.
some, perceiving the mischief wrought by luxurious habits,
 urge us to go back to nature, to eat natural food. this is
 ambiguous. to speak of animals as being in a state of nature,
 conveys the distinct idea of their living according to their
 own instinct and reason, uninterfered with, in any way, by man.
 the phrase, applied to man, is either meaningless, or has a
 meaning varying with the views of each speaker. if it has any
 definite meaning, it must surely be the giving way to the
 animal impulses and instincts; to cast off all the artifices of
 civilisation, to give up all that the arts and sciences have
 done for man, all that he has acquired with enormous labour,
 through countless failures and successes, during hundreds of
 thousands of years, and to fall back to the lowest
 savagery—even the savages known to us use art in
 fashioning their arms, clothing and shelter, to the time when
 man was a mere animal. civilised man is not only an animal, but
 an intellectual and spiritual being, and it is as natural for
 him to clothe himself as for a cow to eat grass. our intellect
 has been made to wait on our animal nature, whilst our
 spiritual has lagged far behind. animal food and all else of a
 stimulating character, stimulates the lower nature of man, his
 selfish propensities; whilst mild food makes it easier to lead
 a pure life. in the treatment of habitual drunkards in
 retreats, it has been found that a permanent cure is rare upon
 the usual abundant flesh dietary. only by the use of vegetable
 food, particularly farinaceous, can a permanent cure be
 assured. the editor of the clarion, mr. r. blatchford, or
 "nunquam," has lately adopted a vegetarian diet. he remarks
 with surprise, that although he has been a heavy smoker for
 more than  years, using not less than eight ounces of tobacco
 a week, often two ounces in a day, he has found his passion for
 tobacco nearly gone. he has had to get milder tobacco, and is
 now not smoking half-an-ounce a day. he says "it does not taste
 the same; i am not nearly so fond of it." he finds, with regard
 to wine, that he now cannot drink it, "it tastes like physic."
 he writes: "these things have come upon me as a revelation. i
 begin to see that the great cure for the evil of national
 intemperance is not teetotal propaganda, but
 vegetarianism."
we have given reasons of a scientific character, for
 abstaining from flesh as food, but higher than these are those
 relating to ethics. everything relating to the slaughter-house
 is revolting to a refined and humane person. in the great
 slaughter-houses of chicago; in those huge hideous box-shaped
 buildings, five or six storeys high, about ten millions of
 animals are killed every year. they are treated as if they were
 bales of merchandise and as destitute of feeling. bullocks are
 struck on the head with a mallet and let fall into the basement
 of the building. they are whilst stunned or half-stunned, at
 once strung up by their hind legs to some machinery, which
 moves them along, their heads hanging downwards. regardless of
 their agony, men run after them to cut their throats, followed
 by others with great pails to catch the blood. much of the warm
 blood is spilt over the men or on the floors; but this is of no
 consequence, if but a small fraction of a minute is economised.
