in — my oldest friend died. we had been at school and college
together, and our intimacy had never been broken. i was trustee for his
wife and executor at his death. he died of a lingering illness, during
which his hopes of living were alternately raised, and depressed. two
years before he died, he gave me a huge parcel carefully tied up and
sealed. take care of, but don't open this he said: if i get better,
return it to me, if i die, let no mortal eye but yours see it, and burn
it.
his widow died a year after him. i had well nigh forgoten this packet
which i had had full three years, when looking for some title deeds
i came cross it, and opened it, as it was my duty to do. its contents
astonished me. the more i read it, the more marvellous it seemed. i
pondered long on the meaning of his instructions when he gave it to me,
and kept the manuscript some years, hesitating what to do with it.
at length i came to the conclusion knowing his idiosyncracy well, that
his fear was only lest any one should know who the writer was; and
feeling that it would be sinful to destroy such a history, i copied the
manuscript and destroyed the original. he died relationless.
no one now can trace the author, no names are mentioned in the book,
though they were given freely in the margin of his manuscript, and i
alone know to whom the initials refer. if i have done harm in printing
it, i have done none to him, have indeed only carried out his evident
intention, and given to a few a secret history, which bears the impress
of truth on every page, a contribution to psychology.
i began these memoirs when about twenty-five years old, having from
youth kept a diary of some sort, which perhaps from habit made me think
of recording my inner and secret life.
when i began it, i had scarcely read a baudy book, none of which
excepting "fanny hill" appeared to me to be truthful, that did, and
it does so still; the others telling of recherche eroticisms, or
of inordinate copulative powers, of the strange twists, tricks, and
fancies, of matured voluptuousness, and philosophical lewedness, seemed
to my comparative ignorance, as baudy imaginings, or lying inventions,
not worthy of belief; although i now know by experience, that they may
be true enough, however eccentric, and improbable, they may appear to
the uninitiated.
fanny hill was a woman's experience. written perhaps by a woman, where
was a man's, written with equal truth? that book has no baudy word
in it; but baudy acts need the baudy ejaculations; the erotic, full
flavored expressions, which even the chastest indulge in, when lust, or
love, is in its full tide of performance. so i determined to write my
private life freely as to fact, and in the spirit of the lustful acts
done by me, or witnessed; it is written therefore with absolute truth,
and without any regard whatever for what the world calls decency.
decency and voluptuousness in its fullest acceptance, cannot exist
together, one would kill the other; the poetry of copulation i have only
experienced with a few women, which however neither prevented them, nor
me from calling a spade, a spade.
i began it for my amusement; when many years had been chronicled i tired
of it and ceased. some ten years afterwards i met a woman, with whom,
or with those she helped me do; i did, said, saw, and heard, well nigh
everything a man and woman could do with their genitals, and began to
narrate those events, when quite fresh in my memory, a great variety of
incidents extending over four years or more. then i lost sight of her,
and my amorous amusements for a while were simpler, but that part of my
history was complete.
after a little while, i set to work to describe the events of the
intervening years of my youth, and early middle age; which included most
of my gallant intrigues and adventures of a frisky order; but not the
more lascivious ones of later years. then an illness caused me to think
seriously of burning the whole. but not liking to destroy my labor, i
laid it aside again for a couple of years. then another illness gave
me long uninterrupted leisure; i read my manuscript, and filled in some
occurrences which i had forgotten, but which my diary enabled me to
place in their proper order. this will account for the difference in
style in places, which i now observe; and a very needless repetition,
of voluptuous descriptions, which i had forgotten, had been before
described; that however is inevitable, for human copulation, vary the
incidents leading up to it as you may, is, and must be, at all times,
much the same affair.
then for the first time, i thought i would print my work that had been
commenced more than twenty years before, but hesitated. i then had
entered my maturity, and on to the most lascivious portion of my life,
the events were disjointed, and fragmentary and my amusement was to
describe them just after they occurred. most frequently the next day i
wrote all down with much prolixity, since, i have much abbreviated it.
i had from youth an excellent memory, but about sexual matters a
wonderful one. women were the pleasure of my life. i loved cunt, but
also she who had it; i like the woman i fucked and not simply the cunt
i fucked, and therein is a great difference. i recollect even now in a
degree which astonishes me, the face, color, stature, thighs, backside,
and cunt, of well nigh every woman i have had, who was not a mere
casual; and even of some who were. the clothes they wore, the houses and
rooms in which i had them, were before me mentally, as i wrote, the way
the bed, and furniture were placed, the side of the room the windows
were on, i remembered perfectly; and all the important events i can fix
as to time, sufficiently nearly by reference to my diary, in which the
contemporaneous circumstances of my life are recorded.
i recollect also largely what we said, and did, and generally our baudy
amusements. where i fail to have done so, i have left description blank,
rather than attempt to make a story coherent by inserting what was
merely probable. i could not now account for my course of action, nor
why i did this, or said that, my conduct seems strange, foolish, absurd,
very frequently, that of some women, equally so, but i can but state
what did occur.
in a few cases, i have for what even seems to me very strange, suggested
reasons, or causes, but only where the facts seem by themselves to be
very improbable, but have not exaggerated anything willingly. when i
have named the number of times i have fucked a woman in my youth, i may
occasionally be in error, it is difficult to be quite accurate on such
points after a lapse of time. but as before said in many cases the
incidents were written down a few weeks and often within a few
days after they occurred. i do not attempt to pose as a hercules in
copulation, there are quite sufficient braggarts on that head, much
intercourse with gay women, and doctors, makes me doubt the wonderful
feats in coition, some men tell of.
i have one fear about publicity, it is that of having done a few things
by curiosity and impulse (temporary abberations), which even professed
libertines may cry fie on. there are plenty who will cry fie who have
done all and worse than i have and habitually, but crying out at the
sins of others was always a way of hiding one's own iniquity. yet from
that cause perhaps no mortal eye but mine, will see this history. the
christian name of the servants mentioned are generally the true ones,
the other names mostly false, the phonetically resembling the true
ones. initials nearly always the true ones. in most cases the woman they
represent are dead or lost to me. streets and baudy houses named are
nearly always correct. most of the houses named are now closed or pulled
down; but any middle aged man about town would recognize them. where a
road, house, room, or garden is described, the description is exactly
true; even to the situation of a tree, chair, bed, sofa, pisspot. the
district is sometimes given wrongly; but it matters little whether
brompton be substituted for hackney, or camden town for walworth. where
however owing to the incidents it is needful, the places of amusement
are given correctly. the tower, and argyle rooms, for example. all this
is done to prevent giving pain to some, perhaps still living, for i have
no malice to gratify.
i have mystified family affairs, but if i say i had ten cousins, when i
had but six, or that one aunt's house was in surrey instead of kent, or
in lancashire; it breaks the clue and cannot matter to the reader.
but my doings with man and woman are as true as gospel. if i say that
i saw, or did, that with a cousin male, or female, it was with a cousin
and no mere acquaintance; if with a servant, it was with a servant; if
with a casual acquaintance, it is equally true. nor if i say i had that
woman, and did this or that with her, or felt or did aught else with a
man, is there a word of untruth excepting as to the place at which the
incidents occurred. but even those are mostly correctly given, this is
intended to be a true history, and not a lie.
some years have passed away since i penned the foregoing, and it is not
printed. i have since gone through abnormal phases of amatory life, have
done and seen things, had tastes and letches which years ago i thought
were the dreams of erotic mad-men; these are all described, the
manuscript has grown into unmanageable bulk, shall it, can it be
printed? what will be said or thought of me, what become of the
manuscript if found when i am dead, better to destroy the whole, it has
fulfilled its purpose in amusing me, now let it go to the flames!
i have read my manuscript, through what reminiscences i had actually
forgotten some of the early ones; how true the detail strikes me as i
read of my early experiences; had it not been written then, it never
could have been written now, has anybody but myself faithfully made such
a record? it would be a sin to burn all this, whatever society may
say it is but a narrative of human life, perhaps the every day life of
thousands, if the confession could be had.
what strikes me as curious in reading it, is the monotony of the course
i have pursued toward women who were not of the gay class; it has been
as similar, and repetitive as fucking itself; do all men act so, does
every man kiss, coax, hint smuttily, then talk baudily, snatch a feel,
smell his fingers, assault, and win, exactly as i have done? is every
woman offended, say no, then oh! blush, be angry, refuse, close her
thighs, after a struggle open them, and yield to her lust as mine have
done? a conclave of whores telling the truth, and of romish priests,
could alone settle the point. have all men had the strange letches which
late in life have enraptured me, though in early days the idea of them
revolted me? i can never know this, my experience if printed may enable
others to compare as i cannot.
shall it be burnt or printed? how many years have passed in this
indecision, why fear; it is for others' good and not my own if
preserved.
 volume i.
volume ii.
volume iii.
end of project gutenberg's my secret life, volumes i. to iii., by anonymous
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by an anonymous volunteer (this file was produced
from scans of public domain material produced by google
books)
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.f.. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section . information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in , the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections  and 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
section . information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
(c)() educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is -. its (c)() letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.
the foundation's principal office is located at  melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, ., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at
 north  west, salt lake city, ut , () -, email
