the head-master’s. the groom swore he would do anything
i wished, and when the time arrived went upstairs to bring the trunk
down. this i feared was beyond the strength of any one man; however,
the groom was a man
of atlantean shoulders, fit to bear
the weight of mightiest monarchies;
and had a back as spacious as salisbury plain. accordingly
he persisted in bringing down the trunk alone, whilst i stood waiting
at the foot of the last flight in anxiety for the event. for some
time i heard him descending with slow and firm steps; but unfortunately,
from his trepidation, as he drew near the dangerous quarter, within
a few steps of the gallery, his foot slipped, and the mighty burden
falling from his shoulders, gained such increase of impetus at each
step of the descent, that on reaching the bottom it trundled, or rather
leaped, right across, with the noise of twenty devils, against the very
bedroom door of the archididascalus. my first thought was that
all was lost, and that my only chance for executing a retreat was to
sacrifice my baggage. however, on reflection i determined to abide
the issue. the groom was in the utmost alarm, both on his own
account and on mine, but, in spite of this, so irresistibly had the
sense of the ludicrous in this unhappy contretemps taken possession
of his fancy, that he sang out a long, loud, and canorous peal of laughter,
that might have wakened the seven sleepers. at the sound of this
resonant merriment, within the very ears of insulted authority, i could
not myself forbear joining in it; subdued to this, not so much by the
unhappy étourderie of the trunk, as by the effect it had
upon the groom. we both expected, as a matter of course, that
dr. --- would sally, out of his room, for in general, if but a mouse
stirred, he sprang out like a mastiff from his kennel. strange
to say, however, on this occasion, when the noise of laughter had ceased,
no sound, or rustling even, was to be heard in the bedroom. dr.
--- had a painful complaint, which, sometimes keeping him awake, made
his sleep perhaps, when it did come, the deeper. gathering courage
from the silence, the groom hoisted his burden again, and accomplished
the remainder of his descent without accident. i waited until
i saw the trunk placed on a wheelbarrow and on its road to the carrier’s;
then, “with providence my guide,” i set off on foot, carrying
a small parcel with some articles of dress under my arm; a favourite
english poet in one pocket, and a small mo volume, containing about
nine plays of euripides, in the other.
it had been my intention originally to proceed to westmoreland, both
from the love i bore to that country and on other personal accounts.
accident, however, gave a different direction to my wanderings, and
i bent my steps towards north wales.
after wandering about for some time in denbighshire, merionethshire,
and carnarvonshire, i took lodgings in a small neat house in b---.
here i might have stayed with great comfort for many weeks, for provisions
were cheap at b---, from the scarcity of other markets for the surplus
produce of a wide agricultural district. an accident, however,
in which perhaps no offence was designed, drove me out to wander again.
i know not whether my reader may have remarked, but i have often remarked,
that the proudest class of people in england (or at any rate the class
whose pride is most apparent) are the families of bishops. noblemen
and their children carry about with them, in their very titles, a sufficient
notification of their rank. nay, their very names (and this applies
also to the children of many untitled houses) are often, to the english
ear, adequate exponents of high birth or descent. sackville, manners,
fitzroy, paulet, cavendish, and scores of others, tell their own tale.
such persons, therefore, find everywhere a due sense of their claims
already established, except among those who are ignorant of the world
by virtue of their own obscurity: “not to know them, argues
one’s self unknown.” their manners take a suitable
tone and colouring, and for once they find it necessary to impress a
sense of their consequence upon others, they meet with a thousand occasions
for moderating and tempering this sense by acts of courteous condescension.
with the families of bishops it is otherwise: with them, it is all uphill
work to make known their pretensions; for the proportion of the episcopal
bench taken from noble families is not at any time very large, and the
succession to these dignities is so rapid that the public ear seldom
has time to become familiar with them, unless where they are connected
with some literary reputation. hence it is that the children of
bishops carry about with them an austere and repulsive air, indicative
of claims not generally acknowledged, a sort of noli me tangere
manner, nervously apprehensive of too familiar approach, and shrinking
with the sensitiveness of a gouty man from all contact with the οι
πολλοι. doubtless, a powerful
understanding, or unusual goodness of nature, will preserve a man from
such weakness, but in general the truth of my representation will be
acknowledged; pride, if not of deeper root in such families, appears
at least more upon the surface of their manners. this spirit of
manners naturally communicates itself to their domestics and other dependants.
now, my landlady had been a lady’s maid or a nurse in the family
of the bishop of ---, and had but lately married away and “settled”
(as such people express it) for life. in a little town like b---,
merely to have lived in the bishop’s family conferred some distinction;
and my good landlady had rather more than her share of the pride i have
noticed on that score. what “my lord” said and what
“my lord” did, how useful he was in parliament and how indispensable
at oxford, formed the daily burden of her talk. all this i bore
very well, for i was too good-natured to laugh in anybody’s face,
and i could make an ample allowance for the garrulity of an old servant.
of necessity, however, i must have appeared in her eyes very inadequately
impressed with the bishop’s importance, and, perhaps to punish
me for my indifference, or possibly by accident, she one day repeated
to me a conversation in which i was indirectly a party concerned.
she had been to the palace to pay her respects to the family, and, dinner
being over, was summoned into the dining-room. in giving an account
of her household economy she happened to mention that she had let her
apartments. thereupon the good bishop (it seemed) had taken occasion
to caution her as to her selection of inmates, “for,” said
he, “you must recollect, betty, that this place is in the high
road to the head; so that multitudes of irish swindlers running away
from their debts into england, and of english swindlers running away
from their debts to the isle of man, are likely to take this place in
their route.” this advice certainly was not without reasonable
grounds, but rather fitted to be stored up for mrs. betty’s private
meditations than specially reported to me. what followed, however,
was somewhat worse. “oh, my lord,” answered my landlady
(according to her own representation of the matter), “i really
don’t think this young gentleman is a swindler, because ---”
“you don’t think me a swindler?” said i, interrupting
her, in a tumult of indignation: “for the future i shall spare
you the trouble of thinking about it.” and without delay
i prepared for my departure. some concessions the good woman seemed
disposed to make; but a harsh and contemptuous expression, which i fear
that i applied to the learned dignitary himself, roused her indignation
in turn, and reconciliation then became impossible. i was indeed
greatly irritated at the bishop’s having suggested any grounds
of suspicion, however remotely, against a person whom he had never seen;
and i thought of letting him know my mind in greek, which, at the same
time that it would furnish some presumption that i was no swindler,
would also (i hoped) compel the bishop to reply in the same language;
in which case i doubted not to make it appear that if i was not so rich
as his lordship, i was a far better grecian. calmer thoughts,
however, drove this boyish design out of my mind; for i considered that
the bishop was in the right to counsel an old servant; that he could
not have designed that his advice should be reported to me; and that
the same coarseness of mind which had led mrs. betty to repeat the advice
at all, might have coloured it in a way more agreeable to her own style
of thinking than to the actual expressions of the worthy bishop.
i left the lodgings the very same hour, and this turned out a very
unfortunate occurrence for me, because, living henceforward at inns,
i was drained of my money very rapidly. in a fortnight i was reduced
to short allowance; that is, i could allow myself only one meal a day.
from the keen appetite produced by constant exercise and mountain air,
acting on a youthful stomach, i soon began to suffer greatly on this
slender regimen, for the single meal which i could venture to order
was coffee or tea. even this, however, was at length withdrawn;
and afterwards, so long as i remained in wales, i subsisted either on
blackberries, hips, haws, &c., or on the casual hospitalities which
i now and then received in return for such little services as i had
an opportunity of rendering. sometimes i wrote letters of business
for cottagers who happened to have relatives in liverpool or in london;
more often i wrote love-letters to their sweethearts for young women
who had lived as servants at shrewsbury or other towns on the english
border. on all such occasions i gave great satisfaction to my
humble friends, and was generally treated with hospitality; and once
in particular, near the village of llan-y-styndw (or some such name),
in a sequestered part of merionethshire, i was entertained for upwards
of three days by a family of young people with an affectionate and fraternal
kindness that left an impression upon my heart not yet impaired.
the family consisted at that time of four sisters and three brothers,
all grown up, and all remarkable for elegance and delicacy of manners.
so much beauty, and so much native good breeding and refinement, i do
not remember to have seen before or since in any cottage, except once
or twice in westmoreland and devonshire. they spoke english, an
accomplishment not often met with in so many members of one family,
especially in villages remote from the high road. here i wrote,
on my first introduction, a letter about prize-money, for one of the
brothers, who had served on board an english man-of-war; and, more privately,
two love-letters for two of the sisters. they were both interesting-looking
girls, and one of uncommon loveliness. in the midst of their confusion
and blushes, whilst dictating, or rather giving me general instructions,
it did not require any great penetration to discover that what they
wished was that their letters should be as kind as was consistent with
proper maidenly pride. i contrived so to temper my expressions
as to reconcile the gratification of both feelings; and they were as
much pleased with the way in which i had expressed their thoughts as
(in their simplicity) they were astonished at my having so readily discovered
them. the reception one meets with from the women of a family
generally determines the tenor of one’s whole entertainment.
in this case i had discharged my confidential duties as secretary so
much to the general satisfaction, perhaps also amusing them with my
conversation, that i was pressed to stay with a cordiality which i had
little inclination to resist. i slept with the brothers, the only
unoccupied bed standing in the apartment of the young women; but in
all other points they treated me with a respect not usually paid to
purses as light as mine—as if my scholarship were sufficient evidence
that i was of “gentle blood.” thus i lived with them
for three days and great part of a fourth; and, from the undiminished
kindness which they continued to show me, i believe i might have stayed
with them up to this time, if their power had corresponded with their
wishes. on the last morning, however, i perceived upon their countenances,
as they sate at breakfast, the expression of some unpleasant communication
which was at hand; and soon after, one of the brothers explained to
me that their parents had gone, the day before my arrival, to an annual
meeting of methodists, held at carnarvon, and were that day expected
to return; “and if they should not be so civil as they ought to
be,” he begged, on the part of all the young people, that i would
not take it amiss. the parents returned with churlish faces, and
“dym sassenach” (no english) in answer to
all my addresses. i saw how matters stood; and so, taking an affectionate
leave of my kind and interesting young hosts, i went my way; for, though
they spoke warmly to their parents in my behalf, and often excused the
manner of the old people by saying it was “only their way,”
yet i easily understood that my talent for writing love-letters would
do as little to recommend me with two grave sexagenarian welsh methodists
as my greek sapphics or alcaics; and what had been hospitality when
offered to me with the gracious courtesy of my young friends, would
become charity when connected with the harsh demeanour of these old
people. certainly, mr. shelley is right in his notions about old
age: unless powerfully counteracted by all sorts of opposite agencies,
it is a miserable corrupter and blighter to the genial charities of
the human heart.
soon after this i contrived, by means which i must omit for want
of room, to transfer myself to london. and now began the latter
and fiercer stage of my long sufferings; without using a disproportionate
expression i might say, of my agony. for i now suffered, for upwards
of sixteen weeks, the physical anguish of hunger in. i various
degrees of intensity, but as bitter perhaps as ever any human being
can have suffered who has survived it would not needlessly harass my
reader’s feelings by a detail of all that i endured; for extremities
such as these, under any circumstances of heaviest misconduct or guilt,
cannot be contemplated, even in description, without a rueful pity that
is painful to the natural goodness of the human heart. let it
suffice, at least on this occasion, to say that a few fragments of bread
from the breakfast-table of one individual (who supposed me to be ill,
but did not know of my being in utter want), and these at uncertain
intervals, constituted my whole support. during the former part
of my sufferings (that is, generally in wales, and always for the first
two months in london) i was houseless, and very seldom slept under a
roof. to this constant exposure to the open air i ascribe
it mainly that i did not sink under my torments. latterly, however,
when colder and more inclement weather came on, and when, from the length
of my sufferings, i had begun to sink into a more languishing condition,
it was no doubt fortunate for me that the same person to whose breakfast-table
i had access, allowed me to sleep in a large unoccupied house of which
he was tenant. unoccupied i call it, for there was no household
or establishment in it; nor any furniture, indeed, except a table and
a few chairs. but i found, on taking possession of my new quarters,
that the house already contained one single inmate, a poor friendless
child, apparently ten years old; but she seemed hunger-bitten, and sufferings
of that sort often make children look older than they are. from
this forlorn child i learned that she had slept and lived there alone
for some time before i came; and great joy the poor creature expressed
when she found that i was in future to be her companion through the
hours of darkness. the house was large, and, from the want of
furniture, the noise of the rats made a prodigious echoing on the spacious
staircase and hall; and amidst the real fleshly ills of cold and, i
fear, hunger, the forsaken child had found leisure to suffer still more
(it appeared) from the self-created one of ghosts. i promised
her protection against all ghosts whatsoever, but alas! i could offer
her no other assistance. we lay upon the floor, with a bundle
of cursed law papers for a pillow, but with no other covering than a
sort of large horseman’s cloak; afterwards, however, we discovered
in a garret an old sofa-cover, a small piece of rug, and some fragments
of other articles, which added a little to our warmth. the poor
child crept close to me for warmth, and for security against her ghostly
enemies. when i was not more than usually ill i took her into
my arms, so that in general she was tolerably warm, and often slept
when i could not, for during the last two months of my sufferings i
slept much in daytime, and was apt to fall into transient dosings at
all hours. but my sleep distressed me more than my watching, for
beside the tumultuousness of my dreams (which were only not so awful
as those which i shall have to describe hereafter as produced by opium),
my sleep was never more than what is called dog-sleep; so that
i could hear myself moaning, and was often, as it seemed to me, awakened
suddenly by my own voice; and about this time a hideous sensation began
to haunt me as soon as i fell into a slumber, which has since returned
upon me at different periods of my life—viz., a sort of twitching
(i know not where, but apparently about the region of the stomach) which
compelled me violently to throw out my feet for the sake of relieving
it. this sensation coming on as soon as i began to sleep, and
the effort to relieve it constantly awaking me, at length i slept only
from exhaustion; and from increasing weakness (as i said before) i was
constantly falling asleep and constantly awaking. meantime, the
master of the house sometimes came in upon us suddenly, and very early;
sometimes not till ten o’clock, sometimes not at all. he
was in constant fear of bailiffs. improving on the plan of cromwell,
every night he slept in a different quarter of london; and i observed
that he never failed to examine through a private window the appearance
of those who knocked at the door before he would allow it to be opened.
he breaksfasted alone; indeed, his tea equipage would hardly have admitted
of his hazarding an invitation to a second person, any more than the
quantity of esculent matériel, which for the most part
was little more than a roll or a few biscuits which he had bought on
his road from the place where he had slept. or, if he had
asked a party—as i once learnedly and facetiously observed to
him—the several members of it must have stood in the relation
to each other (not sate in any relation whatever) of succession,
as the metaphysicians have it, and not of a coexistence; in the relation
of the parts of time, and not of the parts of space. during his
breakfast i generally contrived a reason for lounging in, and, with
an air of as much indifference as i could assume, took up such fragments
as he had left; sometimes, indeed, there were none at all. in
doing this i committed no robbery except upon the man himself, who was
thus obliged (i believe) now and then to send out at noon for an extra
biscuit; for as to the poor child, she was never admitted into
his study (if i may give that name to his chief depository of parchments,
law writings, &c.); that room was to her the bluebeard room of the
house, being regularly locked on his departure to dinner, about six
o’clock, which usually was his final departure for the night.
whether this child were an illegitimate daughter of mr. ---, or only
a servant, i could not ascertain; she did not herself know; but certainly
she was treated altogether as a menial servant. no sooner did
mr. --- make his appearance than she went below stairs, brushed his
shoes, coat, &c.; and, except when she was summoned to run an errand,
she never emerged from the dismal tartarus of the kitchen, &c.,
to the upper air until my welcome knock at night called up her little
trembling footsteps to the front door. of her life during the
daytime, however, i knew little but what i gathered from her own account
at night, for as soon as the hours of business commenced i saw that
my absence would be acceptable, and in general, therefore, i went off
and sate in the parks or elsewhere until nightfall.
but who and what, meantime, was the master of the house himself?
reader, he was one of those anomalous practitioners in lower departments
of the law who—what shall i say?—who on prudential reasons,
or from necessity, deny themselves all indulgence in the luxury of too
delicate a conscience, (a periphrasis which might be abridged considerably,
but that i leave to the reader’s taste): in many walks
of life a conscience is a more expensive encumbrance than a wife or
a carriage; and just as people talk of “laying down” their
carriages, so i suppose my friend mr. --- had “laid down”
his conscience for a time, meaning, doubtless, to resume it as soon
as he could afford it. the inner economy of such a man’s
daily life would present a most strange picture, if i could allow myself
to amuse the reader at his expense. even with my limited opportunities
for observing what went on, i saw many scenes of london intrigues and
complex chicanery, “cycle and epicycle, orb in orb,” at
which i sometimes smile to this day, and at which i smiled then, in
spite of my misery. my situation, however, at that time gave me
little experience in my own person of any qualities in mr. ---’s
character but such as did him honour; and of his whole strange composition
i must forget everything but that towards me he was obliging, and to
the extent of his power, generous.
that power was not, indeed, very extensive; however, in common with
the rats, i sate rent free; and as dr. johnson has recorded that he
never but once in his life had as much wall-fruit as he could eat, so
let me be grateful that on that single occasion i had as large a choice
of apartments in a london mansion as i could possibly desire.
except the bluebeard room, which the poor child believed to be haunted,
all others, from the attics to the cellars, were at our service; “the
world was all before us,” and we pitched our tent for the night
in any spot we chose. this house i have already described as a
large one; it stands in a conspicuous situation and in a well-known
part of london. many of my readers will have passed it, i doubt
not, within a few hours of reading this. for myself, i never fail
to visit it when business draws me to london; about ten o’clock
this very night, august , —being my birthday—i turned
aside from my evening walk down oxford street, purposely to take a glance
at it; it is now occupied by a respectable family, and by the lights
in the front drawing-room i observed a domestic party assembled, perhaps
at tea, and apparently cheerful and gay. marvellous contrast,
in my eyes, to the darkness, cold, silence, and desolation of that same
house eighteen years ago, when its nightly occupants were one famishing
scholar and a neglected child. her, by-the-bye, in after-years
i vainly endeavoured to trace. apart from her situation, she was
not what would be called an interesting child; she was neither pretty,
nor quick in understanding, nor remarkably pleasing in manners.
but, thank god! even in those years i needed not the embellishments
of novel accessories to conciliate my affections: plain human nature,
in its humblest and most homely apparel, was enough for me, and i loved
the child because she was my partner in wretchedness. if she is
now living she is probably a mother, with children of her own; but,
as i have said, i could never trace her.
this i regret; but another person there was at that time whom i have
since sought to trace with far deeper earnestness, and with far deeper
sorrow at my failure. this person was a young woman, and one of
that unhappy class who subsist upon the wages of prostitution.
i feel no shame, nor have any reason to feel it, in avowing that i was
then on familiar and friendly terms with many women in that unfortunate
condition. the reader needs neither smile at this avowal nor frown;
for, not to remind my classical readers of the old latin proverb, “sine
cerere,” &c., it may well be supposed that in the existing
state of my purse my connection with such women could not have been
an impure one. but the truth is, that at no time of my life have
i been a person to hold myself polluted by the touch or approach of
any creature that wore a human shape; on the contrary, from my very
earliest youth it has been my pride to converse familiarly, more
socratio, with all human beings, man, woman, and child, that chance
might fling in my way; a practice which is friendly to the knowledge
of human nature, to good feelings, and to that frankness of address
which becomes a man who would be thought a philosopher. for a
philosopher should not see with the eyes of the poor limitary creature
calling himself a man of the world, and filled with narrow and self-regarding
prejudices of birth and education, but should look upon himself as a
catholic creature, and as standing in equal relation to high and low,
to educated and uneducated, to the guilty and the innocent. being
myself at that time of necessity a peripatetic, or a walker of the streets,
i naturally fell in more frequently with those female peripatetics who
are technically called street-walkers. many of these women had
occasionally taken my part against watchmen who wished to drive me off
the steps of houses where i was sitting. but one amongst them,
the one on whose account i have at all introduced this subject—yet
no! let me not class the, oh! noble-minded ann—with that order
of women. let me find, if it be possible, some gentler name to
designate the condition of her to whose bounty and compassion, ministering
to my necessities when all the world had forsaken me, i owe it that
i am at this time alive. for many weeks i had walked at nights
with this poor friendless girl up and down oxford street, or had rested
with her on steps and under the shelter of porticoes. she could
not be so old as myself; she told me, indeed, that she had not completed
her sixteenth year. by such questions as my interest about her
prompted i had gradually drawn forth her simple history. hers
was a case of ordinary occurrence (as i have since had reason to think),
and one in which, if london beneficence had better adapted its arrangements
to meet it, the power of the law might oftener be interposed to protect
and to avenge. but the stream of london charity flows in a channel
which, though deep and mighty, is yet noiseless and underground; not
obvious or readily accessible to poor houseless wanderers; and it cannot
be denied that the outside air and framework of london society is harsh,
cruel, and repulsive. in any case, however, i saw that part of
her injuries might easily have been redressed, and i urged her often
and earnestly to lay her complaint before a magistrate. friendless
as she was, i assured her that she would meet with immediate attention,
and that english justice, which was no respecter of persons, would speedily
and amply avenge her on the brutal ruffian who had plundered her little
property. she promised me often that she would, but she delayed
taking the steps i pointed out from time to time, for she was timid
and dejected to a degree which showed how deeply sorrow had taken hold
of her young heart; and perhaps she thought justly that the most upright
judge and the most righteous tribunals could do nothing to repair her
heaviest wrongs. something, however, would perhaps have been done,
for it had been settled between us at length, but unhappily on the very
last time but one that i was ever to see her, that in a day or two we
should go together before a magistrate, and that i should speak on her
behalf. this little service it was destined, however, that i should
never realise. meantime, that which she rendered to me, and which
was greater than i could ever have repaid her, was this:—one night,
when we were pacing slowly along oxford street, and after a day when
i had felt more than usually ill and faint, i requested her to turn
off with me into soho square. thither we went, and we sat down
on the steps of a house, which to this hour i never pass without a pang
of grief and an inner act of homage to the spirit of that unhappy girl,
in memory of the noble action which she there performed. suddenly,
as we sate, i grew much worse. i had been leaning my head against
her bosom, and all at once i sank from her arms and fell backwards on
the steps. from the sensations i then had, i felt an inner conviction
of the liveliest kind, that without some powerful and reviving stimulus
i should either have died on the spot, or should at least have sunk
to a point of exhaustion from which all reäscent under my friendless
circumstances would soon have become hopeless. then it was, at
this crisis of my fate, that my poor orphan companion, who had herself
met with little but injuries in this world, stretched out a saving hand
to me. uttering a cry of terror, but without a moment’s
delay, she ran off into oxford street, and in less time than could be
imagined returned to me with a glass of port wine and spices, that acted
upon my empty stomach, which at that time would have rejected all solid
food, with an instantaneous power of restoration; and for this glass
the generous girl without a murmur paid out of her humble purse at a
time—be it remembered!—when she had scarcely wherewithal
to purchase the bare necessaries of life, and when she could have no
reason to expect that i should ever be able to reimburse her.
oh, youthful benefactress! how often in succeeding years, standing
in solitary places, and thinking of thee with grief of heart and perfect
love—how often have i wished that, as in ancient times, the curse
of a father was believed to have a supernatural power, and to pursue
its object with a fatal necessity of self-fulfilment; even so the benediction
of a heart oppressed with gratitude might have a like prerogative, might
have power given to it from above to chase, to haunt, to waylay, to
overtake, to pursue thee into the central darkness of a london brothel,
or (if it were possible) into the darkness of the grave, there to awaken
thee with an authentic message of peace and forgiveness, and of final
reconciliation!
i do not often weep: for not only do my thoughts on subjects connected
with the chief interests of man daily, nay hourly, descend a thousand
fathoms “too deep for tears;” not only does the sternness
of my habits of thought present an antagonism to the feelings which
prompt tears—wanting of necessity to those who, being protected
usually by their levity from any tendency to meditative sorrow, would
by that same levity be made incapable of resisting it on any casual
access of such feelings; but also, i believe that all minds which have
contemplated such objects as deeply as i have done, must, for their
own protection from utter despondency, have early encouraged and cherished
some tranquillising belief as to the future balances and the hieroglyphic
meanings of human sufferings. on these accounts i am cheerful
to this hour, and, as i have said, i do not often weep. yet some
feelings, though not deeper or more passionate, are more tender than
others; and often, when i walk at this time in oxford street by dreamy
lamplight, and hear those airs played on a barrel-organ which years
ago solaced me and my dear companion (as i must always call her), i
shed tears, and muse with myself at the mysterious dispensation which
so suddenly and so critically separated us for ever. how it happened
the reader will understand from what remains of this introductory narration.
soon after the period of the last incident i have recorded i met
in albemarle street a gentleman of his late majesty’s household.
this gentleman had received hospitalities on different occasions from
my family, and he challenged me upon the strength of my family likeness.
i did not attempt any disguise; i answered his questions ingenuously,
and, on his pledging his word of honour that he would not betray me
to my guardians, i gave him an address to my friend the attorney’s.
the next day i received from him a £ bank-note. the letter
enclosing it was delivered with other letters of business to the attorney,
but though his look and manner informed me that he suspected its contents,
he gave it up to me honourably and without demur.
this present, from the particular service to which it was applied,
leads me naturally to speak of the purpose which had allured me up to
london, and which i had been (to use a forensic word) soliciting from
the first day of my arrival in london to that of my final departure.
in so mighty a world as london it will surprise my readers that i
should not have found some means of starving off the last extremities,
of penury; and it will strike them that two resources at least must
have been open to me—viz., either to seek assistance from the
friends of my family, or to turn my youthful talents and attainments
into some channel of pecuniary emolument. as to the first course,
i may observe generally, that what i dreaded beyond all other evils
was the chance of being reclaimed by my guardians; not doubting that
whatever power the law gave them would have been enforced against me
to the utmost—that is, to the extremity of forcibly restoring
me to the school which i had quitted, a restoration which, as it would
in my eyes have been a dishonour, even if submitted to voluntarily,
could not fail, when extorted from me in contempt and defiance of my
own wishes and efforts, to have been a humiliation worse to me than
death, and which would indeed have terminated in death. i was
therefore shy enough of applying for assistance even in those quarters
where i was sure of receiving it, at the risk of furnishing my guardians
with any clue of recovering me. but as to london in particular,
though doubtless my father had in his lifetime had many friends there,
yet (as ten years had passed since his death) i remembered few of them
even by name; and never having seen london before, except once for a
few hours, i knew not the address of even those few. to this mode
of gaining help, therefore, in part the difficulty, but much more the
paramount fear which i have mentioned, habitually indisposed me.
in regard to the other mode, i now feel half inclined to join my reader
in wondering that i should have overlooked it. as a corrector
of greek proofs (if in no other way) i might doubtless have gained enough
for my slender wants. such an office as this i could have discharged
with an exemplary and punctual accuracy that would soon have gained
me the confidence of my employers. but it must not be forgotten
that, even for such an office as this, it was necessary that i should
first of all have an introduction to some respectable publisher, and
this i had no means of obtaining. to say the truth, however, it
had never once occurred to me to think of literary labours as a source
of profit. no mode sufficiently speedy of obtaining money had
ever occurred to me but that of borrowing it on the strength of my future
claims and expectations. this mode i sought by every avenue to
compass; and amongst other persons i applied to a jew named d--- {}
to this jew, and to other advertising money-lenders (some of whom
were, i believe, also jews), i had introduced myself with an account
of my expectations; which account, on examining my father’s will
at doctors’ commons, they had ascertained to be correct.
the person there mentioned as the second son of --- was found to have
all the claims (or more than all) that i had stated; but one question
still remained, which the faces of the jews pretty significantly suggested—was
i that person? this doubt had never occurred to me as a
possible one; i had rather feared, whenever my jewish friends scrutinised
me keenly, that i might be too well known to be that person, and that
some scheme might be passing in their minds for entrapping me and selling
me to my guardians. it was strange to me to find my own self materialiter
considered (so i expressed it, for i doated on logical accuracy of distinctions),
accused, or at least suspected, of counterfeiting my own self formaliter
considered. however, to satisfy their scruples, i took the only
course in my power. whilst i was in wales i had received various
letters from young friends these i produced, for i carried them constantly
in my pocket, being, indeed, by this time almost the only relics of
my personal encumbrances (excepting the clothes i wore) which i had
not in one way or other disposed of. most of these letters were
from the earl of ---, who was at that time my chief (or rather only)
confidential friend. these letters were dated from eton.
i had also some from the marquis of ---, his father, who, though absorbed
in agricultural pursuits, yet having been an etonian himself, and as
good a scholar as a nobleman needs to be, still retained an affection
for classical studies and for youthful scholars. he had accordingly,
from the time that i was fifteen, corresponded with me; sometimes upon
the great improvements which he had made or was meditating in the counties
of m--- and sl--- since i had been there, sometimes upon the merits
of a latin poet, and at other times suggesting subjects to me on which
he wished me to write verses.
on reading the letters, one of my jewish friends agreed to furnish
me with two or three hundred pounds on my personal security, provided
i could persuade the young earl --- who was, by the way, not older than
myself—to guarantee the payment on our coming of age; the jew’s
final object being, as i now suppose, not the trifling profit he could
expect to make by me, but the prospect of establishing a connection
with my noble friend, whose immense expectations were well known to
him. in pursuance of this proposal on the part of the jew, about
eight or nine days after i had received the £, i prepared to
go down to eton. nearly £ of the money i had given to my
money-lending friend, on his alleging that the stamps must be bought,
in order that the writings might be preparing whilst i was away from
london. i thought in my heart that he was lying; but i did not
wish to give him any excuse for charging his own delays upon me.
a smaller sum i had given to my friend the attorney (who was connected
with the money-lenders as their lawyer), to which, indeed, he was entitled
for his unfurnished lodgings. about fifteen shillings i had employed
in re-establishing (though in a very humble way) my dress. of
the remainder i gave one quarter to ann, meaning on my return to have
divided with her whatever might remain. these arrangements made,
soon after six o’clock on a dark winter evening i set off, accompanied
by ann, towards piccadilly; for it was my intention to go down as far
as salthill on the bath or bristol mail. our course lay through
a part of the town which has now all disappeared, so that i can no longer
retrace its ancient boundaries—swallow street, i think it was
called. having time enough before us, however, we bore away to
the left until we came into golden square; there, near the corner of
sherrard street, we sat down, not wishing to part in the tumult and
blaze of piccadilly. i had told her of my plans some time before,
and i now assured her again that she should share in my good fortune,
if i met with any, and that i would never forsake her as soon as i had
power to protect her. this i fully intended, as much from inclination
as from a sense of duty; for setting aside gratitude, which in any case
must have made me her debtor for life, i loved her as affectionately
as if she had been my sister; and at this moment with sevenfold tenderness,
from pity at witnessing her extreme dejection. i had apparently
most reason for dejection, because i was leaving the saviour of my life;
yet i, considering the shock my health had received, was cheerful and
full of hope. she, on the contrary, who was parting with one who
had had little means of serving her, except by kindness and brotherly
treatment, was overcome by sorrow; so that, when i kissed her at our
final farewell, she put her arms about my neck and wept without speaking
a word. i hoped to return in a week at farthest, and i agreed
with her that on the fifth night from that, and every night afterwards,
she would wait for me at six o’clock near the bottom of great
titchfield street, which had been our customary haven, as it were, of
rendezvous, to prevent our missing each other in the great mediterranean
of oxford street. this and other measures of precaution i took;
one only i forgot. she had either never told me, or (as a matter
of no great interest) i had forgotten her surname. it is a general
practice, indeed, with girls of humble rank in her unhappy condition,
not (as novel-reading women of higher pretensions) to style themselves
miss douglas, miss montague, &c., but simply by their
christian names—mary, jane, frances, &c.
her surname, as the surest means of tracing her hereafter, i ought now
to have inquired; but the truth is, having no reason to think that our
meeting could, in consequence of a short interruption, be more difficult
or uncertain than it had been for so many weeks, i had scarcely for
a moment adverted to it as necessary, or placed it amongst my memoranda
against this parting interview; and my final anxieties being spent in
comforting her with hopes, and in pressing upon her the necessity of
getting some medicines for a violent cough and hoarseness with which
she was troubled, i wholly forgot it until it was too late to recall
her.
it was past eight o’clock when i reached the gloucester coffee-house,
and the bristol mail being on the point of going off, i mounted on the
outside. the fine fluent motion {}
of this mail soon laid me asleep: it is somewhat remarkable that the
first easy or refreshing sleep which i had enjoyed for some months,
was on the outside of a mail-coach—a bed which at this day i find
rather an uneasy one. connected with this sleep was a little incident
which served, as hundreds of others did at that time, to convince me
how easily a man who has never been in any great distress may pass through
life without knowing, in his own person at least, anything of the possible
goodness of the human heart—or, as i must add with a sigh, of
its possible vileness. so thick a curtain of manners is
drawn over the features and expression of men’s natures,
that to the ordinary observer the two extremities, and the infinite
field of varieties which lie between them, are all confounded; the vast
and multitudinous compass of their several harmonies reduced to the
meagre outline of differences expressed in the gamut or alphabet of
elementary sounds. the case was this: for the first four or five
miles from london i annoyed my fellow-passenger on the roof by occasionally
falling against him when the coach gave a lurch to his: side; and indeed,
if the road had been less smooth and level than it is, i should have
fallen off from weakness. of this annoyance he complained heavily,
as perhaps, in the same circumstances, most people would; he expressed
his complaint, however, more morosely than the occasion seemed to warrant,
and if i had parted with him at that moment i should have thought of
him (if i had considered it worth while to think of him at all) as a
surly and almost brutal fellow. however, i was conscious that
i had given him some cause for complaint, and therefore i apologized
to him, and assured him i would do what i could to avoid falling asleep
for the future; and at the same time, in as few words as possible, i
explained to him that i was ill and in a weak state from long suffering,
and that i could not afford at that time to take an inside place.
this man’s manner changed, upon hearing this explanation, in an
instant; and when i next woke for a minute from the noise and lights
of hounslow (for in spite of my wishes and efforts i had fallen asleep
again within two minutes from the time i had spoken to him) i found
that he had put his arm round me to protect me from falling off, and
for the rest of my journey he behaved to me with the gentleness of a
woman, so that at length i almost lay in his arms; and this was the
more kind, as he could not have known that i was not going the whole
way to bath or bristol. unfortunately, indeed, i did go
rather farther than i intended, for so genial and so refreshing was
my sleep, that the next time after leaving hounslow that i fully awoke
was upon the sudden pulling up of the mail (possibly at a post-office),
and on inquiry i found that we had reached maidenhead—six or seven
miles, i think, ahead of salthill. here i alighted, and for the
half-minute that the mail stopped i was entreated by my friendly companion
(who, from the transient glimpse i had had of him in piccadilly, seemed
to me to be a gentleman’s butler, or person of that rank) to go
to bed without delay. this i promised, though with no intention
of doing so; and in fact i immediately set forward, or rather backward,
on foot. it must then have been nearly midnight, but so slowly
did i creep along that i heard a clock in a cottage strike four before
i turned down the lane from slough to eton. the air and the sleep
had both refreshed me; but i was weary nevertheless. i remember
a thought (obvious enough, and which has been prettily expressed by
a roman poet) which gave me some consolation at that moment under my
poverty. there had been some time before a murder committed on
or near hounslow heath. i think i cannot be mistaken when i say
that the name of the murdered person was steele, and that he
was the owner of a lavender plantation in that neighbourhood.
every step of my progress was bringing me nearer to the heath, and it
naturally occurred to me that i and the accused murderer, if he were
that night abroad, might at every instant be unconsciously approaching
each other through the darkness; in which case, said i—supposing
i, instead of being (as indeed i am) little better than an outcast—
lord of my learning, and no land beside—
were, like my friend lord ---, heir by general repute to £,
per annum, what a panic should i be under at this moment about my throat!
indeed, it was not likely that lord --- should ever be in my situation.
but nevertheless, the spirit of the remark remains true—that vast
power and possessions make a man shamefully afraid of dying; and i am
convinced that many of the most intrepid adventurers, who, by fortunately
being poor, enjoy the full use of their natural courage, would, if at
the very instant of going into action news were brought to them that
they had unexpectedly succeeded to an estate in england of £,
a-year, feel their dislike to bullets considerably sharpened, {}
and their efforts at perfect equanimity and self-possession proportionably
difficult. so true it is, in the language of a wise man whose
own experience had made him acquainted with both fortunes, that riches
are better fitted
to slacken virtue, and abate her edge,
than tempt her to do ought may merit praise.
paradise regained.
i dally with my subject because, to myself, the remembrance of these
times is profoundly interesting. but my reader shall not have
any further cause to complain, for i now hasten to its close.
in the road between slough and eton i fell asleep, and just as the morning
began to dawn i was awakened by the voice of a man standing over me
and surveying me. i know not what he was: he was an ill-looking
fellow, but not therefore of necessity an ill-meaning fellow; or, if
he were, i suppose he thought that no person sleeping out-of-doors in
winter could be worth robbing. in which conclusion, however, as
it regarded myself, i beg to assure him, if he should be among my readers,
that he was mistaken. after a slight remark he passed on; and
i was not sorry at his disturbance, as it enabled me to pass through
eton before people were generally up. the night had been heavy
and lowering, but towards the morning it had changed to a slight frost,
and the ground and the trees were now covered with rime. i slipped
through eton unobserved; washed myself, and as far as possible adjusted
my dress, at a little public-house in windsor; and about eight o’clock
went down towards pote’s. on my road i met some junior boys,
of whom i made inquiries. an etonian is always a gentleman; and,
in spite of my shabby habiliments, they answered me civilly. my
friend lord --- was gone to the university of ---. “ibi
omnis effusus labor!” i had, however, other friends at eton;
but it is not to all that wear that name in prosperity that a man is
willing to present himself in distress. on recollecting myself,
however, i asked for the earl of d---, to whom (though my acquaintance
with him was not so intimate as with some others) i should not have
shrunk from presenting myself under any circumstances. he was
still at eton, though i believe on the wing for cambridge. i called,
was received kindly, and asked to breakfast.
here let me stop for a moment to check my reader from any erroneous
conclusions. because i have had occasion incidentally to speak
of various patrician friends, it must not be supposed that i have myself
any pretension to rank and high blood. i thank god that i have
not. i am the son of a plain english merchant, esteemed during
his life for his great integrity, and strongly attached to literary
pursuits (indeed, he was himself, anonymously, an author). if
he had lived it was expected that he would have been very rich; but
dying prematurely, he left no more than about £, amongst
seven different claimants. my mother i may mention with honour,
as still more highly gifted; for though unpretending to the name and
honours of a literary woman, i shall presume to call her (what
many literary women are not) an intellectual woman; and i believe
that if ever her letters should be collected and published, they would
be thought generally to exhibit as much strong and masculine sense,
delivered in as pure “mother english,” racy and fresh with
idiomatic graces, as any in our language—hardly excepting those
of lady m. w. montague. these are my honours of descent, i have
no other; and i have thanked god sincerely that i have not, because,
in my judgment, a station which raises a man too eminently above the
level of his fellow-creatures is not the most favourable to moral or
to intellectual qualities.
lord d--- placed before me a most magnificent breakfast. it
was really so; but in my eyes it seemed trebly magnificent, from being
the first regular meal, the first “good man’s table,”
that i had sate down to for months. strange to say, however, i
could scarce eat anything. on the day when i first received my
£ bank-note i had gone to a baker’s shop and bought a
couple of rolls; this very shop i had two months or six weeks before
surveyed with an eagerness of desire which it was almost humiliating
to me to recollect. i remembered the story about otway, and feared
that there might be danger in eating too rapidly. but i had no
need for alarm; my appetite was quite sunk, and i became sick before
i had eaten half of what i had bought. this effect from eating
what approached to a meal i continued to feel for weeks; or, when i
did not experience any nausea, part of what i ate was rejected, sometimes
with acidity, sometimes immediately and without any acidity. on
the present occasion, at lord d-’s table, i found myself not at
all better than usual, and in the midst of luxuries i had no appetite.
i had, however, unfortunately, at all times a craving for wine; i explained
my situation, therefore, to lord d---, and gave him a short account
of my late sufferings, at which he expressed great compassion, and called
for wine. this gave me a momentary relief and pleasure; and on
all occasions when i had an opportunity i never failed to drink wine,
which i worshipped then as i have since worshipped opium. i am
convinced, however, that this indulgence in wine contributed to strengthen
my malady, for the tone of my stomach was apparently quite sunk, and
by a better regimen it might sooner, and perhaps effectually, have been
revived. i hope that it was not from this love of wine that i
lingered in the neighbourhood of my eton friends; i persuaded myself
then that it was from reluctance to ask of lord d---, on whom i was
conscious i had not sufficient claims, the particular service in quest
of which i had come down to eton. i was, however unwilling to
lose my journey, and—i asked it. lord d---, whose good nature
was unbounded, and which, in regard to myself, had been measured rather
by his compassion perhaps for my condition, and his knowledge of my
intimacy with some of his relatives, than by an over-rigorous inquiry
into the extent of my own direct claims, faltered, nevertheless, at
this request. he acknowledged that he did not like to have any
dealings with money-lenders, and feared lest such a transaction might
come to the ears of his connexions. moreover, he doubted whether
his signature, whose expectations were so much more bounded than
those of ---, would avail with my unchristian friends. however,
he did not wish, as it seemed, to mortify me by an absolute refusal;
for after a little consideration he promised, under certain conditions
which he pointed out, to give his security. lord d--- was at this
time not eighteen years of age; but i have often doubted, on recollecting
since the good sense and prudence which on this occasion he mingled
with so much urbanity of manner (an urbanity which in him wore the grace
of youthful sincerity), whether any statesman—the oldest and the
most accomplished in diplomacy—could have acquitted himself better
under the same circumstances. most people, indeed, cannot be addressed
on such a business without surveying you with looks as austere and unpropitious
as those of a saracen’s head.
recomforted by this promise, which was not quite equal to the best
but far above the worst that i had pictured to myself as possible, i
returned in a windsor coach to london three days after i had quitted
it. and now i come to the end of my story. the jews did
not approve of lord d---’s terms; whether they would in the end
have acceded to them, and were only seeking time for making due inquiries,
i know not; but many delays were made, time passed on, the small fragment
of my bank-note had just melted away, and before any conclusion could
have been put to the business i must have relapsed into my former state
of wretchedness. suddenly, however, at this crisis, an opening
was made, almost by accident, for reconciliation with my friends; i
quitted london in haste for a remote part of england; after some time
i proceeded to the university, and it was not until many months had
passed away that i had it in my power again to revisit the ground which
had become so interesting to me, and to this day remains so, as the
chief scene of my youthful sufferings.
meantime, what had become of poor ann? for her i have reserved
my concluding words. according to our agreement, i sought her
daily, and waited for her every night, so long as i stayed in london,
at the corner of titchfield street. i inquired for her of every
one who was likely to know her, and during the last hours of my stay
in london i put into activity every means of tracing her that my knowledge
of london suggested and the limited extent of my power made possible.
the street where she had lodged i knew, but not the house; and i remembered
at last some account which she had given me of ill-treatment from her
landlord, which made it probable that she had quitted those lodgings
before we parted. she had few acquaintances; most people, besides,
thought that the earnestness of my inquiries arose from motives which
moved their laughter or their slight regard; and others, thinking i
was in chase of a girl who had robbed me of some trifles, were naturally
and excusably indisposed to give me any clue to her, if indeed they
had any to give. finally as my despairing resource, on the day
i left london i put into the hands of the only person who (i was sure)
must know ann by sight, from having been in company with us once or
twice, an address to ---, in ---shire, at that time the residence of
my family. but to this hour i have never heard a syllable about
her. this, amongst such troubles as most men meet with in this
life, has been my heaviest affliction. if she lived, doubtless
we must have been some time in search of each other, at the very same
moment, through the mighty labyrinths of london; perhaps even within
a few feet of each other—a barrier no wider than a london street
often amounting in the end to a separation for eternity! during
some years i hoped that she did live; and i suppose that, in
the literal and unrhetorical use of the word myriad, i may say
that on my different visits to london i have looked into many, many
myriads of female faces, in the hope of meeting her. i should
know her again amongst a thousand, if i saw her for a moment; for though
not handsome, she had a sweet expression of countenance and a peculiar
and graceful carriage of the head. i sought her, i have said,
in hope. so it was for years; but now i should fear to see her;
and her cough, which grieved me when i parted with her, is now my consolation.
i now wish to see her no longer; but think of her, more gladly, as one
long since laid in the grave—in the grave, i would hope, of a
magdalen; taken away, before injuries and cruelty had blotted out and
transfigured her ingenuous nature, or the brutalities of ruffians had
completed the ruin they had begun.
[the remainder of this very interesting article will be given in
the next number.—ed.]
from the london magazine for october .
so then, oxford street, stony-hearted step-mother! thou that listenest
to the sighs of orphans and drinkest the tears of children, at length
i was dismissed from thee; the time was come at last that i no more
should pace in anguish thy never-ending terraces, no more should dream
and wake in captivity to the pangs of hunger. successors too many,
to myself and ann, have doubtless since then trodden in our footsteps,
inheritors of our calamities; other orphans than ann have sighed; tears
have been shed by other children; and thou, oxford street, hast since
doubtless echoed to the groans of innumerable hearts. for myself,
however, the storm which i had outlived seemed to have been the pledge
of a long fair-weather—the premature sufferings which i had paid
down to have been accepted as a ransom for many years to come, as a
price of long immunity from sorrow; and if again i walked in london
a solitary and contemplative man (as oftentimes i did), i walked for
the most part in serenity and peace of mind. and although it is
true that the calamities of my noviciate in london had struck root so
deeply in my bodily constitution, that afterwards they shot up and flourished
afresh, and grew into a noxious umbrage that has overshadowed and darkened
my latter years, yet these second assaults of suffering were met with
a fortitude more confirmed, with the resources of a maturer intellect,
and with alleviations from sympathising affection—how deep and
tender!
thus, however, with whatsoever alleviations, years that were far
asunder were bound together by subtle links of suffering derived from
a common root. and herein i notice an instance of the short-sightedness
of human desires, that oftentimes on moonlight nights, during my first
mournful abode in london, my consolation was (if such it could be thought)
to gaze from oxford street up every avenue in succession which pierces
through the heart of marylebone to the fields and the woods; for that,
said i, travelling with my eyes up the long vistas which lay part in
light and part in shade, “that is the road to the north,
and therefore to, and if i had the wings of a dove, that way
i would fly for comfort.” thus i said, and thus i wished,
in my blindness. yet even in that very northern region it was,
even in that very valley, nay, in that very house to which my erroneous
wishes pointed, that this second birth of my sufferings began, and that
they again threatened to besiege the citadel of life and hope.
there it was that for years i was persecuted by visions as ugly, and
as ghastly phantoms as ever haunted the couch of an orestes; and in
this unhappier than he, that sleep, which comes to all as a respite
and a restoration, and to him especially as a blessed {}
balm for his wounded heart and his haunted brain, visited me as my bitterest
scourge. thus blind was i in my desires; yet if a veil interposes
between the dim-sightedness of man and his future calamities, the same
veil hides from him their alleviations, and a grief which had not been
feared is met by consolations which had not been hoped. i therefore,
who participated, as it were, in the troubles of orestes (excepting
only in his agitated conscience), participated no less in all his supports.
my eumenides, like his, were at my bed-feet, and stared in upon me through
the curtains; but watching by my pillow, or defrauding herself of sleep
to bear me company through the heavy watches of the night, sate my electra;
for thou, beloved m., dear companion of my later years, thou wast my
electra! and neither in nobility of mind nor in long-suffering affection
wouldst permit that a grecian sister should excel an english wife.
for thou thoughtest not much to stoop to humble offices of kindness
and to servile {}
ministrations of tenderest affection—to wipe away for years the
unwholesome dews upon the forehead, or to refresh the lips when parched
and baked with fever; nor even when thy own peaceful slumbers had by
long sympathy become infected with the spectacle of my dread contest
with phantoms and shadowy enemies that oftentimes bade me “sleep
no more!”—not even then didst thou utter a complaint or
any murmur, nor withdraw thy angelic smiles, nor shrink from thy service
of love, more than electra did of old. for she too, though she
was a grecian woman, and the daughter of the king {}
of men, yet wept sometimes, and hid her face {}
in her robe.
but these troubles are past; and thou wilt read records of a period
so dolorous to us both as the legend of some hideous dream that can
return no more. meantime, i am again in london, and again i pace
the terraces of oxford street by night; and oftentimes, when i am oppressed
by anxieties that demand all my philosophy and the comfort of thy presence
to support, and yet remember that i am separated from thee by three
hundred miles and the length of three dreary months, i look up the streets
that run northwards from oxford street, upon moonlight nights, and recollect
my youthful ejaculation of anguish; and remembering that thou art sitting
alone in that same valley, and mistress of that very house to which
my heart turned in its blindness nineteen years ago, i think that, though
blind indeed, and scattered to the winds of late, the promptings of
my heart may yet have had reference to a remoter time, and may be justified
if read in another meaning; and if i could allow myself to descend again
to the impotent wishes of childhood, i should again say to myself, as
i look to the north, “oh, that i had the wings of a dove—”
and with how just a confidence in thy good and gracious nature might
i add the other half of my early ejaculation—“and that
way i would fly for comfort!”
it is so long since i first took opium that if it had been a trifling
incident in my life i might have forgotten its date; but cardinal events
are not to be forgotten, and from circumstances connected with it i
remember that it must be referred to the autumn of . during
that season i was in london, having come thither for the first time
since my entrance at college. and my introduction to opium arose
in the following way. from an early age i had been accustomed
to wash my head in cold water at least once a day: being suddenly seized
with toothache, i attributed it to some relaxation caused by an accidental
intermission of that practice, jumped out of bed, plunged my head into
a basin of cold water, and with hair thus wetted went to sleep.
the next morning, as i need hardly say, i awoke with excruciating rheumatic
pains of the head and face, from which i had hardly any respite for
about twenty days. on the twenty-first day i think it was, and
on a sunday, that i went out into the streets, rather to run away, if
possible, from my torments, than with any distinct purpose. by
accident i met a college acquaintance, who recommended opium.
opium! dread agent of unimaginable pleasure and pain! i had heard
of it as i had of manna or of ambrosia, but no further. how unmeaning
a sound was it at that time: what solemn chords does it now strike upon
my heart! what heart-quaking vibrations of sad and happy remembrances!
reverting for a moment to these, i feel a mystic importance attached
to the minutest circumstances connected with the place and the time
and the man (if man he was) that first laid open to me the paradise
of opium-eaters. it was a sunday afternoon, wet and cheerless:
and a duller spectacle this earth of ours has not to show than a rainy
sunday in london. my road homewards lay through oxford street;
and near “the stately pantheon” (as mr. wordsworth has obligingly
called it) i saw a druggist’s shop. the druggist—unconscious
minister of celestial pleasures!—as if in sympathy with the rainy
sunday, looked dull and stupid, just as any mortal druggist might be
expected to look on a sunday; and when i asked for the tincture of opium,
he gave it to me as any other man might do, and furthermore, out of
my shilling returned me what seemed to be real copper halfpence, taken
out of a real wooden drawer. nevertheless, in spite of such indications
of humanity, he has ever since existed in my mind as the beatific vision
of an immortal druggist, sent down to earth on a special mission to
myself. and it confirms me in this way of considering him, that
when i next came up to london i sought him near the stately pantheon,
and found him not; and thus to me, who knew not his name (if indeed
he had one), he seemed rather to have vanished from oxford street than
to have removed in any bodily fashion. the reader may choose to
think of him as possibly no more than a sublunary druggist; it may be
so, but my faith is better—i believe him to have evanesced, {}
or evaporated. so unwillingly would i connect any mortal remembrances
with that hour, and place, and creature, that first brought me acquainted
with the celestial drug.
arrived at my lodgings, it may be supposed that i lost not a moment
in taking the quantity prescribed. i was necessarily ignorant
of the whole art and mystery of opium-taking, and what i took i took
under every disadvantage. but i took it—and in an hour—oh,
heavens! what a revulsion! what an upheaving, from its lowest depths,
of inner spirit! what an apocalypse of the world within me! that
my pains had vanished was now a trifle in my eyes: this negative effect
was swallowed up in the immensity of those positive effects which had
opened before me—in the abyss of divine enjoyment thus suddenly
revealed. here was a panacea, a φαρμακον
for all human woes; here was the secret of happiness, about which philosophers
had disputed for so many ages, at once discovered: happiness might now
be bought for a penny, and carried in the waistcoat pocket; portable
ecstacies might be had corked up in a pint bottle, and peace of mind
could be sent down in gallons by the mail-coach. but if i talk
in this way the reader will think i am laughing, and i can assure him
that nobody will laugh long who deals much with opium: its pleasures
even are of a grave and solemn complexion, and in his happiest state
the opium-eater cannot present himself in the character of l’allegro:
even then he speaks and thinks as becomes il penseroso.
nevertheless, i have a very reprehensible way of jesting at times in
the midst of my own misery; and unless when i am checked by some more
powerful feelings, i am afraid i shall be guilty of this indecent practice
even in these annals of suffering or enjoyment. the reader must
allow a little to my infirm nature in this respect; and with a few indulgences
of that sort i shall endeavour to be as grave, if not drowsy, as fits
a theme like opium, so anti-mercurial as it really is, and so drowsy
as it is falsely reputed.
and first, one word with respect to its bodily effects; for upon
all that has been hitherto written on the subject of opium, whether
by travellers in turkey (who may plead their privilege of lying as an
old immemorial right), or by professors of medicine, writing ex cathedrâ,
i have but one emphatic criticism to pronounce—lies! lies! lies!
i remember once, in passing a book-stall, to have caught these words
from a page of some satiric author: “by this time i became convinced
that the london newspapers spoke truth at least twice a week, viz.,
on tuesday and saturday, and might safely be depended upon for—the
list of bankrupts.” in like manner, i do by no means deny
that some truths have been delivered to the world in regard to opium.
thus it has been repeatedly affirmed by the learned that opium is a
dusky brown in colour; and this, take notice, i grant. secondly,
that it is rather dear, which also i grant, for in my time east indian
opium has been three guineas a pound, and turkey eight. and thirdly,
that if you eat a good deal of it, most probably you must—do what
is particularly disagreeable to any man of regular habits, viz., die.
{} these
weighty propositions are, all and singular, true: i cannot gainsay them,
and truth ever was, and will be, commendable. but in these three
theorems i believe we have exhausted the stock of knowledge as yet accumulated
by men on the subject of opium.
and therefore, worthy doctors, as there seems to be room for further
discoveries, stand aside, and allow me to come forward and lecture on
this matter.
first, then, it is not so much affirmed as taken for granted, by
all who ever mention opium, formally or incidentally, that it does or
can produce intoxication. now, reader, assure yourself, meo
perieulo, that no quantity of opium ever did or could intoxicate.
as to the tincture of opium (commonly called laudanum) that might
certainly intoxicate if a man could bear to take enough of it; but why?
because it contains so much proof spirit, and not because it contains
so much opium. but crude opium, i affirm peremptorily, is incapable
of producing any state of body at all resembling that which is produced
by alcohol, and not in degree only incapable, but even in kind:
it is not in the quantity of its effects merely, but in the quality,
that it differs altogether. the pleasure given by wine is always
mounting and tending to a crisis, after which it declines; that from
opium, when once generated, is stationary for eight or ten hours: the
first, to borrow a technical distinction from medicine, is a case of
acute—the second, the chronic pleasure; the one is a flame, the
other a steady and equable glow. but the main distinction lies
in this, that whereas wine disorders the mental faculties, opium, on
the contrary (if taken in a proper manner), introduces amongst them
the most exquisite order, legislation, and harmony. wine robs
a man of his self-possession; opium greatly invigorates it. wine
unsettles and clouds the judgement, and gives a preternatural brightness
and a vivid exaltation to the contempts and the admirations, the loves
and the hatreds of the drinker; opium, on the contrary, communicates
serenity and equipoise to all the faculties, active or passive, and
with respect to the temper and moral feelings in general it gives simply
that sort of vital warmth which is approved by the judgment, and which
would probably always accompany a bodily constitution of primeval or
antediluvian health. thus, for instance, opium, like wine, gives
an expansion to the heart and the benevolent affections; but then, with
this remarkable difference, that in the sudden development of kind-heartedness
which accompanies inebriation there is always more or less of a maudlin
character, which exposes it to the contempt of the bystander.
men shake hands, swear eternal friendship, and shed tears, no mortal
knows why; and the sensual creature is clearly uppermost. but
the expansion of the benigner feelings incident to opium is no febrile
access, but a healthy restoration to that state which the mind would
naturally recover upon the removal of any deep-seated irritation of
pain that had disturbed and quarrelled with the impulses of a heart
originally just and good. true it is that even wine, up to a certain
point and with certain men, rather tends to exalt and to steady the
intellect; i myself, who have never been a great wine-drinker, used
to find that half-a-dozen glasses of wine advantageously affected the
faculties—brightened and intensified the consciousness, and gave
to the mind a feeling of being “ponderibus librata suis;”
and certainly it is most absurdly said, in popular language, of any
man that he is disguised in liquor; for, on the contrary, most
men are disguised by sobriety, and it is when they are drinking (as
some old gentleman says in athenæus), that men εαυτους
οιτινες εισιν—display
themselves in their true complexion of character, which surely is not
disguising themselves. but still, wine constantly leads a man
to the brink of absurdity and extravagance, and beyond a certain point
it is sure to volatilise and to disperse the intellectual energies:
whereas opium always seems to compose what had been agitated, and to
concentrate what had been distracted. in short, to sum up all
in one word, a man who is inebriated, or tending to inebriation, is,
and feels that he is, in a condition which calls up into supremacy the
merely human, too often the brutal part of his nature; but the opium-eater
(i speak of him who is not suffering from any disease or other remote
effects of opium) feels that the divines part of his nature is paramount;
that is, the moral affections are in a state of cloudless serenity,
and over all is the great light of the majestic intellect.
this is the doctrine of the true church on the subject of opium:
of which church i acknowledge myself to be the only member—the
alpha and the omega: but then it is to be recollected that i speak from
the ground of a large and profound personal experience: whereas most
of the unscientific {}
authors who have at all treated of opium, and even of those who have
written expressly on the materia medica, make it evident, from the horror
they express of it, that their experimental knowledge of its action
is none at all. i will, however, candidly acknowledge that i have
met with one person who bore evidence to its intoxicating power, such
as staggered my own incredulity; for he was a surgeon, and had himself
taken opium largely. i happened to say to him that his enemies
(as i had heard) charged him with talking nonsense on politics, and
that his friends apologized for him by suggesting that he was constantly
in a state of intoxication from opium. now the accusation, said
i, is not primâ facie and of necessity an absurd one; but
the defence is. to my surprise, however, he insisted that
both his enemies and his friends were in the right. “i will
maintain,” said he, “that i do talk nonsense; and
secondly, i will maintain that i do not talk nonsense upon principle,
or with any view to profit, but solely and simply, said he, solely and
simply—solely and simply (repeating it three times over), because
i am drunk with opium, and that daily.” i replied
that, as to the allegation of his enemies, as it seemed to be established
upon such respectable testimony, seeing that the three parties concerned
all agree in it, it did not become me to question it; but the defence
set up i must demur to. he proceeded to discuss the matter, and
to lay down his reasons; but it seemed to me so impolite to pursue an
argument which must have presumed a man mistaken in a point belonging
to his own profession, that i did not press him even when his course
of argument seemed open to objection; not to mention that a man who
talks nonsense, even though “with no view to profit,” is
not altogether the most agreeable partner in a dispute, whether as opponent
or respondent. i confess, however, that the authority of a surgeon,
and one who was reputed a good one, may seem a weighty one to my prejudice;
but still i must plead my experience, which was greater than his greatest
by , drops a-day; and though it was not possible to suppose a medical
man unacquainted with the characteristic symptoms of vinous intoxication,
it yet struck me that he might proceed on a logical error of using the
word intoxication with too great latitude, and extending it generically
to all modes of nervous excitement, instead of restricting it as the
expression for a specific sort of excitement connected with certain
diagnostics. some people have maintained in my hearing that they
had been drunk upon green tea; and a medical student in london, for
whose knowledge in his profession i have reason to feel great respect,
assured me the other day that a patient in recovering from an illness
had got drunk on a beef-steak.
having dwelt so much on this first and leading error in respect to
opium, i shall notice very briefly a second and a third, which are,
that the elevation of spirits produced by opium is necessarily followed
by a proportionate depression, and that the natural and even immediate
consequence of opium is torpor and stagnation, animal and mental.
the first of these errors i shall content myself with simply denying;
assuring my reader that for ten years, during which i took opium at
intervals, the day succeeding to that on which i allowed myself this
luxury was always a day of unusually good spirits.
with respect to the torpor supposed to follow, or rather (if we were
to credit the numerous pictures of turkish opium-eaters) to accompany
the practice of opium-eating, i deny that also. certainly opium
is classed under the head of narcotics, and some such effect it may
produce in the end; but the primary effects of opium are always, and
in the highest degree, to excite and stimulate the system. this
first stage of its action always lasted with me, during my noviciate,
for upwards of eight hours; so that it must be the fault of the opium-eater
himself if he does not so time his exhibition of the dose (to speak
medically) as that the whole weight of its narcotic influence may descend
upon his sleep. turkish opium-eaters, it seems, are absurd enough
to sit, like so many equestrian statues, on logs of wood as stupid as
themselves. but that the reader may judge of the degree in which
opium is likely to stupefy the faculties of an englishman, i shall (by
way of treating the question illustratively, rather than argumentatively)
describe the way in which i myself often passed an opium evening in
london during the period between -. it will be seen that
at least opium did not move me to seek solitude, and much less to seek
inactivity, or the torpid state of self-involution ascribed to the turks.
i give this account at the risk of being pronounced a crazy enthusiast
or visionary; but i regard that little. i must desire my
reader to bear in mind that i was a hard student, and at severe studies
for all the rest of my time; and certainly i had a right occasionally
to relaxations as well as other people. these, however, i allowed
myself but seldom.
the late duke of --- used to say, “next friday, by the blessing
of heaven, i purpose to be drunk;” and in like manner i used to
fix beforehand how often within a given time, and when, i would commit
a debauch of opium. this was seldom more than once in three weeks,
for at that time i could not have ventured to call every day, as i did
afterwards, for “a glass of laudanum negus, warm, and without
sugar.” no, as i have said, i seldom drank laudanum,
at that time, more than once in three weeks: this was usually on a tuesday
or a saturday night; my reason for which was this. in those days
grassini sang at the opera, and her voice was delightful to me beyond
all that i had ever heard. i know not what may be the state of
the opera-house now, having never been within its walls for seven or
eight years, but at that time it was by much the most pleasant place
of public resort in london for passing an evening. five shillings
admitted one to the gallery, which was subject to far less annoyance
than the pit of the theatres; the orchestra was distinguished by its
sweet and melodious grandeur from all english orchestras, the composition
of which, i confess, is not acceptable to my ear, from the predominance
of the clamorous instruments and the absolute tyranny of the violin.
the choruses were divine to hear, and when grassini appeared in some
interlude, as she often did, and poured forth her passionate soul as
andromache at the tomb of hector, &c., i question whether any turk,
of all that ever entered the paradise of opium-eaters, can have had
half the pleasure i had. but, indeed, i honour the barbarians
too much by supposing them capable of any pleasures approaching to the
intellectual ones of an englishman. for music is an intellectual
or a sensual pleasure according to the temperament of him who hears
it. and, by-the-bye, with the exception of the fine extravaganza
on that subject in “twelfth night,” i do not recollect more
than one thing said adequately on the subject of music in all literature;
it is a passage in the religio medici {}
of sir t. brown, and though chiefly remarkable for its sublimity, has
also a philosophic value, inasmuch as it points to the true theory of
musical effects. the mistake of most people is to suppose that
it is by the ear they communicate with music, and therefore that they
are purely passive to its effects. but this is not so; it is by
the reaction of the mind upon the notices of the ear (the matter
coming by the senses, the form from the mind) that the pleasure
is constructed, and therefore it is that people of equally good ear
differ so much in this point from one another. now, opium, by
greatly increasing the activity of the mind, generally increases, of
necessity, that particular mode of its activity by which we are able
to construct out of the raw material of organic sound an elaborate intellectual
pleasure. but, says a friend, a succession of musical sounds is
to me like a collection of arabic characters; i can attach no ideas
to them. ideas! my good sir? there is no occasion for them;
all that class of ideas which can be available in such a case has a
language of representative feelings. but this is a subject foreign
to my present purposes; it is sufficient to say that a chorus, &c.,
of elaborate harmony displayed before me, as in a piece of arras work,
the whole of my past life—not as if recalled by an act of memory,
but as if present and incarnated in the music; no longer painful to
dwell upon; but the detail of its incidents removed or blended in some
hazy abstraction, and its passions exalted, spiritualized, and sublimed.
all this was to be had for five shillings. and over and above
the music of the stage and the orchestra, i had all around me, in the
intervals of the performance, the music of the italian language talked
by italian women—for the gallery was usually crowded with italians—and
i listened with a pleasure such as that with which weld the traveller
lay and listened, in canada, to the sweet laughter of indian women;
for the less you understand of a language, the more sensible you are
to the melody or harshness of its sounds. for such a purpose,
therefore, it was an advantage to me that i was a poor italian scholar,
reading it but little, and not speaking it at all, nor understanding
a tenth part of what i heard spoken.
these were my opera pleasures; but another pleasure i had which,
as it could be had only on a saturday night, occasionally struggled
with my love of the opera; for at that time tuesday and saturday were
the regular opera nights. on this subject i am afraid i shall
be rather obscure, but i can assure the reader not at all more so than
marinus in his life of proclus, or many other biographers and autobiographers
of fair reputation. this pleasure, i have said, was to be had
only on a saturday night. what, then, was saturday night to me
more than any other night? i had no labours that i rested from,
no wages to receive; what needed i to care for saturday night, more
than as it was a summons to hear grassini? true, most logical
reader; what you say is unanswerable. and yet so it was and is,
that whereas different men throw their feelings into different channels,
and most are apt to show their interest in the concerns of the poor
chiefly by sympathy, expressed in some shape or other, with their distresses
and sorrows, i at that time was disposed to express my interest by sympathising
with their pleasures. the pains of poverty i had lately seen too
much of, more than i wished to remember; but the pleasures of the poor,
their consolations of spirit, and their reposes from bodily toil, can
never become oppressive to contemplate. now saturday night is
the season for the chief, regular, and periodic return of rest of the
poor; in this point the most hostile sects unite, and acknowledge a
common link of brotherhood; almost all christendom rests from its labours.
it is a rest introductory to another rest, and divided by a whole day
and two nights from the renewal of toil. on this account i feel
always, on a saturday night, as though i also were released from some
yoke of labour, had some wages to receive, and some luxury of repose
to enjoy. for the sake, therefore, of witnessing, upon as large
a scale as possible, a spectacle with which my sympathy was so entire,
i used often on saturday nights, after i had taken opium, to wander
forth, without much regarding the direction or the distance, to all
the markets and other parts of london to which the poor resort of a
saturday night, for laying out their wages. many a family party,
consisting of a man, his wife, and sometimes one or two of his children,
have i listened to, as they stood consulting on their ways and means,
or the strength of their exchequer, or the price of household articles.
gradually i became familiar with their wishes, their difficulties, and
their opinions. sometimes there might be heard murmurs of discontent,
but far oftener expressions on the countenance, or uttered in words,
of patience, hope, and tranquillity. and taken generally, i must
say that, in this point at least, the poor are more philosophic than
the rich—that they show a more ready and cheerful submission to
what they consider as irremediable evils or irreparable losses.
whenever i saw occasion, or could do it without appearing to be intrusive,
i joined their parties, and gave my opinion upon the matter in discussion,
which, if not always judicious, was always received indulgently.
if wages were a little higher or expected to be so, or the quartern
loaf a little lower, or it was reported that onions and butter were
expected to fall, i was glad; yet, if the contrary were true, i drew
from opium some means of consoling myself. for opium (like the
bee, that extracts its materials indiscriminately from roses and from
the soot of chimneys) can overrule all feelings into compliance with
the master-key. some of these rambles led me to great distances,
for an opium-eater is too happy to observe the motion of time; and sometimes
in my attempts to steer homewards, upon nautical principles, by fixing
my eye on the pole-star, and seeking ambitiously for a north-west passage,
instead of circumnavigating all the capes and head-lands i had doubled
in my outward voyage, i came suddenly upon such knotty problems of alleys,
such enigmatical entries, and such sphynx’s riddles of streets
without thoroughfares, as must, i conceive, baffle the audacity of porters
and confound the intellects of hackney-coachmen. i could almost
have believed at times that i must be the first discoverer of some of
these terræ incognitæ, and doubted whether they had
yet been laid down in the modern charts of london. for all this,
however, i paid a heavy price in distant years, when the human face
tyrannised over my dreams, and the perplexities of my steps in london
came back and haunted my sleep, with the feeling of perplexities, moral
and intellectual, that brought confusion to the reason, or anguish and
remorse to the conscience.
thus i have shown that opium does not of necessity produce inactivity
or torpor, but that, on the contrary, it often led me into markets and
theatres. yet, in candour, i will admit that markets and theatres
are not the appropriate haunts of the opium-eater when in the divinest
state incident to his enjoyment. in that state, crowds become
an oppression to him; music even, too sensual and gross. he naturally
seeks solitude and silence, as indispensable conditions of those trances,
or profoundest reveries, which are the crown and consummation of what
opium can do for human nature. i, whose disease it was to meditate
too much and to observe too little, and who upon my first entrance at
college was nearly falling into a deep melancholy, from brooding too
much on the sufferings which i had witnessed in london, was sufficiently
aware of the tendencies of my own thoughts to do all i could to counteract
them. i was, indeed, like a person who, according to the old legend,
had entered the cave of trophonius; and the remedies i sought were to
force myself into society, and to keep my understanding in continual
activity upon matters of science. but for these remedies i should
certainly have become hypochondriacally melancholy. in after years,
however, when my cheerfulness was more fully re-established, i yielded
to my natural inclination for a solitary life. and at that time
i often fell into these reveries upon taking opium; and more than once
it has happened to me, on a summer night, when i have been at an open
window, in a room from which i could overlook the sea at a mile below
me, and could command a view of the great town of l---, at about the
same distance, that i have sate from sunset to sunrise, motionless,
and without wishing to move.
i shall be charged with mysticism, behmenism, quietism, &c.,
but that shall not alarm me. sir h. vane, the younger,
was one of our wisest men; and let my reader see if he, in his philosophical
works, be half as unmystical as i am. i say, then, that it has
often struck me that the scene itself was somewhat typical of what took
place in such a reverie. the town of l--- represented the earth,
with its sorrows and its graves left behind, yet not out of sight, nor
wholly forgotten. the ocean, in everlasting but gentle agitation,
and brooded over by a dove-like calm, might not unfitly typify the mind
and the mood which then swayed it. for it seemed to me as if then
first i stood at a distance and aloof from the uproar of life; as if
the tumult, the fever, and the strife were suspended; a respite granted
from the secret burthens of the heart; a sabbath of repose; a resting
from human labours. here were the hopes which blossom in the paths
of life reconciled with the peace which is in the grave; motions of
the intellect as unwearied as the heavens, yet for all anxieties a halcyon
calm; a tranquillity that seemed no product of inertia, but as if resulting
from mighty and equal antagonisms; infinite activities, infinite repose.
oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium! that to the hearts of poor and
rich alike, for the wounds that will never heal, and for “the
pangs that tempt the spirit to rebel,” bringest an assuaging balm;
eloquent opium! that with thy potent rhetoric stealest away the purposes
of wrath; and to the guilty man for one night givest back the hopes
of his youth, and hands washed pure from blood; and to the proud man
a brief oblivion for
wrongs undress’d and insults unavenged;
that summonest to the chancery of dreams, for the triumphs of suffering
innocence, false witnesses; and confoundest perjury, and dost reverse
the sentences of unrighteous judges;—thou buildest upon the bosom
of darkness, out of the fantastic imagery of the brain, cities and temples
beyond the art of phidias and praxiteles—beyond the splendour
of babylon and hekatómpylos, and “from the anarchy of dreaming
sleep” callest into sunny light the faces of long-buried beauties
and the blessed household countenances cleansed from the “dishonours
of the grave.” thou only givest these gifts to man; and
thou hast the keys of paradise, oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium!
courteous, and i hope indulgent, reader (for all my readers
must be indulgent ones, or else i fear i shall shock them too much to
count on their courtesy), having accompanied me thus far, now let me
request you to move onwards for about eight years; that is to say, from
 (when i have said that my acquaintance with opium first began)
to . the years of academic life are now over and gone—almost
forgotten; the student’s cap no longer presses my temples; if
my cap exist at all, it presses those of some youthful scholar, i trust,
as happy as myself, and as passionate a lover of knowledge. my
gown is by this time, i dare say, in the same condition with many thousand
excellent books in the bodleian, viz., diligently perused by certain
studious moths and worms; or departed, however (which is all that i
know of his fate), to that great reservoir of somewhere to which
all the tea-cups, tea-caddies, tea-pots, tea-kettles, &c., have
departed (not to speak of still frailer vessels, such as glasses, decanters,
bed-makers, &c.), which occasional resemblances in the present generation
of tea-cups, &c., remind me of having once possessed, but of whose
departure and final fate i, in common with most gownsmen of either university,
could give, i suspect, but an obscure and conjectural history.
the persecutions of the chapel-bell, sounding its unwelcome summons
to six o’clock matins, interrupts my slumbers no longer, the porter
who rang it, upon whose beautiful nose (bronze, inlaid with copper)
i wrote, in retaliation so many greek epigrams whilst i was dressing,
is dead, and has ceased to disturb anybody; and i, and many others who
suffered much from his tintinnabulous propensities, have now agreed
to overlook his errors, and have forgiven him. even with the bell
i am now in charity; it rings, i suppose, as formerly, thrice a-day,
and cruelly annoys, i doubt not, many worthy gentlemen, and disturbs
their peace of mind; but as to me, in this year , i regard its treacherous
voice no longer (treacherous i call it, for, by some refinement of malice,
it spoke in as sweet and silvery tones as if it had been inviting one
to a party); its tones have no longer, indeed, power to reach me, let
the wind sit as favourable as the malice of the bell itself could wish,
for i am  miles away from it, and buried in the depth of mountains.
and what am i doing among the mountains? taking opium. yes;
but what else? why reader, in , the year we are now arrived
at, as well as for some years previous, i have been chiefly studying
german metaphysics in the writings of kant, fichte, schelling, &c.
and how and in what manner do i live?—in short, what class or
description of men do i belong to? i am at this period—viz.
in —living in a cottage and with a single female servant (honi
soit qui mal y pense), who amongst my neighbours passes by the name
of my “housekeeper.” and as a scholar and a man of
learned education, and in that sense a gentleman, i may presume to class
myself as an unworthy member of that indefinite body called gentlemen.
partly on the ground i have assigned perhaps, partly because from my
having no visible calling or business, it is rightly judged that i must
be living on my private fortune; i am so classed by my neighbours; and
by the courtesy of modern england i am usually addressed on letters,
&c., “esquire,” though having, i fear, in the rigorous
construction of heralds, but slender pretensions to that distinguished
honour; yet in popular estimation i am x. y. z., esquire, but not justice
of the peace nor custos rotulorum. am i married? not yet.
and i still take opium? on saturday nights. and perhaps
have taken it unblushingly ever since “the rainy sunday,”
and “the stately pantheon,” and “the beatific druggist”
of ? even so. and how do i find my health after all
this opium-eating? in short, how do i do? why, pretty well,
i thank you, reader; in the phrase of ladies in the straw, “as
well as can be expected.” in fact, if i dared to say the
real and simple truth, though, to satisfy the theories of medical men,
i ought to be ill, i never was better in my life than in the
spring of ; and i hope sincerely that the quantity of claret, port,
or “particular madeira,” which in all probability you, good
reader, have taken, and design to take for every term of eight years
during your natural life, may as little disorder your health as mine
was disordered by the opium i had taken for eight years, between 
and . hence you may see again the danger of taking any medical
advice from anastasius; in divinity, for aught i know, or law,
he may be a safe counsellor; but not in medicine. no; it is far
better to consult dr. buchan, as i did; for i never forgot that worthy
man’s excellent suggestion, and i was “particularly careful
not to take above five-and-twenty ounces of laudanum.” to
this moderation and temperate use of the article i may ascribe it, i
suppose, that as yet, at least (i.e. in ), i am ignorant
and unsuspicious of the avenging terrors which opium has in store for
those who abuse its lenity. at the same time, it must not be forgotten
that hitherto i have been only a dilettante eater of opium; eight years’
practice even, with a single precaution of allowing sufficient intervals
between every indulgence, has not been sufficient to make opium necessary
to me as an article of daily diet. but now comes a different era.
move on, if you please, reader, to . in the summer of the
year we have just quitted i have suffered much in bodily health from
distress of mind connected with a very melancholy event. this
event being no ways related to the subject now before me, further than
through the bodily illness which it produced, i need not more particularly
notice. whether this illness of  had any share in that of
 i know not; but so it was, that in the latter year i was attacked
by a most appalling irritation of the stomach, in all respects the same
as that which had caused me so much suffering in youth, and accompanied
by a revival of all the old dreams. this is the point of my narrative
on which, as respects my own self-justification, the whole of what follows
may be said to hinge. and here i find myself in a perplexing dilemma.
either, on the one hand, i must exhaust the reader’s patience
by such a detail of my malady, or of my struggles with it, as might
suffice to establish the fact of my inability to wrestle any longer
with irritation and constant suffering; or, on the other hand, by passing
lightly over this critical part of my story, i must forego the benefit
of a stronger impression left on the mind of the reader, and must lay
myself open to the misconstruction of having slipped, by the easy and
gradual steps of self-indulging persons, from the first to the final
stage of opium-eating (a misconstruction to which there will be a lurking
predisposition in most readers, from my previous acknowledgements).
this is the dilemma, the first horn of which would be sufficient to
toss and gore any column of patient readers, though drawn up sixteen
deep and constantly relieved by fresh men; consequently that is not
to be thought of. it remains, then, that i postulale so
much as is necessary for my purpose. and let me take as full credit
for what i postulate as if i had demonstrated it, good reader, at the
expense of your patience and my own. be not so ungenerous as to
let me suffer in your good opinion through my own forbearance and regard
for your comfort. no; believe all that i ask of you—viz.,
that i could resist no longer; believe it liberally and as an act of
grace, or else in mere prudence; for if not, then in the next edition
of my opium confessions, revised and enlarged, i will make you believe
and tremble; and à force d’ennuyer, by mere dint
of pandiculation i will terrify all readers of mine from ever again
questioning any postulate that i shall think fit to make.
this, then, let me repeat, i postulate—that at the time i began
to take opium daily i could not have done otherwise. whether,
indeed, afterwards i might not have succeeded in breaking off the habit,
even when it seemed to me that all efforts would be unavailing, and
whether many of the innumerable efforts which i did make might not have
been carried much further, and my gradual reconquests of ground lost
might not have been followed up much more energetically—these
are questions which i must decline. perhaps i might make out a
case of palliation; but shall i speak ingenuously? i confess it,
as a besetting infirmity of mine, that i am too much of an eudæmonist;
i hanker too much after a state of happiness, both for myself and others;
i cannot face misery, whether my own or not, with an eye of sufficient
firmness, and am little capable of encountering present pain for the
sake of any reversionary benefit. on some other matters i can
agree with the gentlemen in the cotton trade {}
at manchester in affecting the stoic philosophy, but not in this.
here i take the liberty of an eclectic philosopher, and i look out for
some courteous and considerate sect that will condescend more to the
infirm condition of an opium-eater; that are “sweet men,”
as chaucer says, “to give absolution,” and will show some
conscience in the penances they inflict, and the efforts of abstinence
they exact from poor sinners like myself. an inhuman moralist
i can no more endure in my nervous state than opium that has not been
boiled. at any rate, he who summons me to send out a large freight
of self-denial and mortification upon any cruising voyage of moral improvement,
must make it clear to my understanding that the concern is a hopeful
one. at my time of life (six-and-thirty years of age) it cannot
be supposed that i have much energy to spare; in fact, i find it all
little enough for the intellectual labours i have on my hands, and therefore
let no man expect to frighten me by a few hard words into embarking
any part of it upon desperate adventures of morality.
whether desperate or not, however, the issue of the struggle in 
was what i have mentioned, and from this date the reader is to consider
me as a regular and confirmed opium-eater, of whom to ask whether on
any particular day he had or had not taken opium, would be to ask whether
his lungs had performed respiration, or the heart fulfilled its functions.
you understand now, reader, what i am, and you are by this time aware
that no old gentleman “with a snow-white beard” will have
any chance of persuading me to surrender “the little golden receptacle
of the pernicious drug.” no; i give notice to all, whether
moralists or surgeons, that whatever be their pretensions and skill
in their respective lines of practice, they must not hope for any countenance
from me, if they think to begin by any savage proposition for a lent
or a ramadan of abstinence from opium. this, then, being all fully
understood between us, we shall in future sail before the wind.
now then, reader, from , where all this time we have been sitting
down and loitering, rise up, if you please, and walk forward about three
years more. now draw up the curtain, and you shall see me in a
new character.
if any man, poor or rich, were to say that he would tell us what
had been the happiest day in his life, and the why and the wherefore,
i suppose that we should all cry out—hear him! hear him!
as to the happiest day, that must be very difficult for any wise
man to name, because any event that could occupy so distinguished a
place in a man’s retrospect of his life, or be entitled to have
shed a special felicity on any one day, ought to be of such an enduring
character as that (accidents apart) it should have continued to shed
the same felicity, or one not distinguishably less, on many years together.
to the happiest lustrum, however, or even to the happiest year,
it may be allowed to any man to point without discountenance from wisdom.
this year, in my case, reader, was the one which we have now reached;
though it stood, i confess, as a parenthesis between years of a gloomier
character. it was a year of brilliant water (to speak after the
manner of jewellers), set as it were, and insulated, in the gloom and
cloudy melancholy of opium. strange as it may sound, i had a little
before this time descended suddenly, and without any considerable effort,
from  grains of opium (i.e. eight {}
thousand drops of laudanum) per day, to forty grains, or one-eighth
part. instantaneously, and as if by magic, the cloud of profoundest
melancholy which rested upon my brain, like some black vapours that
i have seen roll away from the summits of mountains, drew off in one
day (νυχθημερον);
passed off with its murky banners as simultaneously as a ship that has
been stranded, and is floated off by a spring tide—
that moveth altogether, if it move at all.
now, then, i was again happy; i now took only  drops of laudanum
per day; and what was that? a latter spring had come to close
up the season of youth; my brain performed its functions as healthily
as ever before; i read kant again, and again i understood him, or fancied
that i did. again my feelings of pleasure expanded themselves
to all around me; and if any man from oxford or cambridge, or from neither,
had been announced to me in my unpretending cottage, i should have welcomed
him with as sumptuous a reception as so poor a man could offer.
whatever else was wanting to a wise man’s happiness, of laudanum
i would have given him as much as he wished, and in a golden cup.
and, by the way, now that i speak of giving laudanum away, i remember
about this time a little incident, which i mention because, trifling
as it was, the reader will soon meet it again in my dreams, which it
influenced more fearfully than could be imagined. one day a malay
knocked at my door. what business a malay could have to transact
amongst english mountains i cannot conjecture; but possibly he was on
his road to a seaport about forty miles distant.
the servant who opened the door to him was a young girl, born and
bred amongst the mountains, who had never seen an asiatic dress of any
sort; his turban therefore confounded her not a little; and as it turned
out that his attainments in english were exactly of the same extent
as hers in the malay, there seemed to be an impassable gulf fixed between
all communication of ideas, if either party had happened to possess
any. in this dilemma, the girl, recollecting the reputed learning
of her master (and doubtless giving me credit for a knowledge of all
the languages of the earth besides perhaps a few of the lunar ones),
came and gave me to understand that there was a sort of demon below,
whom she clearly imagined that my art could exorcise from the house.
i did not immediately go down, but when i did, the group which presented
itself, arranged as it was by accident, though not very elaborate, took
hold of my fancy and my eye in a way that none of the statuesque attitudes
exhibited in the ballets at the opera-house, though so ostentatiously
complex, had ever done. in a cottage kitchen, but panelled on
the wall with dark wood that from age and rubbing resembled oak, and
looking more like a rustic hall of entrance than a kitchen, stood the
malay—his turban and loose trousers of dingy white relieved upon
the dark panelling. he had placed himself nearer to the girl than
she seemed to relish, though her native spirit of mountain intrepidity
contended with the feeling of simple awe which her countenance expressed
as she gazed upon the tiger-cat before her. and a more striking
picture there could not be imagined than the beautiful english face
of the girl, and its exquisite fairness, together with her erect and
independent attitude, contrasted with the sallow and bilious skin of
the malay, enamelled or veneered with mahogany by marine air, his small,
fierce, restless eyes, thin lips, slavish gestures and adorations.
half-hidden by the ferocious-looking malay was a little child from a
neighbouring cottage who had crept in after him, and was now in the
act of reverting its head and gazing upwards at the turban and the fiery
eyes beneath it, whilst with one hand he caught at the dress of the
young woman for protection. my knowledge of the oriental tongues
is not remarkably extensive, being indeed confined to two words—the
arabic word for barley and the turkish for opium (madjoon), which i
have learned from anastasius; and as i had neither a malay dictionary
nor even adelung’s mithridates, which might have helped
me to a few words, i addressed him in some lines from the iliad, considering
that, of such languages as i possessed, greek, in point of longitude,
came geographically nearest to an oriental one. he worshipped
me in a most devout manner, and replied in what i suppose was malay.
in this way i saved my reputation with my neighbours, for the malay
had no means of betraying the secret. he lay down upon the floor
for about an hour, and then pursued his journey. on his departure
i presented him with a piece of opium. to him, as an orientalist,
i concluded that opium must be familiar; and the expression of his face
convinced me that it was. nevertheless, i was struck with some
little consternation when i saw him suddenly raise his hand to his mouth,
and, to use the schoolboy phrase, bolt the whole, divided into three
pieces, at one mouthful. the quantity was enough to kill three
dragoons and their horses, and i felt some alarm for the poor creature;
but what could be done? i had given him the opium in compassion
for his solitary life, on recollecting that if he had travelled on foot
from london it must be nearly three weeks since he could have exchanged
a thought with any human being. i could not think of violating
the laws of hospitality by having him seized and drenched with an emetic,
and thus frightening him into a notion that we were going to sacrifice
him to some english idol. no: there was clearly no help for it.
he took his leave, and for some days i felt anxious, but as i never
heard of any malay being found dead, i became convinced that he was
used {} to opium;
and that i must have done him the service i designed by giving him one
night of respite from the pains of wandering.
this incident i have digressed to mention, because this malay (partly
from the picturesque exhibition he assisted to frame, partly from the
anxiety i connected with his image for some days) fastened afterwards
upon my dreams, and brought other malays with him, worse than himself,
that ran “a-muck” {}
at me, and led me into a world of troubles. but to quit this episode,
and to return to my intercalary year of happiness. i have said
already, that on a subject so important to us all as happiness, we should
listen with pleasure to any man’s experience or experiments, even
though he were but a plough-boy, who cannot be supposed to have ploughed
very deep into such an intractable soil as that of human pains and pleasures,
or to have conducted his researches upon any very enlightened principles.
but i who have taken happiness both in a solid and liquid shape, both
boiled and unboiled, both east india and turkey—who have conducted
my experiments upon this interesting subject with a sort of galvanic
battery, and have, for the general benefit of the world, inoculated
myself, as it were, with the poison of  drops of laudanum per day
(just for the same reason as a french surgeon inoculated himself lately
with cancer, an english one twenty years ago with plague, and a third,
i know not of what nation, with hydrophobia), i (it will be admitted)
must surely know what happiness is, if anybody does. and therefore
i will here lay down an analysis of happiness; and as the most interesting
mode of communicating it, i will give it, not didactically, but wrapped
up and involved in a picture of one evening, as i spent every evening
during the intercalary year when laudanum, though taken daily, was to
me no more than the elixir of pleasure. this done, i shall quit
the subject of happiness altogether, and pass to a very different one—the
pains of opium.
let there be a cottage standing in a valley, eighteen miles from
any town—no spacious valley, but about two miles long by three-quarters
of a mile in average width; the benefit of which provision is that all
the family resident within its circuit will compose, as it were, one
larger household, personally familiar to your eye, and more or less
interesting to your affections. let the mountains be real mountains,
between , and , feet high, and the cottage a real cottage, not
(as a witty author has it) “a cottage with a double coach-house;”
let it be, in fact (for i must abide by the actual scene), a white cottage,
embowered with flowering shrubs, so chosen as to unfold a succession
of flowers upon the walls and clustering round the windows through all
the months of spring, summer, and autumn—beginning, in fact, with
may roses, and ending with jasmine. let it, however, not
be spring, nor summer, nor autumn, but winter in his sternest shape.
this is a most important point in the science of happiness. and
i am surprised to see people overlook it, and think it matter of congratulation
that winter is going, or, if coming, is not likely to be a severe one.
on the contrary, i put up a petition annually for as much snow, hail,
frost, or storm, of one kind or other, as the skies can possibly afford
us. surely everybody is aware of the divine pleasures which attend
a winter fireside, candles at four o’clock, warm hearth-rugs,
tea, a fair tea-maker, shutters closed, curtains flowing in ample draperies
on the floor, whilst the wind and rain are raging audibly without,
and at the doors and windows seem to call,
as heav’n and earth they would together mell;
yet the least entrance find they none at all;
whence sweeter grows our rest secure in massy hall.
castle of indolence.
all these are items in the description of a winter evening which
must surely be familiar to everybody born in a high latitude.
and it is evident that most of these delicacies, like ice-cream, require
a very low temperature of the atmosphere to produce them; they are fruits
which cannot be ripened without weather stormy or inclement in some
way or other. i am not “particular,” as people
say, whether it be snow, or black frost, or wind so strong that (as
mr. --- says) “you may lean your back against it like a post.”
i can put up even with rain, provided it rains cats and dogs; but something
of the sort i must have, and if i have it not, i think myself in a manner
ill-used; for why am i called on to pay so heavily for winter, in coals
and candles, and various privations that will occur even to gentlemen,
if i am not to have the article good of its kind? no, a canadian
winter for my money, or a russian one, where every man is but a co-proprietor
with the north wind in the fee-simple of his own ears. indeed,
so great an epicure am i in this matter that i cannot relish a winter
night fully if it be much past st. thomas’s day, and have degenerated
into disgusting tendencies to vernal appearances. no, it must
be divided by a thick wall of dark nights from all return of light and
sunshine. from the latter weeks of october to christmas eve, therefore,
is the period during which happiness is in season, which, in my judgment,
enters the room with the tea-tray; for tea, though ridiculed by those
who are naturally of coarse nerves, or are become so from wine-drinking,
and are not susceptible of influence from so refined a stimulant, will
always be the favourite beverage of the intellectual; and, for my part,
i would have joined dr. johnson in a bellum internecinum against
jonas hanway, or any other impious person, who should presume to disparage
it. but here, to save myself the trouble of too much verbal description,
i will introduce a painter, and give him directions for the rest of
the picture. painters do not like white cottages, unless a good
deal weather-stained; but as the reader now understands that it is a
winter night, his services will not be required except for the inside
of the house.
paint me, then, a room seventeen feet by twelve, and not more than
seven and a half feet high. this, reader, is somewhat ambitiously
styled in my family the drawing-room; but being contrived “a double
debt to pay,” it is also, and more justly, termed the library,
for it happens that books are the only article of property in which
i am richer than my neighbours. of these i have about five thousand,
collected gradually since my eighteenth year. therefore, painter,
put as many as you can into this room. make it populous with books,
and, furthermore, paint me a good fire, and furniture plain and modest,
befitting the unpretending cottage of a scholar. and near the
fire paint me a tea-table, and (as it is clear that no creature can
come to see one such a stormy night) place only two cups and saucers
on the tea-tray; and, if you know how to paint such a thing symbolically
or otherwise, paint me an eternal tea-pot—eternal à
parte ante and à parte post—for i usually drink
tea from eight o’clock at night to four o’clock in the morning.
and as it is very unpleasant to make tea or to pour it out for oneself,
paint me a lovely young woman sitting at the table. paint her
arms like aurora’s and her smiles like hebe’s. but
no, dear m., not even in jest let me insinuate that thy power to illuminate
my cottage rests upon a tenure so perishable as mere personal beauty,
or that the witchcraft of angelic smiles lies within the empire of any
earthly pencil. pass then, my good painter, to something more
within its power; and the next article brought forward should naturally
be myself—a picture of the opium-eater, with his “little
golden receptacle of the pernicious drug” lying beside him on
the table. as to the opium, i have no objection to see a picture
of that, though i would rather see the original. you may
paint it if you choose, but i apprise you that no “little”
receptacle would, even in , answer my purpose, who was at
a distance from the “stately pantheon,” and all druggists
(mortal or otherwise). no, you may as well paint the real receptacle,
which was not of gold, but of glass, and as much like a wine-decanter
as possible. into this you may put a quart of ruby-coloured laudanum;
that, and a book of german metaphysics placed by its side, will sufficiently
attest my being in the neighbourhood. but as to myself—there
i demur. i admit that, naturally, i ought to occupy the foreground
of the picture; that being the hero of the piece, or (if you choose)
the criminal at the bar, my body should be had into court. this
seems reasonable; but why should i confess on this point to a painter?
or why confess at all? if the public (into whose private ear i
am confidentially whispering my confessions, and not into any painter’s)
should chance to have framed some agreeable picture for itself of the
opium-eater’s exterior, should have ascribed to him, romantically
an elegant person or a handsome face, why should i barbarously tear
from it so pleasing a delusion—pleasing both to the public and
to me? no; paint me, if at all, according to your own fancy, and
as a painter’s fancy should teem with beautiful creations, i cannot
fail in that way to be a gainer. and now, reader, we have run
through all the ten categories of my condition as it stood about -,
up to the middle of which latter year i judge myself to have been a
happy man, and the elements of that happiness i have endeavoured to
place before you in the above sketch of the interior of a scholar’s
library, in a cottage among the mountains, on a stormy winter evening.
but now, farewell—a long farewell—to happiness, winter
or summer! farewell to smiles and laughter! farewell to
peace of mind! farewell to hope and to tranquil dreams, and to
the blessed consolations of sleep. for more than three years and
a half i am summoned away from these. i am now arrived at an iliad
of woes, for i have now to record
as when some great painter dips
his pencil in the gloom of earthquake and eclipse.
shelley’s revolt of islam.
reader, who have thus far accompanied me, i must request your attention
to a brief explanatory note on three points:
. for several reasons i have not been able to compose the
notes for this part of my narrative into any regular and connected shape.
i give the notes disjointed as i find them, or have now drawn them up
from memory. some of them point to their own date, some i have
dated, and some are undated. whenever it could answer my purpose
to transplant them from the natural or chronological order, i have not
scrupled to do so. sometimes i speak in the present, sometimes
in the past tense. few of the notes, perhaps, were written exactly
at the period of time to which they relate; but this can little affect
their accuracy, as the impressions were such that they can never fade
from my mind. much has been omitted. i could not, without
effort, constrain myself to the task of either recalling, or constructing
into a regular narrative, the whole burthen of horrors which lies upon
my brain. this feeling partly i plead in excuse, and partly that
i am now in london, and am a helpless sort of person, who cannot even
arrange his own papers without assistance; and i am separated from the
hands which are wont to perform for me the offices of an amanuensis.
. you will think perhaps that i am too confidential and communicative
of my own private history. it may be so. but my way of writing
is rather to think aloud, and follow my own humours, than much to consider
who is listening to me; and if i stop to consider what is proper to
be said to this or that person, i shall soon come to doubt whether any
part at all is proper. the fact is, i place myself at a distance
of fifteen or twenty years ahead of this time, and suppose myself writing
to those who will be interested about me hereafter; and wishing to have
some record of time, the entire history of which no one can know but
myself, i do it as fully as i am able with the efforts i am now capable
of making, because i know not whether i can ever find time to do it
again.
. it will occur to you often to ask, why did i not release
myself from the horrors of opium by leaving it off or diminishing it?
to this i must answer briefly: it might be supposed that i yielded to
the fascinations of opium too easily; it cannot be supposed that any
man can be charmed by its terrors. the reader may be sure, therefore,
that i made attempts innumerable to reduce the quantity. i add,
that those who witnessed the agonies of those attempts, and not myself,
were the first to beg me to desist. but could not have i reduced
it a drop a day, or, by adding water, have bisected or trisected a drop?
a thousand drops bisected would thus have taken nearly six years to
reduce, and that way would certainly not have answered. but this
is a common mistake of those who know nothing of opium experimentally;
i appeal to those who do, whether it is not always found that down to
a certain point it can be reduced with ease and even pleasure, but that
after that point further reduction causes intense suffering. yes,
say many thoughtless persons, who know not what they are talking of,
you will suffer a little low spirits and dejection for a few days.
i answer, no; there is nothing like low spirits; on the contrary, the
mere animal spirits are uncommonly raised: the pulse is improved: the
health is better. it is not there that the suffering lies.
it has no resemblance to the sufferings caused by renouncing wine.
it is a state of unutterable irritation of stomach (which surely is
not much like dejection), accompanied by intense perspirations, and
feelings such as i shall not attempt to describe without more space
at my command.
i shall now enter in medias res, and shall anticipate, from
a time when my opium pains might be said to be at their acmé,
an account of their palsying effects on the intellectual faculties.
my studies have now been long interrupted. i cannot read to
myself with any pleasure, hardly with a moment’s endurance.
yet i read aloud sometimes for the pleasure of others, because reading
is an accomplishment of mine, and, in the slang use of the word “accomplishment”
as a superficial and ornamental attainment, almost the only one i possess;
and formerly, if i had any vanity at all connected with any endowment
or attainment of mine, it was with this, for i had observed that no
accomplishment was so rare. players are the worst readers of all:—reads
vilely; and mrs. ---, who is so celebrated, can read nothing well but
dramatic compositions: milton she cannot read sufferably. people
in general either read poetry without any passion at all, or else overstep
the modesty of nature, and read not like scholars. of late, if
i have felt moved by anything it has been by the grand lamentations
of samson agonistes, or the great harmonies of the satanic speeches
in paradise regained, when read aloud by myself. a young lady
sometimes comes and drinks tea with us: at her request and m.’s,
i now and then read w-’s poems to them. (w., by-the-bye
is the only poet i ever met who could read his own verses: often indeed
he reads admirably.)
for nearly two years i believe that i read no book, but one; and
i owe it to the author, in discharge of a great debt of gratitude, to
mention what that was. the sublimer and more passionate poets
i still read, as i have said, by snatches, and occasionally. but
my proper vocation, as i well know, was the exercise of the analytic
understanding. now, for the most part analytic studies are continuous,
and not to be pursued by fits and starts, or fragmentary efforts.
mathematics, for instance, intellectual philosophy, &c, were all
become insupportable to me; i shrunk from them with a sense of powerless
and infantine feebleness that gave me an anguish the greater from remembering
the time when i grappled with them to my own hourly delight; and for
this further reason, because i had devoted the labour of my whole life,
and had dedicated my intellect, blossoms and fruits, to the slow and
elaborate toil of constructing one single work, to which i had presumed
to give the title of an unfinished work of spinosa’s—viz.,
de emendatione humani intellectus. this was now lying locked
up, as by frost, like any spanish bridge or aqueduct, begun upon too
great a scale for the resources of the architect; and instead of reviving
me as a monument of wishes at least, and aspirations, and a life of
labour dedicated to the exaltation of human nature in that way in which
god had best fitted me to promote so great an object, it was likely
to stand a memorial to my children of hopes defeated, of baffled efforts,
of materials uselessly accumulated, of foundations laid that were never
to support a super-structure—of the grief and the ruin of the
architect. in this state of imbecility i had, for amusement, turned
my attention to political economy; my understanding, which formerly
had been as active and restless as a hyæna, could not, i suppose
(so long as i lived at all) sink into utter lethargy; and political
economy offers this advantage to a person in my state, that though it
is eminently an organic science (no part, that is to say, but what acts
on the whole as the whole again reacts on each part), yet the several
parts may be detached and contemplated singly. great as was the
prostration of my powers at this time, yet i could not forget my knowledge;
and my understanding had been for too many years intimate with severe
thinkers, with logic, and the great masters of knowledge, not to be
aware of the utter feebleness of the main herd of modern economists.
i had been led in  to look into loads of books and pamphlets on
many branches of economy; and, at my desire, m. sometimes read to me
chapters from more recent works, or parts of parliamentary debates.
i saw that these were generally the very dregs and rinsings of the human
intellect; and that any man of sound head, and practised in wielding
logic with a scholastic adroitness, might take up the whole academy
of modern economists, and throttle them between heaven and earth with
his finger and thumb, or bray their fungus-heads to powder with a lady’s
fan. at length, in , a friend in edinburgh sent me down mr.
ricardo’s book; and recurring to my own prophetic anticipation
of the advent of some legislator for this science, i said, before i
had finished the first chapter, “thou art the man!”
wonder and curiosity were emotions that had long been dead in me.
yet i wondered once more: i wondered at myself that i could once again
be stimulated to the effort of reading, and much more i wondered at
the book. had this profound work been really written in england
during the nineteenth century? was it possible? i supposed
thinking {} had
been extinct in england. could it be that an englishman, and he
not in academic bowers, but oppressed by mercantile and senatorial cares,
had accomplished what all the universities of europe and a century of
thought had failed even to advance by one hair’s breadth?
all other writers had been crushed and overlaid by the enormous weight
of facts and documents. mr. ricardo had deduced à priori
from the understanding itself laws which first gave a ray of light into
the unwieldy chaos of materials, and had constructed what had been but
a collection of tentative discussions into a science of regular proportions,
now first standing on an eternal basis.
thus did one single work of a profound understanding avail to give
me a pleasure and an activity which i had not known for years.
it roused me even to write, or at least to dictate what m. wrote for
me. it seemed to me that some important truths had escaped even
“the inevitable eye” of mr. ricardo; and as these were for
the most part of such a nature that i could express or illustrate them
more briefly and elegantly by algebraic symbols than in the usual clumsy
and loitering diction of economists, the whole would not have filled
a pocket-book; and being so brief, with m. for my amanuensis, even at
this time, incapable as i was of all general exertion, i drew up my
prolegomena to all future systems of political economy.
i hope it will not be found redolent of opium; though, indeed, to most
people the subject is a sufficient opiate.
this exertion, however, was but a temporary flash, as the sequel
showed; for i designed to publish my work. arrangements were made
at a provincial press, about eighteen miles distant, for printing it.
an additional compositor was retained for some days on this account.
the work was even twice advertised, and i was in a manner pledged to
the fulfilment of my intention. but i had a preface to write,
and a dedication, which i wished to make a splendid one, to mr. ricardo.
i found myself quite unable to accomplish all this. the arrangements
were countermanded, the compositor dismissed, and my “prolegomena”
rested peacefully by the side of its elder and more dignified brother.
i have thus described and illustrated my intellectual torpor in terms
that apply more or less to every part of the four years during which
i was under the circean spells of opium. but for misery and suffering,
i might indeed be said to have existed in a dormant state. i seldom
could prevail on myself to write a letter; an answer of a few words
to any that i received was the utmost that i could accomplish, and often
that not until the letter had lain weeks or even months on my
writing-table. without the aid of m. all records of bills paid
or to be paid must have perished, and my whole domestic economy,
whatever became of political economy, must have gone into irretrievable
confusion. i shall not afterwards allude to this part of the case.
it is one, however, which the opium-eater will find, in the end, as
oppressive and tormenting as any other, from the sense of incapacity
and feebleness, from the direct embarrassments incident to the neglect
or procrastination of each day’s appropriate duties, and from
the remorse which must often exasperate the stings of these evils to
a reflective and conscientious mind. the opium-eater loses none
of his moral sensibilities or aspirations. he wishes and longs
as earnestly as ever to realize what he believes possible, and feels
to be exacted by duty; but his intellectual apprehension of what is
possible infinitely outruns his power, not of execution only, but even
of power to attempt. he lies under the weight of incubus and nightmare;
he lies in sight of all that he would fain perform, just as a man forcibly
confined to his bed by the mortal languor of a relaxing disease, who
is compelled to witness injury or outrage offered to some object of
his tenderest love: he curses the spells which chain him down from motion;
he would lay down his life if he might but get up and walk; but he is
powerless as an infant, and cannot even attempt to rise.
i now pass to what is the main subject of these latter confessions,
to the history and journal of what took place in my dreams, for these
were the immediate and proximate cause of my acutest suffering.
the first notice i had of any important change going on in this part
of my physical economy was from the reawakening of a state of eye generally
incident to childhood, or exalted states of irritability. i know
not whether my reader is aware that many children, perhaps most, have
a power of painting, as it were upon the darkness, all sorts of phantoms.
in some that power is simply a mechanical affection of the eye; others
have a voluntary or semi-voluntary power to dismiss or to summon them;
or, as a child once said to me when i questioned him on this matter,
“i can tell them to go, and they go ---, but sometimes they come
when i don’t tell them to come.” whereupon i told
him that he had almost as unlimited a command over apparitions as a
roman centurion over his soldiers.—in the middle of , i think
it was, that this faculty became positively distressing to me: at night,
when i lay awake in bed, vast processions passed along in mournful pomp;
friezes of never-ending stories, that to my feelings were as sad and
solemn as if they were stories drawn from times before œdipus
or priam, before tyre, before memphis. and at the same time a
corresponding change took place in my dreams; a theatre seemed suddenly
opened and lighted up within my brain, which presented nightly spectacles
of more than earthly splendour. and the four following facts may
be mentioned as noticeable at this time:
. that as the creative state of the eye increased, a sympathy
seemed to arise between the waking and the dreaming states of the brain
in one point—that whatsoever i happened to call up and to trace
by a voluntary act upon the darkness was very apt to transfer itself
to my dreams, so that i feared to exercise this faculty; for, as midas
turned all things to gold that yet baffled his hopes and defrauded his
human desires, so whatsoever things capable of being visually represented
i did but think of in the darkness, immediately shaped themselves into
phantoms of the eye; and by a process apparently no less inevitable,
when thus once traced in faint and visionary colours, like writings
in sympathetic ink, they were drawn out by the fierce chemistry of my
dreams into insufferable splendour that fretted my heart.
. for this and all other changes in my dreams were accompanied
by deep-seated anxiety and gloomy melancholy, such as are wholly incommunicable
by words. i seemed every night to descend, not metaphorically,
but literally to descend, into chasms and sunless abysses, depths below
depths, from which it seemed hopeless that i could ever reascend.
nor did i, by waking, feel that i had reascended. this
i do not dwell upon; because the state of gloom which attended these
gorgeous spectacles, amounting at last to utter darkness, as of some
suicidal despondency, cannot be approached by words.
. the sense of space, and in the end the sense of time, were
both powerfully affected. buildings, landscapes, &c., were
exhibited in proportions so vast as the bodily eye is not fitted to
receive. space swelled, and was amplified to an extent of unutterable
infinity. this, however, did not disturb me so much as the vast
expansion of time; i sometimes seemed to have lived for  or  years
in one night—nay, sometimes had feelings representative of a millennium
passed in that time, or, however, of a duration far beyond the limits
of any human experience.
. the minutest incidents of childhood, or forgotten scenes
of later years, were often revived: i could not be said to recollect
them, for if i had been told of them when waking, i should not have
been able to acknowledge them as parts of my past experience.
but placed as they were before me, in dreams like intuitions, and clothed
in all their evanescent circumstances and accompanying feelings, i recognised
them instantaneously. i was once told by a near relative of mine,
that having in her childhood fallen into a river, and being on the very
verge of death but for the critical assistance which reached her, she
saw in a moment her whole life, in its minutest incidents, arrayed before
her simultaneously as in a mirror; and she had a faculty developed as
suddenly for comprehending the whole and every part. this, from
some opium experiences of mine, i can believe; i have indeed seen the
same thing asserted twice in modern books, and accompanied by a remark
which i am convinced is true; viz., that the dread book of account which
the scriptures speak of is in fact the mind itself of each individual.
of this at least i feel assured, that there is no such thing as forgetting
possible to the mind; a thousand accidents may and will interpose a
veil between our present consciousness and the secret inscriptions on
the mind; accidents of the same sort will also rend away this veil;
but alike, whether veiled or unveiled, the inscription remains for ever,
just as the stars seem to withdraw before the common light of day, whereas
in fact we all know that it is the light which is drawn over them as
a veil, and that they are waiting to be revealed when the obscuring
daylight shall have withdrawn.
having noticed these four facts as memorably distinguishing my dreams
from those of health, i shall now cite a case illustrative of the first
fact, and shall then cite any others that i remember, either in their
chronological order, or any other that may give them more effect as
pictures to the reader.
i had been in youth, and even since, for occasional amusement, a
great reader of livy, whom i confess that i prefer, both for style and
matter, to any other of the roman historians; and i had often felt as
most solemn and appalling sounds, and most emphatically representative
of the majesty of the roman people, the two words so often occurring
in livy—consul romanus, especially when the consul is introduced
in his military character. i mean to say that the words king,
sultan, regent, &c., or any other titles of those who embody in
their own persons the collective majesty of a great people, had less
power over my reverential feelings. i had also, though no great
reader of history, made myself minutely and critically familiar with
one period of english history, viz., the period of the parliamentary
war, having been attracted by the moral grandeur of some who figured
in that day, and by the many interesting memoirs which survive those
unquiet times. both these parts of my lighter reading, having
furnished me often with matter of reflection, now furnished me with
matter for my dreams. often i used to see, after painting upon
the blank darkness a sort of rehearsal whilst waking, a crowd of ladies,
and perhaps a festival and dances. and i heard it said, or i said
to myself, “these are english ladies from the unhappy times of
charles i. these are the wives and the daughters of those who
met in peace, and sate at the same table, and were allied by marriage
or by blood; and yet, after a certain day in august , never smiled
upon each other again, nor met but in the field of battle; and at marston
moor, at newbury, or at naseby, cut asunder all ties of love by the
cruel sabre, and washed away in blood the memory of ancient friendship.”
the ladies danced, and looked as lovely as the court of george iv.
yet i knew, even in my dream, that they had been in the grave for nearly
two centuries. this pageant would suddenly dissolve; and at a
clapping of hands would be heard the heart-quaking sound of consul
romanus; and immediately came “sweeping by,” in gorgeous
paludaments, paulus or marius, girt round by a company of centurions,
with the crimson tunic hoisted on a spear, and followed by the alalagmos
of the roman legions.
many years ago, when i was looking over piranesi’s, antiquities
of rome, mr. coleridge, who was standing by, described to me a set of
plates by that artist, called his dreams, and which record the
scenery of his own visions during the delirium of a fever. some
of them (i describe only from memory of mr. coleridge’s account)
represented vast gothic halls, on the floor of which stood all sorts
of engines and machinery, wheels, cables, pulleys, levers, catapults,
&c. &c., expressive of enormous power put forth and resistance
overcome. creeping along the sides of the walls you perceived
a staircase; and upon it, groping his way upwards, was piranesi himself:
follow the stairs a little further and you perceive it come to a sudden
and abrupt termination without any balustrade, and allowing no step
onwards to him who had reached the extremity except into the depths
below. whatever is to become of poor piranesi, you suppose at
least that his labours must in some way terminate here. but raise
your eyes, and behold a second flight of stairs still higher, on which
again piranesi is perceived, but this time standing on the very brink
of the abyss. again elevate your eye, and a still more aërial
flight of stairs is beheld, and again is poor piranesi busy on his aspiring
labours; and so on, until the unfinished stairs and piranesi both are
lost in the upper gloom of the hall. with the same power of endless
growth and self-reproduction did my architecture proceed in dreams.
in the early stage of my malady the splendours of my dreams were indeed
chiefly architectural; and i beheld such pomp of cities and palaces
as was never yet beheld by the waking eye unless in the clouds.
from a great modern poet i cite part of a passage which describes, as
an appearance actually beheld in the clouds, what in many of its circumstances
i saw frequently in sleep:
the appearance, instantaneously disclosed,
was of a mighty city—boldly say
a wilderness of building, sinking far
and self-withdrawn into a wondrous depth,
far sinking into splendour—without end!
fabric it seem’d of diamond, and of gold,
with alabaster domes, and silver spires,
and blazing terrace upon terrace, high
uplifted; here, serene pavilions bright
in avenues disposed; there towers begirt
with battlements that on their restless fronts
bore stars—illumination of all gems!
by earthly nature had the effect been wrought
upon the dark materials of the storm
now pacified; on them, and on the coves,
and mountain-steeps and summits, whereunto
the vapours had receded,—taking there
their station under a cerulean sky. &c. &c.
the sublime circumstance, “battlements that on their restless
fronts bore stars,” might have been copied from my architectural
dreams, for it often occurred. we hear it reported of dryden and
of fuseli, in modern times, that they thought proper to eat raw meat
for the sake of obtaining splendid dreams: how much better for such
a purpose to have eaten opium, which yet i do not remember that any
poet is recorded to have done, except the dramatist shadwell; and in
ancient days homer is i think rightly reputed to have known the virtues
of opium.
to my architecture succeeded dreams of lakes and silvery expanses
of water: these haunted me so much that i feared (though possibly it
will appear ludicrous to a medical man) that some dropsical state or
tendency of the brain might thus be making itself (to use a metaphysical
word) objective; and the sentient organ project itself
as its own object. for two months i suffered greatly in my head,
a part of my bodily structure which had hitherto been so clear from
all touch or taint of weakness (physically i mean) that i used to say
of it, as the last lord orford said of his stomach, that it seemed likely
to survive the rest of my person. till now i had never felt a
headache even, or any the slightest pain, except rheumatic pains caused
by my own folly. however, i got over this attack, though it must
have been verging on something very dangerous.
the waters now changed their character—from translucent lakes
shining like mirrors they now became seas and oceans. and now
came a tremendous change, which, unfolding itself slowly like a scroll
through many months, promised an abiding torment; and in fact it never
left me until the winding up of my case. hitherto the human face
had mixed often in my dreams, but not despotically nor with any special
power of tormenting. but now that which i have called the tyranny
of the human face began to unfold itself. perhaps some part of
my london life might be answerable for this. be that as it may,
now it was that upon the rocking waters of the ocean the human face
began to appear; the sea appeared paved with innumerable faces upturned
to the heavens—faces imploring, wrathful, despairing, surged upwards
by thousands, by myriads, by generations, by centuries: my agitation
was infinite; my mind tossed and surged with the ocean.
may 
the malay has been a fearful enemy for months. i have been
every night, through his means, transported into asiatic scenes.
i know not whether others share in my feelings on this point; but i
have often thought that if i were compelled to forego england, and to
live in china, and among chinese manners and modes of life and scenery,
i should go mad. the causes of my horror lie deep, and some of
them must be common to others. southern asia in general is the
seat of awful images and associations. as the cradle of the human
race, it would alone have a dim and reverential feeling connected with
it. but there are other reasons. no man can pretend that
the wild, barbarous, and capricious superstitions of africa, or of savage
tribes elsewhere, affect him in the way that he is affected by the ancient,
monumental, cruel, and elaborate religions of indostan, &c.
the mere antiquity of asiatic things, of their institutions, histories,
modes of faith, &c., is so impressive, that to me the vast age of
the race and name overpowers the sense of youth in the individual.
a young chinese seems to me an antediluvian man renewed. even
englishmen, though not bred in any knowledge of such institutions, cannot
but shudder at the mystic sublimity of castes that have flowed
apart, and refused to mix, through such immemorial tracts of time; nor
can any man fail to be awed by the names of the ganges or the euphrates.
it contributes much to these feelings that southern asia is, and has
been for thousands of years, the part of the earth most swarming with
human life, the great officina gentium. man is a weed in
those regions. the vast empires also in which the enormous population
of asia has always been cast, give a further sublimity to the feelings
associated with all oriental names or images. in china, over and
above what it has in common with the rest of southern asia, i am terrified
by the modes of life, by the manners, and the barrier of utter abhorrence
and want of sympathy placed between us by feelings deeper than i can
analyse. i could sooner live with lunatics or brute animals.
all this, and much more than i can say or have time to say, the reader
must enter into before he can comprehend the unimaginable horror which
these dreams of oriental imagery and mythological tortures impressed
upon me. under the connecting feeling of tropical heat and vertical
sunlights i brought together all creatures, birds, beasts, reptiles,
all trees and plants, usages and appearances, that are found in all
tropical regions, and assembled them together in china or indostan.
from kindred feelings, i soon brought egypt and all her gods under the
same law. i was stared at, hooted at, grinned at, chattered at,
by monkeys, by parroquets, by cockatoos. i ran into pagodas, and
was fixed for centuries at the summit or in secret rooms: i was the
idol; i was the priest; i was worshipped; i was sacrificed. i
fled from the wrath of brama through all the forests of asia: vishnu
hated me: seeva laid wait for me. i came suddenly upon isis and
osiris: i had done a deed, they said, which the ibis and the crocodile
trembled at. i was buried for a thousand years in stone coffins,
with mummies and sphynxes, in narrow chambers at the heart of eternal
pyramids. i was kissed, with cancerous kisses, by crocodiles;
and laid, confounded with all unutterable slimy things, amongst reeds
and nilotic mud.
i thus give the reader some slight abstraction of my oriental dreams,
which always filled me with such amazement at the monstrous scenery
that horror seemed absorbed for a while in sheer astonishment.
sooner or later came a reflux of feeling that swallowed up the astonishment,
and left me not so much in terror as in hatred and abomination of what
i saw. over every form, and threat, and punishment, and dim sightless
incarceration, brooded a sense of eternity and infinity that drove me
into an oppression as of madness. into these dreams only it was,
with one or two slight exceptions, that any circumstances of physical
horror entered. all before had been moral and spiritual terrors.
but here the main agents were ugly birds, or snakes, or crocodiles;
especially the last. the cursed crocodile became to me the object
of more horror than almost all the rest. i was compelled to live
with him, and (as was always the case almost in my dreams) for centuries.
i escaped sometimes, and found myself in chinese houses, with cane tables,
&c. all the feet of the tables, sofas, &c., soon became
instinct with life: the abominable head of the crocodile, and his leering
eyes, looked out at me, multiplied into a thousand repetitions; and
i stood loathing and fascinated. and so often did this hideous
reptile haunt my dreams that many times the very same dream was broken
up in the very same way: i heard gentle voices speaking to me (i hear
everything when i am sleeping), and instantly i awoke. it was
broad noon, and my children were standing, hand in hand, at my bedside—come
to show me their coloured shoes, or new frocks, or to let me see them
dressed for going out. i protest that so awful was the transition
from the damned crocodile, and the other unutterable monsters and abortions
of my dreams, to the sight of innocent human natures and of infancy,
that in the mighty and sudden revulsion of mind i wept, and could not
forbear it, as i kissed their faces.
june 
i have had occasion to remark, at various periods of my life, that
the deaths of those whom we love, and indeed the contemplation of death
generally, is (cæteris paribus) more affecting in summer
than in any other season of the year. and the reasons are these
three, i think: first, that the visible heavens in summer appear far
higher, more distant, and (if such a solecism may be excused) more infinite;
the clouds, by which chiefly the eye expounds the distance of the blue
pavilion stretched over our heads, are in summer more voluminous, massed
and accumulated in far grander and more towering piles. secondly,
the light and the appearances of the declining and the setting sun are
much more fitted to be types and characters of the infinite. and
thirdly (which is the main reason), the exuberant and riotous prodigality
of life naturally forces the mind more powerfully upon the antagonist
thought of death, and the wintry sterility of the grave. for it
may be observed generally, that wherever two thoughts stand related
to each other by a law of antagonism, and exist, as it were, by mutual
repulsion, they are apt to suggest each other. on these accounts
it is that i find it impossible to banish the thought of death when
i am walking alone in the endless days of summer; and any particular
death, if not more affecting, at least haunts my mind more obstinately
and besiegingly in that season. perhaps this cause, and a slight
incident which i omit, might have been the immediate occasions of the
following dream, to which, however, a predisposition must always have
existed in my mind; but having been once roused it never left me, and
split into a thousand fantastic varieties, which often suddenly reunited,
and composed again the original dream.
i thought that it was a sunday morning in may, that it was easter
sunday, and as yet very early in the morning. i was standing,
as it seemed to me, at the door of my own cottage. right before
me lay the very scene which could really be commanded from that situation,
but exalted, as was usual, and solemnised by the power of dreams.
there were the same mountains, and the same lovely valley at their feet;
but the mountains were raised to more than alpine height, and there
was interspace far larger between them of meadows and forest lawns;
the hedges were rich with white roses; and no living creature was to
be seen, excepting that in the green churchyard there were cattle tranquilly
reposing upon the verdant graves, and particularly round about the grave
of a child whom i had tenderly loved, just as i had really beheld them,
a little before sunrise in the same summer, when that child died.
i gazed upon the well-known scene, and i said aloud (as i thought) to
myself, “it yet wants much of sunrise, and it is easter sunday;
and that is the day on which they celebrate the first fruits of resurrection.
i will walk abroad; old griefs shall be forgotten to-day; for the air
is cool and still, and the hills are high and stretch away to heaven;
and the forest glades are as quiet as the churchyard, and with the dew
i can wash the fever from my forehead, and then i shall be unhappy no
longer.” and i turned as if to open my garden gate, and
immediately i saw upon the left a scene far different, but which yet
the power of dreams had reconciled into harmony with the other.
the scene was an oriental one, and there also it was easter sunday,
and very early in the morning. and at a vast distance were visible,
as a stain upon the horizon, the domes and cupolas of a great city—an
image or faint abstraction, caught perhaps in childhood from some picture
of jerusalem. and not a bow-shot from me, upon a stone and shaded
by judean palms, there sat a woman, and i looked, and it was—ann!
she fixed her eyes upon me earnestly, and i said to her at length: “so,
then, i have found you at last.” i waited, but she answered
me not a word. her face was the same as when i saw it last, and
yet again how different! seventeen years ago, when the lamplight
fell upon her face, as for the last time i kissed her lips (lips, ann,
that to me were not polluted), her eyes were streaming with tears: the
tears were now wiped away; she seemed more beautiful than she was at
that time, but in all other points the same, and not older. her
looks were tranquil, but with unusual solemnity of expression, and i
now gazed upon her with some awe; but suddenly her countenance grew
dim, and turning to the mountains i perceived vapours rolling between
us. in a moment all had vanished, thick darkness came on, and
in the twinkling of an eye i was far away from mountains, and by lamplight
in oxford street, walking again with ann—just as we walked seventeen
years before, when we were both children.
as a final specimen, i cite one of a different character, from .
the dream commenced with a music which now i often heard in dreams—a
music of preparation and of awakening suspense, a music like the opening
of the coronation anthem, and which, like that, gave the feeling
of a vast march, of infinite cavalcades filing off, and the tread of
innumerable armies. the morning was come of a mighty day—a
day of crisis and of final hope for human nature, then suffering some
mysterious eclipse, and labouring in some dread extremity. somewhere,
i knew not where—somehow, i knew not how—by some beings,
i knew not whom—a battle, a strife, an agony, was conducting,
was evolving like a great drama or piece of music, with which my sympathy
was the more insupportable from my confusion as to its place, its cause,
its nature, and its possible issue. i, as is usual in dreams (where
of necessity we make ourselves central to every movement), had the power,
and yet had not the power, to decide it. i had the power, if i
could raise myself to will it, and yet again had not the power, for
the weight of twenty atlantics was upon me, or the oppression of inexpiable
guilt. “deeper than ever plummet sounded,” i lay inactive.
then like a chorus the passion deepened. some greater interest
was at stake, some mightier cause than ever yet the sword had pleaded,
or trumpet had proclaimed. then came sudden alarms, hurryings
to and fro, trepidations of innumerable fugitives—i knew not whether
from the good cause or the bad, darkness and lights, tempest and human
faces, and at last, with the sense that all was lost, female forms,
and the features that were worth all the world to me, and but a moment
allowed—and clasped hands, and heart-breaking partings, and then—everlasting
farewells! and with a sigh, such as the caves of hell sighed when
the incestuous mother uttered the abhorred name of death, the sound
was reverberated—everlasting farewells! and again and yet
again reverberated—everlasting farewells!
and i awoke in struggles, and cried aloud—“i will sleep
no more.”
but i am now called upon to wind up a narrative which has already
extended to an unreasonable length. within more spacious limits
the materials which i have used might have been better unfolded, and
much which i have not used might have been added with effect.
perhaps, however, enough has been given. it now remains that i
should say something of the way in which this conflict of horrors was
finally brought to a crisis. the reader is already aware (from
a passage near the beginning of the introduction to the first part)
that the opium-eater has, in some way or other, “unwound almost
to its final links the accursed chain which bound him.”
by what means? to have narrated this according to the original
intention would have far exceeded the space which can now be allowed.
it is fortunate, as such a cogent reason exists for abridging it, that
i should, on a maturer view of the case, have been exceedingly unwilling
to injure, by any such unaffecting details, the impression of the history
itself, as an appeal to the prudence and the conscience of the yet unconfirmed
opium-eater—or even (though a very inferior consideration) to
injure its effect as a composition. the interest of the judicious
reader will not attach itself chiefly to the subject of the fascinating
spells, but to the fascinating power. not the opium-eater, but
the opium, is the true hero of the tale, and the legitimate centre on
which the interest revolves. the object was to display the marvellous
agency of opium, whether for pleasure or for pain: if that is done,
the action of the piece has closed.
however, as some people, in spite of all laws to the contrary, will
persist in asking what became of the opium-eater, and in what state
he now is, i answer for him thus: the reader is aware that opium had
long ceased to found its empire on spells of pleasure; it was solely
by the tortures connected with the attempt to abjure it that it kept
its hold. yet, as other tortures, no less it may be thought, attended
the non-abjuration of such a tyrant, a choice only of evils was left;
and that might as well have been adopted which, however terrific
in itself, held out a prospect of final restoration to happiness.
this appears true; but good logic gave the author no strength to act
upon it. however, a crisis arrived for the author’s life,
and a crisis for other objects still dearer to him—and which will
always be far dearer to him than his life, even now that it is again
a happy one. i saw that i must die if i continued the opium.
i determined, therefore, if that should be required, to die in throwing
it off. how much i was at that time taking i cannot say, for the
opium which i used had been purchased for me by a friend, who afterwards
refused to let me pay him; so that i could not ascertain even what quantity
i had used within the year. i apprehend, however, that i took
it very irregularly, and that i varied from about fifty or sixty grains
to  a day. my first task was to reduce it to forty, to thirty,
and as fast as i could to twelve grains.
i triumphed. but think not, reader, that therefore my sufferings
were ended, nor think of me as of one sitting in a dejected state.
think of me as one, even when four months had passed, still agitated,
writhing, throbbing, palpitating, shattered, and much perhaps in the
situation of him who has been racked, as i collect the torments of that
state from the affecting account of them left by a most innocent sufferer
{} of the times
of james i. meantime, i derived no benefit from any medicine,
except one prescribed to me by an edinburgh surgeon of great eminence,
viz., ammoniated tincture of valerian. medical account, therefore,
of my emancipation i have not much to give, and even that little, as
managed by a man so ignorant of medicine as myself, would probably tend
only to mislead. at all events, it would be misplaced in this
situation. the moral of the narrative is addressed to the opium-eater,
and therefore of necessity limited in its application. if he is
taught to fear and tremble, enough has been effected. but he may
say that the issue of my case is at least a proof that opium, after
a seventeen years’ use and an eight years’ abuse of its
powers, may still be renounced, and that he may chance to bring
to the task greater energy than i did, or that with a stronger constitution
than mine he may obtain the same results with less. this may be
true. i would not presume to measure the efforts of other men
by my own. i heartily wish him more energy. i wish him the
same success. nevertheless, i had motives external to myself which
he may unfortunately want, and these supplied me with conscientious
supports which mere personal interests might fail to supply to a mind
debilitated by opium.
jeremy taylor conjectures that it may be as painful to be born as
to die. i think it probable; and during the whole period of diminishing
the opium i had the torments of a man passing out of one mode of existence
into another. the issue was not death, but a sort of physical
regeneration; and i may add that ever since, at intervals, i have had
a restoration of more than youthful spirits, though under the pressure
of difficulties which in a less happy state of mind i should have called
misfortunes.
one memorial of my former condition still remains—my dreams
are not yet perfectly calm; the dread swell and agitation of the storm
have not wholly subsided; the legions that encamped in them are drawing
off, but not all departed; my sleep is still tumultuous, and, like the
gates of paradise to our first parents when looking back from afar,
it is still (in the tremendous line of milton)
with dreadful faces throng’d, and fiery arms.
from the “london magazine” for december .
the interest excited by the two papers bearing this title, in our
numbers for september and october , will have kept our promise of
a third part fresh in the remembrance of our readers. that we
are still unable to fulfil our engagement in its original meaning will,
we, are sure, be matter of regret to them as to ourselves, especially
when they have perused the following affecting narrative. it was
composed for the purpose of being appended to an edition of the confessions
in a separate volume, which is already before the public, and we have
reprinted it entire, that our subscribers may be in possession of the
whole of this extraordinary history.
the proprietors of this little work having determined on reprinting
it, some explanation seems called for, to account for the non-appearance
of a third part promised in the london magazine of december last;
and the more so because the proprietors, under whose guarantee that
promise was issued, might otherwise be implicated in the blame—little
or much—attached to its non-fulfilment. this blame, in mere
justice, the author takes wholly upon himself. what may be the
exact amount of the guilt which he thus appropriates is a very dark
question to his own judgment, and not much illuminated by any of the
masters in casuistry whom he has consulted on the occasion. on
the one hand it seems generally agreed that a promise is binding in
the inverse ratio of the numbers to whom it is made; for which reason
it is that we see many persons break promises without scruple that are
made to a whole nation, who keep their faith religiously in all private
engagements, breaches of promise towards the stronger party being committed
at a man’s own peril; on the other hand, the only parties interested
in the promises of an author are his readers, and these it is a point
of modesty in any author to believe as few as possible—or perhaps
only one, in which case any promise imposes a sanctity of moral obligation
which it is shocking to think of. casuistry dismissed, however,
the author throws himself on the indulgent consideration of all who
may conceive themselves aggrieved by his delay, in the following account
of his own condition from the end of last year, when the engagement
was made, up nearly to the present time. for any purpose of self-excuse
it might be sufficient to say that intolerable bodily suffering had
totally disabled him for almost any exertion of mind, more especially
for such as demands and presupposes a pleasurable and genial state of
feeling; but, as a case that may by possibility contribute a trifle
to the medical history of opium, in a further stage of its action than
can often have been brought under the notice of professional men, he
has judged that it might be acceptable to some readers to have it described
more at length. fiat experimentum in corpore vili is a
just rule where there is any reasonable presumption of benefit to arise
on a large scale. what the benefit may be will admit of a doubt,
but there can be none as to the value of the body; for a more worthless
body than his own the author is free to confess cannot be. it
is his pride to believe that it is the very ideal of a base, crazy,
despicable human system, that hardly ever could have been meant to be
seaworthy for two days under the ordinary storms and wear and tear of
life; and indeed, if that were the creditable way of disposing of human
bodies, he must own that he should almost be ashamed to bequeath his
wretched structure to any respectable dog. but now to the case,
which, for the sake of avoiding the constant recurrence of a cumbersome
periphrasis, the author will take the liberty of giving in the first
person.
those who have read the confessions will have closed them with the
impression that i had wholly renounced the use of opium. this
impression i meant to convey, and that for two reasons: first, because
the very act of deliberately recording such a state of suffering necessarily
presumes in the recorder a power of surveying his own case as a cool
spectator, and a degree of spirits for adequately describing it which
it would be inconsistent to suppose in any person speaking from the
station of an actual sufferer; secondly, because i, who had descended
from so large a quantity as , drops to so small a one (comparatively
speaking) as a quantity ranging between  and  drops, might well
suppose that the victory was in effect achieved. in suffering
my readers, therefore, to think of me as of a reformed opium-eater,
i left no impression but what i shared myself; and, as may be seen,
even this impression was left to be collected from the general tone
of the conclusion, and not from any specific words, which are in no
instance at variance with the literal truth. in no long time after
that paper was written i became sensible that the effort which remained
would cost me far more energy than i had anticipated, and the necessity
for making it was more apparent every month. in particular i became
aware of an increasing callousness or defect of sensibility in the stomach,
and this i imagined might imply a scirrhous state of that organ, either
formed or forming. an eminent physician, to whose kindness i was
at that time deeply indebted, informed me that such a termination of
my case was not impossible, though likely to be forestalled by a different
termination in the event of my continuing the use of opium. opium
therefore i resolved wholly to abjure as soon as i should find myself
at liberty to bend my undivided attention and energy to this purpose.
it was not, however, until the th of june last that any tolerable
concurrence of facilities for such an attempt arrived. on that
day i began my experiment, having previously settled in my own mind
that i would not flinch, but would “stand up to the scratch”
under any possible “punishment.” i must premise that
about  or  drops had been my ordinary allowance for many months;
occasionally i had run up as high as , and once nearly to ; in
repeated preludes to my final experiment i had also gone as low as 
drops; but had found it impossible to stand it beyond the fourth day—which,
by the way, i have always found more difficult to get over than any
of the preceding three. i went off under easy sail— drops
a day for three days; on the fourth i plunged at once to . the
misery which i now suffered “took the conceit” out of me
at once, and for about a month i continued off and on about this mark;
then i sunk to , and the next day to—none at all. this
was the first day for nearly ten years that i had existed without opium.
i persevered in my abstinence for ninety hours; i.e., upwards of half
a week. then i took—ask me not how much; say, ye severest,
what would ye have done? then i abstained again—then took
about  drops then abstained; and so on.
meantime the symptoms which attended my case for the first six weeks
of my experiment were these: enormous irritability and excitement of
the whole system; the stomach in particular restored to a full feeling
of vitality and sensibility, but often in great pain; unceasing restlessness
night and day; sleep—i scarcely knew what it was; three hours
out of the twenty-four was the utmost i had, and that so agitated and
shallow that i heard every sound that was near me. lower jaw constantly
swelling, mouth ulcerated, and many other distressing symptoms that
would be tedious to repeat; amongst which, however, i must mention one,
because it had never failed to accompany any attempt to renounce opium—viz.,
violent sternutation. this now became exceedingly troublesome,
sometimes lasting for two hours at once, and recurring at least twice
or three times a day. i was not much surprised at this on recollecting
what i had somewhere heard or read, that the membrane which lines the
nostrils is a prolongation of that which lines the stomach; whence,
i believe, are explained the inflammatory appearances about the nostrils
of dram drinkers. the sudden restoration of its original sensibility
to the stomach expressed itself, i suppose, in this way. it is
remarkable also that during the whole period of years through which
i had taken opium i had never once caught cold (as the phrase is), nor
even the slightest cough. but now a violent cold attacked me,
and a cough soon after. in an unfinished fragment of a letter
begun about this time to—i find these words: “you ask me
to write the—do you know beaumont and fletcher’s play of
“thierry and theodore”? there you will see my case
as to sleep; nor is it much of an exaggeration in other features.
i protest to you that i have a greater influx of thoughts in one hour
at present than in a whole year under the reign of opium. it seems
as though all the thoughts which had been frozen up for a decade of
years by opium had now, according to the old fable, been thawed at once—such
a multitude stream in upon me from all quarters. yet such is my
impatience and hideous irritability that for one which i detain and
write down fifty escape me: in spite of my weariness from suffering
and want of sleep, i cannot stand still or sit for two minutes together.
‘i nunc, et versus tecum meditare canoros.’”
at this stage of my experiment i sent to a neighbouring surgeon,
requesting that he would come over to see me. in the evening he
came; and after briefly stating the case to him, i asked this question;
whether he did not think that the opium might have acted as a stimulus
to the digestive organs, and that the present state of suffering in
the stomach, which manifestly was the cause of the inability to sleep,
might arise from indigestion? his answer was; no; on the contrary,
he thought that the suffering was caused by digestion itself, which
should naturally go on below the consciousness, but which from the unnatural
state of the stomach, vitiated by so long a use of opium, was become
distinctly perceptible. this opinion was plausible; and the unintermitting
nature of the suffering disposes me to think that it was true, for if
it had been any mere irregular affection of the stomach, it should
naturally have intermitted occasionally, and constantly fluctuated as
to degree. the intention of nature, as manifested in the healthy
state, obviously is to withdraw from our notice all the vital motions,
such as the circulation of the blood, the expansion and contraction
of the lungs, the peristaltic action of the stomach, &c., and opium,
it seems, is able in this, as in other instances, to counteract her
purposes. by the advice of the surgeon i tried bitters.
for a short time these greatly mitigated the feelings under which i
laboured, but about the forty-second day of the experiment the symptoms
already noticed began to retire, and new ones to arise of a different
and far more tormenting class; under these, but with a few intervals
of remission, i have since continued to suffer. but i dismiss
them undescribed for two reasons: first, because the mind revolts from
retracing circumstantially any sufferings from which it is removed by
too short or by no interval. to do this with minuteness enough
to make the review of any use would be indeed infandum renovare dolorem,
and possibly without a sufficient motive; for secondly, i doubt whether
this latter state be anyway referable to opium—positively considered,
or even negatively; that is, whether it is to be numbered amongst the
last evils from the direct action of opium, or even amongst the earliest
evils consequent upon a want of opium in a system long deranged
by its use. certainly one part of the symptoms might be accounted
for from the time of year (august), for though the summer was not a
hot one, yet in any case the sum of all the heat funded (if one
may say so) during the previous months, added to the existing heat of
that month, naturally renders august in its better half the hottest
part of the year; and it so happened that—the excessive perspiration
which even at christmas attends any great reduction in the daily quantum
of opium—and which in july was so violent as to oblige me to use
a bath five or six times a day—had about the setting-in of the
hottest season wholly retired, on which account any bad effect of the
heat might be the more unmitigated. another symptom—viz.,
what in my ignorance i call internal rheumatism (sometimes affecting
the shoulders, &c., but more often appearing to be seated in the
stomach)—seemed again less probably attributable to the opium,
or the want of opium, than to the dampness of the house {}
which i inhabit, which had about this time attained its maximum, july
having been, as usual, a month of incessant rain in our most rainy part
of england.
under these reasons for doubting whether opium had any connexion
with the latter stage of my bodily wretchedness—except, indeed,
as an occasional cause, as having left the body weaker and more crazy,
and thus predisposed to any mal-influence whatever—i willingly
spare my reader all description of it; let it perish to him, and would
that i could as easily say let it perish to my own remembrances, that
any future hours of tranquillity may not be disturbed by too vivid an
ideal of possible human misery!
so much for the sequel of my experiment. as to the former stage,
in which probably lies the experiment and its application to other cases,
i must request my reader not to forget the reasons for which i have
recorded it. these were two: first, a belief that i might add
some trifle to the history of opium as a medical agent. in this
i am aware that i have not at all fulfilled my own intentions, in consequence
of the torpor of mind, pain of body, and extreme disgust to the subject
which besieged me whilst writing that part of my paper; which part being
immediately sent off to the press (distant about five degrees of latitude),
cannot be corrected or improved. but from this account, rambling
as it may be, it is evident that thus much of benefit may arise to the
persons most interested in such a history of opium, viz., to opium-eaters
in general, that it establishes, for their consolation and encouragement,
the fact that opium may be renounced, and without greater sufferings
than an ordinary resolution may support, and by a pretty rapid course
{} of descent.
to communicate this result of my experiment was my foremost purpose.
secondly, as a purpose collateral to this, i wished to explain how it
had become impossible for me to compose a third part in time to accompany
this republication; for during the time of this experiment the proof-sheets
of this reprint were sent to me from london, and such was my inability
to expand or to improve them, that i could not even bear to read them
over with attention enough to notice the press errors or to correct
any verbal inaccuracies. these were my reasons for troubling my
reader with any record, long or short, of experiments relating to so
truly base a subject as my own body; and i am earnest with the reader
that he will not forget them, or so far misapprehend me as to believe
it possible that i would condescend to so rascally a subject for its
own sake, or indeed for any less object than that of general benefit
to others. such an animal as the self-observing valetudinarian
i know there is; i have met him myself occasionally, and i know that
he is the worst imaginable heautontimoroumenos; aggravating and
sustaining, by calling into distinct consciousness, every symptom that
would else perhaps, under a different direction given to the thoughts,
become evanescent. but as to myself, so profound is my contempt
for this undignified and selfish habit, that i could as little condescend
to it as i could to spend my time in watching a poor servant girl, to
whom at this moment i hear some lad or other making love at the back
of my house. is it for a transcendental philosopher to feel any
curiosity on such an occasion? or can i, whose life is worth only
eight and a half years’ purchase, be supposed to have leisure
for such trivial employments? however, to put this out of question,
i shall say one thing, which will perhaps shock some readers, but i
am sure it ought not to do so, considering the motives on which i say
it. no man, i suppose, employs much of his time on the phenomena
of his own body without some regard for it; whereas the reader sees
that, so far from looking upon mine with any complacency or regard,
i hate it, and make it the object of my bitter ridicule and contempt;
and i should not be displeased to know that the last indignities which
the law inflicts upon the bodies of the worst malefactors might hereafter
fall upon it. and, in testification of my sincerity in saying
this, i shall make the following offer. like other men, i have
particular fancies about the place of my burial; having lived chiefly
in a mountainous region, i rather cleave to the conceit, that a grave
in a green churchyard amongst the ancient and solitary hills will be
a sublimer and more tranquil place of repose for a philosopher than
any in the hideous golgothas of london. yet if the gentlemen of
surgeons’ hall think that any benefit can redound to their science
from inspecting the appearances in the body of an opium-eater, let them
speak but a word, and i will take care that mine shall be legally secured
to them—i.e., as soon as i have done with it myself. let
them not hesitate to express their wishes upon any scruples of false
delicacy and consideration for my feelings; i assure them they will
do me too much honour by “demonstrating” on such a crazy
body as mine, and it will give me pleasure to anticipate this posthumous
revenge and insult inflicted upon that which has caused me so much suffering
in this life. such bequests are not common; reversionary benefits
contingent upon the death of the testator are indeed dangerous to announce
in many cases: of this we have a remarkable instance in the habits of
a roman prince, who used, upon any notification made to him by rich
persons that they had left him a handsome estate in their wills, to
express his entire satisfaction at such arrangements and his gracious
acceptance of those loyal legacies; but then, if the testators neglected
to give him immediate possession of the property, if they traitorously
“persisted in living” (si vivere perseverarent, as
suetonius expresses it), he was highly provoked, and took his measures
accordingly. in those times, and from one of the worst of the
cæsars, we might expect such conduct; but i am sure that from
english surgeons at this day i need look for no expressions of impatience,
or of any other feelings but such as are answerable to that pure love
of science and all its interests which induces me to make such an offer.
sept , 
{} “not
yet recorded,” i say; for there is one celebrated man of
the present day, who, if all be true which is reported of him, has greatly
exceeded me in quantity.
{} a third
exception might perhaps have been added; and my reason for not adding
that exception is chiefly because it was only in his juvenile efforts
that the writer whom i allude to expressly addressed hints to philosophical
themes; his riper powers having been all dedicated (on very excusable
and very intelligible grounds, under the present direction of the popular
mind in england) to criticism and the fine arts. this reason apart,
however, i doubt whether he is not rather to be considered an acute
thinker than a subtle one. it is, besides, a great drawback on
his mastery over philosophical subjects that he has obviously not had
the advantage of a regular scholastic education: he has not read plato
in his youth (which most likely was only his misfortune), but neither
has he read kant in his manhood (which is his fault).
{} i disclaim
any allusion to existing professors, of whom indeed i know only
one.
{} to this
same jew, by the way, some eighteen months afterwards, i applied again
on the same business; and, dating at that time from a respectable college,
i was fortunate enough to gain his serious attention to my proposals.
my necessities had not arisen from any extravagance or youthful levities
(these my habits and the nature of my pleasures raised me far above),
but simply from the vindictive malice of my guardian, who, when he found
himself no longer able to prevent me from going to the university, had,
as a parting token of his good nature, refused to sign an order for
granting me a shilling beyond the allowance made to me at school—viz.,
£ per annum. upon this sum it was in my time barely possible
to have lived in college, and not possible to a man who, though above
the paltry affectation of ostentatious disregard for money, and without
any expensive tastes, confided nevertheless rather too much in servants,
and did not delight in the petty details of minute economy. i
soon, therefore, became embarrassed, and at length, after a most voluminous
negotiation with the jew (some parts of which, if i had leisure to rehearse
them, would greatly amuse my readers), i was put in possession of the
sum i asked for, on the “regular” terms of paying the jew
seventeen and a half per cent. by way of annuity on all the money furnished;
israel, on his part, graciously resuming no more than about ninety guineas
of the said money, on account of an attorney’s bill (for what
services, to whom rendered, and when, whether at the siege of jerusalem,
at the building of the second temple, or on some earlier occasion, i
have not yet been able to discover). how many perches this bill
measured i really forget; but i still keep it in a cabinet of natural
curiosities, and some time or other i believe i shall present it to
the british museum.
{} the bristol
mail is the best appointed in the kingdom, owing to the double advantages
of an unusually good road and of an extra sum for the expenses subscribed
by the bristol merchants.
{} it will
be objected that many men, of the highest rank and wealth, have in our
own day, as well as throughout our history, been amongst the foremost
in courting danger in battle. true; but this is not the case supposed;
long familiarity with power has to them deadened its effect and its
attractions.
υπνη θελyητρον
eurip. orest.
’αyαμεμνων.
the scholar will know that throughout this passage i refer to the early
scenes of the orestes; one of the most beautiful exhibitions of the
domestic affections which even the dramas of euripides can furnish.
to the english reader it may be necessary to say that the situation
at the opening of the drama is that of a brother attended only by his
sister during the demoniacal possession of a suffering conscience (or,
in the mythology of the play, haunted by the furies), and in circumstances
of immediate danger from enemies, and of desertion or cold regard from
nominal friends.
{} evanesced:
this way of going off the stage of life appears to have been well known
in the th century, but at that time to have been considered a peculiar
privilege of blood-royal, and by no means to be allowed to druggists.
for about the year  a poet of rather ominous name (and who, by-the-bye,
did ample justice to his name), viz., mr. flat-man, in speaking
of the death of charles ii. expresses his surprise that any prince should
commit so absurd an act as dying, because, says he,
“kings should disdain to die, and only disappear.”
they should abscond, that is, into the other world.
{} of
this, however, the learned appear latterly to have doubted; for in a
pirated edition of buchan’s domestic medicine, which i
once saw in the hands of a farmer’s wife, who was studying it
for the benefit of her health, the doctor was made to say—“be
particularly careful never to take above five-and-twenty ounces
of laudanum at once;” the true reading being probably five-and-twenty
drops, which are held equal to about one grain of crude opium.
{} amongst
the great herd of travellers, &c., who show sufficiently by their
stupidity that they never held any intercourse with opium, i must caution
my readers specially against the brilliant author of anastasius.
this gentleman, whose wit would lead one to presume him an opium-eater,
has made it impossible to consider him in that character, from the grievous
misrepresentation which he gives of its effects at pp. - of vol.
i. upon consideration it must appear such to the author himself,
for, waiving the errors i have insisted on in the text, which (and others)
are adopted in the fullest manner, he will himself admit that an old
gentleman “with a snow-white beard,” who eats “ample
doses of opium,” and is yet able to deliver what is meant and
received as very weighty counsel on the bad effects of that practice,
is but an indifferent evidence that opium either kills people prematurely
or sends them into a madhouse. but for my part, i see into this
old gentleman and his motives: the fact is, he was enamoured of “the
little golden receptacle of the pernicious drug” which anastasius
carried about him; and no way of obtaining it so safe and so feasible
occurred as that of frightening its owner out of his wits (which, by
the bye, are none of the strongest). this commentary throws a
new light upon the case, and greatly improves it as a story; for the
old gentleman’s speech, considered as a lecture on pharmacy, is
highly absurd; but considered as a hoax on anastasius, it reads excellently.
{} i have
not the book at this moment to consult; but i think the passage begins—“and
even that tavern music, which makes one man merry, another mad, in me
strikes a deep fit of devotion,” &c.
{} a handsome
newsroom, of which i was very politely made free in passing through
manchester by several gentlemen of that place, is called, i think, the
