 like inhumane creatures, laughed, and rejoiced to see it, though i thought
 we should there have ended our days, as overcome with so many
 difficulties. but the lord renewed my strength still, and carried me
 along, that i might see more of his power; yea, so much that i could never
 have thought of, had i not experienced it.
 after this it quickly began to snow, and when night came on, they stopped,
 and now down i must sit in the snow, by a little fire, and a few boughs
 behind me, with my sick child in my lap; and calling much for water, being
 now (through the wound) fallen into a violent fever. my own wound also
 growing so stiff that i could scarce sit down or rise up; yet so it must
 be, that i must sit all this cold winter night upon the cold snowy ground,
 with my sick child in my arms, looking that every hour would be the last
 of its life; and having no christian friend near me, either to comfort or
 help me. oh, i may see the wonderful power of god, that my spirit did not
 utterly sink under my affliction: still the lord upheld me with his
 gracious and merciful spirit, and we were both alive to see the light of
 the next morning.
 the morning being come, they prepared to go on their way. one of the
 indians got up upon a horse, and they set me up behind him, with my poor
 sick babe in my lap. a very wearisome and tedious day i had of it; what
 with my own wound, and my child's being so exceeding sick, and in a
 lamentable condition with her wound. it may be easily judged what a poor
 feeble condition we were in, there being not the least crumb of refreshing
 that came within either of our mouths from wednesday night to saturday
 night, except only a little cold water. this day in the afternoon, about
 an hour by sun, we came to the place where they intended, viz. an indian
 town, called wenimesset, northward of quabaug. when we were come, oh the
 number of pagans (now merciless enemies) that there came about me, that i
 may say as david, "i had fainted, unless i had believed, etc" (psalm
 .). the next day was the sabbath. i then remembered how careless i had
 been of god's holy time; how many sabbaths i had lost and misspent, and
 how evilly i had walked in god's sight; which lay so close unto my spirit,
 that it was easy for me to see how righteous it was with god to cut off
 the thread of my life and cast me out of his presence forever. yet the
 lord still showed mercy to me, and upheld me; and as he wounded me with
 one hand, so he healed me with the other. this day there came to me one
 robert pepper (a man belonging to roxbury) who was taken in captain
 beers's fight, and had been now a considerable time with the indians; and
 up with them almost as far as albany, to see king philip, as he told me,
 and was now very lately come into these parts. hearing, i say, that i was
 in this indian town, he obtained leave to come and see me. he told me he
 himself was wounded in the leg at captain beer's fight; and was not able
 some time to go, but as they carried him, and as he took oaken leaves and
 laid to his wound, and through the blessing of god he was able to travel
 again. then i took oaken leaves and laid to my side, and with the blessing
 of god it cured me also; yet before the cure was wrought, i may say, as it
 is in psalm .- "my wounds stink and are corrupt, i am troubled, i am
 bowed down greatly, i go mourning all the day long." i sat much alone with
 a poor wounded child in my lap, which moaned night and day, having nothing
 to revive the body, or cheer the spirits of her, but instead of that,
 sometimes one indian would come and tell me one hour that "your master
 will knock your child in the head," and then a second, and then a third,
 "your master will quickly knock your child in the head."
 this was the comfort i had from them, miserable comforters are ye all, as
 he said. thus nine days i sat upon my knees, with my babe in my lap, till
 my flesh was raw again; my child being even ready to depart this sorrowful
 world, they bade me carry it out to another wigwam (i suppose because they
 would not be troubled with such spectacles) whither i went with a very
 heavy heart, and down i sat with the picture of death in my lap. about two
 hours in the night, my sweet babe like a lamb departed this life on feb.
 , . it being about six years, and five months old. it was nine days
 from the first wounding, in this miserable condition, without any
 refreshing of one nature or other, except a little cold water. i cannot
 but take notice how at another time i could not bear to be in the room
 where any dead person was, but now the case is changed; i must and could
 lie down by my dead babe, side by side all the night after. i have thought
 since of the wonderful goodness of god to me in preserving me in the use
 of my reason and senses in that distressed time, that i did not use wicked
 and violent means to end my own miserable life. in the morning, when they
 understood that my child was dead they sent for me home to my master's
 wigwam (by my master in this writing, must be understood quinnapin, who
 was a sagamore, and married king philip's wife's sister; not that he first
 took me, but i was sold to him by another narragansett indian, who took me
 when first i came out of the garrison). i went to take up my dead child in
 my arms to carry it with me, but they bid me let it alone; there was no
 resisting, but go i must and leave it. when i had been at my master's
 wigwam, i took the first opportunity i could get to go look after my dead
 child. when i came i asked them what they had done with it; then they told
 me it was upon the hill. then they went and showed me where it was, where
 i saw the ground was newly digged, and there they told me they had buried
 it. there i left that child in the wilderness, and must commit it, and
 myself also in this wilderness condition, to him who is above all. god
 having taken away this dear child, i went to see my daughter mary, who was
 at this same indian town, at a wigwam not very far off, though we had
 little liberty or opportunity to see one another. she was about ten years
 old, and taken from the door at first by a praying ind. and afterward sold
 for a gun. when i came in sight, she would fall aweeping; at which they
 were provoked, and would not let me come near her, but bade me be gone;
 which was a heart-cutting word to me. i had one child dead, another in the
 wilderness, i knew not where, the third they would not let me come near
 to: "me (as he said) have ye bereaved of my children, joseph is not, and
 simeon is not, and ye will take benjamin also, all these things are
 against me." i could not sit still in this condition, but kept walking
 from one place to another. and as i was going along, my heart was even
 overwhelmed with the thoughts of my condition, and that i should have
 children, and a nation which i knew not, ruled over them. whereupon i
 earnestly entreated the lord, that he would consider my low estate, and
 show me a token for good, and if it were his blessed will, some sign and
 hope of some relief. and indeed quickly the lord answered, in some
 measure, my poor prayers; for as i was going up and down mourning and
 lamenting my condition, my son came to me, and asked me how i did. i had
 not seen him before, since the destruction of the town, and i knew not
 where he was, till i was informed by himself, that he was amongst a
 smaller parcel of indians, whose place was about six miles off. with tears
 in his eyes, he asked me whether his sister sarah was dead; and told me he
 had seen his sister mary; and prayed me, that i would not be troubled in
 reference to himself. the occasion of his coming to see me at this time,
 was this: there was, as i said, about six miles from us, a small
 plantation of indians, where it seems he had been during his captivity;
 and at this time, there were some forces of the ind. gathered out of our
 company, and some also from them (among whom was my son's master) to go to
 assault and burn medfield. in this time of the absence of his master, his
 dame brought him to see me. i took this to be some gracious answer to my
 earnest and unfeigned desire. the next day, viz. to this, the indians
 returned from medfield, all the company, for those that belonged to the
 other small company, came through the town that now we were at. but before
 they came to us, oh! the outrageous roaring and hooping that there was.
 they began their din about a mile before they came to us. by their noise
 and hooping they signified how many they had destroyed (which was at that
 time twenty-three). those that were with us at home were gathered together
 as soon as they heard the hooping, and every time that the other went over
 their number, these at home gave a shout, that the very earth rung again.
 and thus they continued till those that had been upon the expedition were
 come up to the sagamore's wigwam; and then, oh, the hideous insulting and
 triumphing that there was over some englishmen's scalps that they had
 taken (as their manner is) and brought with them. i cannot but take notice
 of the wonderful mercy of god to me in those afflictions, in sending me a
 bible. one of the indians that came from medfield fight, had brought some
 plunder, came to me, and asked me, if i would have a bible, he had got one
 in his basket. i was glad of it, and asked him, whether he thought the
 indians would let me read? he answered, yes. so i took the bible, and in
 that melancholy time, it came into my mind to read first the th chapter
 of deuteronomy, which i did, and when i had read it, my dark heart wrought
 on this manner: that there was no mercy for me, that the blessings were
 gone, and the curses come in their room, and that i had lost my
 opportunity. but the lord helped me still to go on reading till i came to
 chap. , the seven first verses, where i found, there was mercy promised
 again, if we would return to him by repentance; and though we were
 scattered from one end of the earth to the other, yet the lord would
 gather us together, and turn all those curses upon our enemies. i do not
 desire to live to forget this scripture, and what comfort it was to me.
 now the ind. began to talk of removing from this place, some one way, and
 some another. there were now besides myself nine english captives in this
 place (all of them children, except one woman). i got an opportunity to go
 and take my leave of them. they being to go one way, and i another, i
 asked them whether they were earnest with god for deliverance. they told
 me they did as they were able, and it was some comfort to me, that the
 lord stirred up children to look to him. the woman, viz. goodwife joslin,
 told me she should never see me again, and that she could find in her
 heart to run away. i wished her not to run away by any means, for we were
 near thirty miles from any english town, and she very big with child, and
 had but one week to reckon, and another child in her arms, two years old,
 and bad rivers there were to go over, and we were feeble, with our poor
 and coarse entertainment. i had my bible with me, i pulled it out, and
 asked her whether she would read. we opened the bible and lighted on psalm
 , in which psalm we especially took notice of that, ver. ult., "wait on
 the lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart, wait i
 say on the lord."
 and now i must part with that little company i had. here i parted from my
 daughter mary (whom i never saw again till i saw her in dorchester,
 returned from captivity), and from four little cousins and neighbors, some
 of which i never saw afterward: the lord only knows the end of them.
 amongst them also was that poor woman before mentioned, who came to a sad
 end, as some of the company told me in my travel: she having much grief
 upon her spirit about her miserable condition, being so near her time, she
 would be often asking the indians to let her go home; they not being
 willing to that, and yet vexed with her importunity, gathered a great
 company together about her and stripped her naked, and set her in the
 midst of them, and when they had sung and danced about her (in their
 hellish manner) as long as they pleased they knocked her on head, and the
 child in her arms with her. when they had done that they made a fire and
 put them both into it, and told the other children that were with them
 that if they attempted to go home, they would serve them in like manner.
 the children said she did not shed one tear, but prayed all the while. but
 to return to my own journey, we traveled about half a day or little more,
 and came to a desolate place in the wilderness, where there were no
 wigwams or inhabitants before; we came about the middle of the afternoon
 to this place, cold and wet, and snowy, and hungry, and weary, and no
 refreshing for man but the cold ground to sit on, and our poor indian
 cheer.
 heart-aching thoughts here i had about my poor children, who were
 scattered up and down among the wild beasts of the forest. my head was
 light and dizzy (either through hunger or hard lodging, or trouble or all
 together), my knees feeble, my body raw by sitting double night and day,
 that i cannot express to man the affliction that lay upon my spirit, but
 the lord helped me at that time to express it to himself. i opened my
 bible to read, and the lord brought that precious scripture to me. "thus
 saith the lord, refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears,
 for thy work shall be rewarded, and they shall come again from the land of
 the enemy" (jeremiah .). this was a sweet cordial to me when i was
 ready to faint; many and many a time have i sat down and wept sweetly over
 this scripture. at this place we continued about four days.
 the occasion (as i thought) of their moving at this time was the english
 army, it being near and following them. for they went as if they had gone
 for their lives, for some considerable way, and then they made a stop, and
 chose some of their stoutest men, and sent them back to hold the english
 army in play whilst the rest escaped. and then, like jehu, they marched on
 furiously, with their old and with their young: some carried their old
 decrepit mothers, some carried one, and some another. four of them carried
 a great indian upon a bier; but going through a thick wood with him, they
 were hindered, and could make no haste, whereupon they took him upon their
 backs, and carried him, one at a time, till they came to banquaug river.
 upon a friday, a little after noon, we came to this river. when all the
 company was come up, and were gathered together, i thought to count the
 number of them, but they were so many, and being somewhat in motion, it
 was beyond my skill. in this travel, because of my wound, i was somewhat
 favored in my load; i carried only my knitting work and two quarts of
 parched meal. being very faint i asked my mistress to give me one spoonful
 of the meal, but she would not give me a taste. they quickly fell to
 cutting dry trees, to make rafts to carry them over the river: and soon my
 turn came to go over. by the advantage of some brush which they had laid
 upon the raft to sit upon, i did not wet my foot (which many of themselves
 at the other end were mid-leg deep) which cannot but be acknowledged as a
 favor of god to my weakened body, it being a very cold time. i was not
 before acquainted with such kind of doings or dangers. "when thou passeth
 through the waters i will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall
 not overflow thee" (isaiah .). a certain number of us got over the
 river that night, but it was the night after the sabbath before all the
 company was got over. on the saturday they boiled an old horse's leg which
 they had got, and so we drank of the broth, as soon as they thought it was
 ready, and when it was almost all gone, they filled it up again.
 the first week of my being among them i hardly ate any thing; the second
 week i found my stomach grow very faint for want of something; and yet it
 was very hard to get down their filthy trash; but the third week, though i
 could think how formerly my stomach would turn against this or that, and i
 could starve and die before i could eat such things, yet they were sweet
 and savory to my taste. i was at this time knitting a pair of white cotton
 stockings for my mistress; and had not yet wrought upon a sabbath day.
 when the sabbath came they bade me go to work. i told them it was the
 sabbath day, and desired them to let me rest, and told them i would do as
 much more tomorrow; to which they answered me they would break my face.
 and here i cannot but take notice of the strange providence of god in
 preserving the heathen. they were many hundreds, old and young, some sick,
 and some lame; many had papooses at their backs. the greatest number at
 this time with us were squaws, and they traveled with all they had, bag
 and baggage, and yet they got over this river aforesaid; and on monday
 they set their wigwams on fire, and away they went. on that very day came
 the english army after them to this river, and saw the smoke of their
 wigwams, and yet this river put a stop to them. god did not give them
 courage or activity to go over after us. we were not ready for so great a
 mercy as victory and deliverance. if we had been god would have found out
 a way for the english to have passed this river, as well as for the
 indians with their squaws and children, and all their luggage. "oh that my
 people had hearkened to me, and israel had walked in my ways, i should
 soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
 adversaries" (psalm .-).
 on monday (as i said) they set their wigwams on fire and went away. it was
 a cold morning, and before us there was a great brook with ice on it; some
 waded through it, up to the knees and higher, but others went till they
 came to a beaver dam, and i amongst them, where through the good
 providence of god, i did not wet my foot. i went along that day mourning
 and lamenting, leaving farther my own country, and traveling into a vast
 and howling wilderness, and i understood something of lot's wife's
 temptation, when she looked back. we came that day to a great swamp, by
 the side of which we took up our lodging that night. when i came to the
 brow of the hill, that looked toward the swamp, i thought we had been come
 to a great indian town (though there were none but our own company). the
 indians were as thick as the trees: it seemed as if there had been a
 thousand hatchets going at once. if one looked before one there was
 nothing but indians, and behind one, nothing but indians, and so on either
 hand, i myself in the midst, and no christian soul near me, and yet how
 hath the lord preserved me in safety? oh the experience that i have had of
 the goodness of god, to me and mine!
 after a restless and hungry night there, we had a wearisome time of it the
 next day. the swamp by which we lay was, as it were, a deep dungeon, and
 an exceeding high and steep hill before it. before i got to the top of the
 hill, i thought my heart and legs, and all would have broken, and failed
 me. what, through faintness and soreness of body, it was a grievous day of
 travel to me. as we went along, i saw a place where english cattle had
 been. that was comfort to me, such as it was. quickly after that we came
 to an english path, which so took with me, that i thought i could have
 freely lyen down and died. that day, a little after noon, we came to
 squakeag, where the indians quickly spread themselves over the deserted
 english fields, gleaning what they could find. some picked up ears of
 wheat that were crickled down; some found ears of indian corn; some found
 ground nuts, and others sheaves of wheat that were frozen together in the
 shock, and went to threshing of them out. myself got two ears of indian
 corn, and whilst i did but turn my back, one of them was stolen from me,
 which much troubled me. there came an indian to them at that time with a
 basket of horse liver. i asked him to give me a piece. "what," says he,
 "can you eat horse liver?" i told him, i would try, if he would give a
 piece, which he did, and i laid it on the coals to roast. but before it
 was half ready they got half of it away from me, so that i was fain to
 take the rest and eat it as it was, with the blood about my mouth, and yet
 a savory bit it was to me: "for to the hungry soul every bitter thing is
 sweet." a solemn sight methought it was, to see fields of wheat and indian
 corn forsaken and spoiled and the remainders of them to be food for our
 merciless enemies. that night we had a mess of wheat for our supper.
 on the morrow morning we must go over the river, i.e. connecticut, to meet
 with king philip. two canoes full they had carried over; the next turn i
 myself was to go. but as my foot was upon the canoe to step in there was a
 sudden outcry among them, and i must step back, and instead of going over
 the river, i must go four or five miles up the river farther northward.
 some of the indians ran one way, and some another. the cause of this rout
 was, as i thought, their espying some english scouts, who were thereabout.
 in this travel up the river about noon the company made a stop, and sat
 down; some to eat, and others to rest them. as i sat amongst them, musing
 of things past, my son joseph unexpectedly came to me. we asked of each
 other's welfare, bemoaning our doleful condition, and the change that had
 come upon us. we had husband and father, and children, and sisters, and
 friends, and relations, and house, and home, and many comforts of this
 life: but now we may say, as job, "naked came i out of my mother's womb,
 and naked shall i return: the lord gave, the lord hath taken away, blessed
 be the name of the lord." i asked him whether he would read. he told me he
 earnestly desired it, i gave him my bible, and he lighted upon that
 comfortable scripture "i shall not die but live, and declare the works of
 the lord: the lord hath chastened me sore yet he hath not given me over to
 death" (psalm .-). "look here, mother," says he, "did you read
 this?" and here i may take occasion to mention one principal ground of my
 setting forth these lines: even as the psalmist says, to declare the works
 of the lord, and his wonderful power in carrying us along, preserving us
 in the wilderness, while under the enemy's hand, and returning of us in
 safety again. and his goodness in bringing to my hand so many comfortable
 and suitable scriptures in my distress. but to return, we traveled on till
 night; and in the morning, we must go over the river to philip's crew.
 when i was in the canoe i could not but be amazed at the numerous crew of
 pagans that were on the bank on the other side. when i came ashore, they
 gathered all about me, i sitting alone in the midst. i observed they asked
 one another questions, and laughed, and rejoiced over their gains and
 victories. then my heart began to fail: and i fell aweeping, which was the
 first time to my remembrance, that i wept before them. although i had met
 with so much affliction, and my heart was many times ready to break, yet
 could i not shed one tear in their sight; but rather had been all this
 while in a maze, and like one astonished. but now i may say as psalm
 ., "by the rivers of babylon, there we sate down: yea, we wept when we
 remembered zion." there one of them asked me why i wept. i could hardly
 tell what to say: yet i answered, they would kill me. "no," said he, "none
 will hurt you." then came one of them and gave me two spoonfuls of meal to
 comfort me, and another gave me half a pint of peas; which was more worth
 than many bushels at another time. then i went to see king philip. he bade
 me come in and sit down, and asked me whether i would smoke it (a usual
 compliment nowadays amongst saints and sinners) but this no way suited me.
 for though i had formerly used tobacco, yet i had left it ever since i was
 first taken. it seems to be a bait the devil lays to make men lose their
 precious time. i remember with shame how formerly, when i had taken two or
 three pipes, i was presently ready for another, such a bewitching thing it
 is. but i thank god, he has now given me power over it; surely there are
 many who may be better employed than to lie sucking a stinking
 tobacco-pipe.
 now the indians gather their forces to go against northampton. over night
 one went about yelling and hooting to give notice of the design. whereupon
 they fell to boiling of ground nuts, and parching of corn (as many as had
 it) for their provision; and in the morning away they went. during my
 abode in this place, philip spake to me to make a shirt for his boy, which
 i did, for which he gave me a shilling. i offered the money to my master,
 but he bade me keep it; and with it i bought a piece of horse flesh.
 afterwards he asked me to make a cap for his boy, for which he invited me
 to dinner. i went, and he gave me a pancake, about as big as two fingers.
 it was made of parched wheat, beaten, and fried in bear's grease, but i
 thought i never tasted pleasanter meat in my life. there was a squaw who
 spake to me to make a shirt for her sannup, for which she gave me a piece
 of bear. another asked me to knit a pair of stockings, for which she gave
 me a quart of peas. i boiled my peas and bear together, and invited my
 master and mistress to dinner; but the proud gossip, because i served them
 both in one dish, would eat nothing, except one bit that he gave her upon
 the point of his knife. hearing that my son was come to this place, i went
 to see him, and found him lying flat upon the ground. i asked him how he
 could sleep so? he answered me that he was not asleep, but at prayer; and
 lay so, that they might not observe what he was doing. i pray god he may
 remember these things now he is returned in safety. at this place (the sun
 now getting higher) what with the beams and heat of the sun, and the smoke
 of the wigwams, i thought i should have been blind. i could scarce discern
 one wigwam from another. there was here one mary thurston of medfield, who
 seeing how it was with me, lent me a hat to wear; but as soon as i was
 gone, the squaw (who owned that mary thurston) came running after me, and
 got it away again. here was the squaw that gave me one spoonful of meal. i
 put it in my pocket to keep it safe. yet notwithstanding, somebody stole
 it, but put five indian corns in the room of it; which corns were the
 greatest provisions i had in my travel for one day.
 the indians returning from northampton, brought with them some horses, and
 sheep, and other things which they had taken; i desired them that they
 would carry me to albany upon one of those horses, and sell me for powder:
 for so they had sometimes discoursed. i was utterly hopeless of getting
 home on foot, the way that i came. i could hardly bear to think of the
 many weary steps i had taken, to come to this place.
 but instead of going either to albany or homeward, we must go five miles
 up the river, and then go over it. here we abode a while. here lived a
 sorry indian, who spoke to me to make him a shirt. when i had done it, he
 would pay me nothing. but he living by the riverside, where i often went
 to fetch water, i would often be putting of him in mind, and calling for
 my pay: at last he told me if i would make another shirt, for a papoose
 not yet born, he would give me a knife, which he did when i had done it. i
 carried the knife in, and my master asked me to give it him, and i was not
 a little glad that i had anything that they would accept of, and be
 pleased with. when we were at this place, my master's maid came home; she
 had been gone three weeks into the narragansett country to fetch corn,
 where they had stored up some in the ground. she brought home about a peck
 and half of corn. this was about the time that their great captain,
 naananto, was killed in the narragansett country. my son being now about a
 mile from me, i asked liberty to go and see him; they bade me go, and away
 i went; but quickly lost myself, traveling over hills and through swamps,
 and could not find the way to him. and i cannot but admire at the
 wonderful power and goodness of god to me, in that, though i was gone from
 home, and met with all sorts of indians, and those i had no knowledge of,
 and there being no christian soul near me; yet not one of them offered the
 least imaginable miscarriage to me. i turned homeward again, and met with
 my master. he showed me the way to my son. when i came to him i found him
 not well: and withall he had a boil on his side, which much troubled him.
 we bemoaned one another a while, as the lord helped us, and then i
 returned again. when i was returned, i found myself as unsatisfied as i
 was before. i went up and down mourning and lamenting; and my spirit was
 ready to sink with the thoughts of my poor children. my son was ill, and i
 could not but think of his mournful looks, and no christian friend was
 near him, to do any office of love for him, either for soul or body. and
 my poor girl, i knew not where she was, nor whether she was sick, or well,
 or alive, or dead. i repaired under these thoughts to my bible (my great
 comfort in that time) and that scripture came to my hand, "cast thy burden
 upon the lord, and he shall sustain thee" (psalm .).
 but i was fain to go and look after something to satisfy my hunger, and
 going among the wigwams, i went into one and there found a squaw who
 showed herself very kind to me, and gave me a piece of bear. i put it into
 my pocket, and came home, but could not find an opportunity to broil it,
 for fear they would get it from me, and there it lay all that day and
 night in my stinking pocket. in the morning i went to the same squaw, who
 had a kettle of ground nuts boiling. i asked her to let me boil my piece
 of bear in her kettle, which she did, and gave me some ground nuts to eat
 with it: and i cannot but think how pleasant it was to me. i have sometime
 seen bear baked very handsomely among the english, and some like it, but
 the thought that it was bear made me tremble. but now that was savory to
 me that one would think was enough to turn the stomach of a brute
 creature.
 one bitter cold day i could find no room to sit down before the fire. i
 went out, and could not tell what to do, but i went in to another wigwam,
 where they were also sitting round the fire, but the squaw laid a skin for
 me, and bid me sit down, and gave me some ground nuts, and bade me come
 again; and told me they would buy me, if they were able, and yet these
 were strangers to me that i never saw before.
 that day a small part of the company removed about three-quarters of a
 mile, intending further the next day. when they came to the place where
 they intended to lodge, and had pitched their wigwams, being hungry, i
 went again back to the place we were before at, to get something to eat,
 being encouraged by the squaw's kindness, who bade me come again. when i
 was there, there came an indian to look after me, who when he had found
 me, kicked me all along. i went home and found venison roasting that
 night, but they would not give me one bit of it. sometimes i met with
 favor, and sometimes with nothing but frowns.
 the next day in the morning they took their travel, intending a day's
 journey up the river. i took my load at my back, and quickly we came to
 wade over the river; and passed over tiresome and wearisome hills. one
 hill was so steep that i was fain to creep up upon my knees, and to hold
 by the twigs and bushes to keep myself from falling backward. my head also
 was so light that i usually reeled as i went; but i hope all these
 wearisome steps that i have taken, are but a forewarning to me of the
 heavenly rest: "i know, o lord, that thy judgments are right, and that
 thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me" (psalm .).
 it was upon a sabbath-day-morning, that they prepared for their travel.
 this morning i asked my master whether he would sell me to my husband. he
 answered me "nux," which did much rejoice my spirit. my mistress, before
 we went, was gone to the burial of a papoose, and returning, she found me
 sitting and reading in my bible; she snatched it hastily out of my hand,
 and threw it out of doors. i ran out and catched it up, and put it into my
 pocket, and never let her see it afterward. then they packed up their
 things to be gone, and gave me my load. i complained it was too heavy,
 whereupon she gave me a slap in the face, and bade me go; i lifted up my
 heart to god, hoping the redemption was not far off; and the rather
 because their insolency grew worse and worse.
 but the thoughts of my going homeward (for so we bent our course) much
 cheered my spirit, and made my burden seem light, and almost nothing at
 all. but (to my amazement and great perplexity) the scale was soon turned;
 for when we had gone a little way, on a sudden my mistress gives out; she
 would go no further, but turn back again, and said i must go back again
 with her, and she called her sannup, and would have had him gone back
 also, but he would not, but said he would go on, and come to us again in
 three days. my spirit was, upon this, i confess, very impatient, and
 almost outrageous. i thought i could as well have died as went back; i
 cannot declare the trouble that i was in about it; but yet back again i
 must go. as soon as i had the opportunity, i took my bible to read, and
 that quieting scripture came to my hand, "be still, and know that i am
 god" (psalm .). which stilled my spirit for the present. but a sore
 time of trial, i concluded, i had to go through, my master being gone, who
 seemed to me the best friend that i had of an indian, both in cold and
 hunger, and quickly so it proved. down i sat, with my heart as full as it
 could hold, and yet so hungry that i could not sit neither; but going out
 to see what i could find, and walking among the trees, i found six acorns,
 and two chestnuts, which were some refreshment to me. towards night i
 gathered some sticks for my own comfort, that i might not lie a-cold; but
 when we came to lie down they bade me to go out, and lie somewhere else,
 for they had company (they said) come in more than their own. i told them,
 i could not tell where to go, they bade me go look; i told them, if i went
 to another wigwam they would be angry, and send me home again. then one of
 the company drew his sword, and told me he would run me through if i did
 not go presently. then was i fain to stoop to this rude fellow, and to go
 out in the night, i knew not whither. mine eyes have seen that fellow
 afterwards walking up and down boston, under the appearance of a friend
 indian, and several others of the like cut. i went to one wigwam, and they
 told me they had no room. then i went to another, and they said the same;
 at last an old indian bade me to come to him, and his squaw gave me some
 ground nuts; she gave me also something to lay under my head, and a good
 fire we had; and through the good providence of god, i had a comfortable
 lodging that night. in the morning, another indian bade me come at night,
 and he would give me six ground nuts, which i did. we were at this place
 and time about two miles from [the] connecticut river. we went in the
 morning to gather ground nuts, to the river, and went back again that
 night. i went with a good load at my back (for they when they went, though
 but a little way, would carry all their trumpery with them). i told them
 the skin was off my back, but i had no other comforting answer from them
 than this: that it would be no matter if my head were off too.
 instead of going toward the bay, which was that i desired, i must go with
 them five or six miles down the river into a mighty thicket of brush;
 where we abode almost a fortnight. here one asked me to make a shirt for
 her papoose, for which she gave me a mess of broth, which was thickened
 with meal made of the bark of a tree, and to make it the better, she had
 put into it about a handful of peas, and a few roasted ground nuts. i had
 not seen my son a pretty while, and here was an indian of whom i made
 inquiry after him, and asked him when he saw him. he answered me that such
 a time his master roasted him, and that himself did eat a piece of him, as
 big as his two fingers, and that he was very good meat. but the lord
 upheld my spirit, under this discouragement; and i considered their
 horrible addictedness to lying, and that there is not one of them that
 makes the least conscience of speaking of truth. in this place, on a cold
 night, as i lay by the fire, i removed a stick that kept the heat from me.
 a squaw moved it down again, at which i looked up, and she threw a handful
 of ashes in mine eyes. i thought i should have been quite blinded, and
 have never seen more, but lying down, the water run out of my eyes, and
 carried the dirt with it, that by the morning i recovered my sight again.
 yet upon this, and the like occasions, i hope it is not too much to say
 with job, "have pity upon me, o ye my friends, for the hand of the lord
 has touched me." and here i cannot but remember how many times sitting in
 their wigwams, and musing on things past, i should suddenly leap up and
 run out, as if i had been at home, forgetting where i was, and what my
 condition was; but when i was without, and saw nothing but wilderness, and
 woods, and a company of barbarous heathens, my mind quickly returned to
 me, which made me think of that, spoken concerning sampson, who said, "i
 will go out and shake myself as at other times, but he wist not that the
 lord was departed from him." about this time i began to think that all my
 hopes of restoration would come to nothing. i thought of the english army,
 and hoped for their coming, and being taken by them, but that failed. i
 hoped to be carried to albany, as the indians had discoursed before, but
 that failed also. i thought of being sold to my husband, as my master
 spake, but instead of that, my master himself was gone, and i left behind,
 so that my spirit was now quite ready to sink. i asked them to let me go
 out and pick up some sticks, that i might get alone, and pour out my heart
 unto the lord. then also i took my bible to read, but i found no comfort
 here neither, which many times i was wont to find. so easy a thing it is
 with god to dry up the streams of scripture comfort from us. yet i can
 say, that in all my sorrows and afflictions, god did not leave me to have
 my impatience work towards himself, as if his ways were unrighteous. but i
 knew that he laid upon me less than i deserved. afterward, before this
 doleful time ended with me, i was turning the leaves of my bible, and the
 lord brought to me some scriptures, which did a little revive me, as that
 [in] isaiah .: "for my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your
 ways my ways, saith the lord." and also that [in] psalm .: "commit thy
 way unto the lord; trust also in him; and he shall bring it to pass."
 about this time they came yelping from hadley, where they had killed three
 englishmen, and brought one captive with them, viz. thomas read. they all
 gathered about the poor man, asking him many questions. i desired also to
 go and see him; and when i came, he was crying bitterly, supposing they
 would quickly kill him. whereupon i asked one of them, whether they
 intended to kill him; he answered me, they would not. he being a little
 cheered with that, i asked him about the welfare of my husband. he told me
 he saw him such a time in the bay, and he was well, but very melancholy.
 by which i certainly understood (though i suspected it before) that
 whatsoever the indians told me respecting him was vanity and lies. some of
 them told me he was dead, and they had killed him; some said he was
 married again, and that the governor wished him to marry; and told him he
 should have his choice, and that all persuaded i was dead. so like were
 these barbarous creatures to him who was a liar from the beginning.
 as i was sitting once in the wigwam here, philip's maid came in with the
 child in her arms, and asked me to give her a piece of my apron, to make a
 flap for it. i told her i would not. then my mistress bade me give it, but
 still i said no. the maid told me if i would not give her a piece, she
 would tear a piece off it. i told her i would tear her coat then. with
 that my mistress rises up, and take up a stick big enough to have killed
 me, and struck at me with it. but i stepped out, and she struck the stick
 into the mat of the wigwam. but while she was pulling of it out i ran to
 the maid and gave her all my apron, and so that storm went over.
 hearing that my son was come to this place, i went to see him, and told
 him his father was well, but melancholy. he told me he was as much grieved
 for his father as for himself. i wondered at his speech, for i thought i
 had enough upon my spirit in reference to myself, to make me mindless of
 my husband and everyone else; they being safe among their friends. he told
 me also, that awhile before, his master (together with other indians) were
 going to the french for powder; but by the way the mohawks met with them,
 and killed four of their company, which made the rest turn back again, for
 it might have been worse with him, had he been sold to the french, than it
 proved to be in his remaining with the indians.
 i went to see an english youth in this place, one john gilbert of
 springfield. i found him lying without doors, upon the ground. i asked him
 how he did? he told me he was very sick of a flux, with eating so much
 blood. they had turned him out of the wigwam, and with him an indian
 papoose, almost dead (whose parents had been killed), in a bitter cold
 day, without fire or clothes. the young man himself had nothing on but his
 shirt and waistcoat. this sight was enough to melt a heart of flint. there
 they lay quivering in the cold, the youth round like a dog, the papoose
 stretched out with his eyes and nose and mouth full of dirt, and yet
 alive, and groaning. i advised john to go and get to some fire. he told me
 he could not stand, but i persuaded him still, lest he should lie there
 and die. and with much ado i got him to a fire, and went myself home. as
 soon as i was got home his master's daughter came after me, to know what i
 had done with the englishman. i told her i had got him to a fire in such a
 place. now had i need to pray paul's prayer "that we may be delivered from
 unreasonable and wicked men" ( thessalonians .). for her satisfaction i
 went along with her, and brought her to him; but before i got home again
 it was noised about that i was running away and getting the english youth,
 along with me; that as soon as i came in they began to rant and domineer,
 asking me where i had been, and what i had been doing? and saying they
 would knock him on the head. i told them i had been seeing the english
 youth, and that i would not run away. they told me i lied, and taking up a
 hatchet, they came to me, and said they would knock me down if i stirred
 out again, and so confined me to the wigwam. now may i say with david, "i
 am in a great strait" ( samuel .). if i keep in, i must die with
 hunger, and if i go out, i must be knocked in head. this distressed
 condition held that day, and half the next. and then the lord remembered
 me, whose mercies are great. then came an indian to me with a pair of
 stockings that were too big for him, and he would have me ravel them out,
 and knit them fit for him. i showed myself willing, and bid him ask my
 mistress if i might go along with him a little way; she said yes, i might,
 but i was not a little refreshed with that news, that i had my liberty
 again. then i went along with him, and he gave me some roasted ground
 nuts, which did again revive my feeble stomach.
 being got out of her sight, i had time and liberty again to look into my
 bible; which was my guide by day, and my pillow by night. now that
 comfortable scripture presented itself to me, "for a small moment have i
 forsaken thee, but with great mercies will i gather thee" (isaiah .).
 thus the lord carried me along from one time to another, and made good to
 me this precious promise, and many others. then my son came to see me, and
 i asked his master to let him stay awhile with me, that i might comb his
 head, and look over him, for he was almost overcome with lice. he told me,
 when i had done, that he was very hungry, but i had nothing to relieve
 him, but bid him go into the wigwams as he went along, and see if he could
 get any thing among them. which he did, and it seems tarried a little too
 long; for his master was angry with him, and beat him, and then sold him.
 then he came running to tell me he had a new master, and that he had given
 him some ground nuts already. then i went along with him to his new master
 who told me he loved him, and he should not want. so his master carried
 him away, and i never saw him afterward, till i saw him at piscataqua in
 portsmouth.
 that night they bade me go out of the wigwam again. my mistress's papoose
 was sick, and it died that night, and there was one benefit in it—that
 there was more room. i went to a wigwam, and they bade me come in, and
 gave me a skin to lie upon, and a mess of venison and ground nuts, which
 was a choice dish among them. on the morrow they buried the papoose, and
 afterward, both morning and evening, there came a company to mourn and
 howl with her; though i confess i could not much condole with them. many
 sorrowful days i had in this place, often getting alone. "like a crane, or
 a swallow, so did i chatter; i did mourn as a dove, mine eyes ail with
 looking upward. oh, lord, i am oppressed; undertake for me" (isaiah
 .). i could tell the lord, as hezekiah, "remember now o lord, i
 beseech thee, how i have walked before thee in truth." now had i time to
 examine all my ways: my conscience did not accuse me of unrighteousness
 toward one or other; yet i saw how in my walk with god, i had been a
 careless creature. as david said, "against thee, thee only have i sinned":
 and i might say with the poor publican, "god be merciful unto me a
 sinner." on the sabbath days, i could look upon the sun and think how
 people were going to the house of god, to have their souls refreshed; and
 then home, and their bodies also; but i was destitute of both; and might
 say as the poor prodigal, "he would fain have filled his belly with the
 husks that the swine did eat, and no man gave unto him" (luke .). for
 i must say with him, "father, i have sinned against heaven and in thy
 sight." i remembered how on the night before and after the sabbath, when
 my family was about me, and relations and neighbors with us, we could pray
 and sing, and then refresh our bodies with the good creatures of god; and
 then have a comfortable bed to lie down on; but instead of all this, i had
 only a little swill for the body and then, like a swine, must lie down on
 the ground. i cannot express to man the sorrow that lay upon my spirit;
 the lord knows it. yet that comfortable scripture would often come to
 mind, "for a small moment have i forsaken thee, but with great mercies
 will i gather thee."
 now must we pack up and be gone from this thicket, bending our course
 toward the baytowns; i having nothing to eat by the way this day, but a
 few crumbs of cake, that an indian gave my girl the same day we were
 taken. she gave it me, and i put it in my pocket; there it lay, till it
 was so moldy (for want of good baking) that one could not tell what it was
 made of; it fell all to crumbs, and grew so dry and hard, that it was like
 little flints; and this refreshed me many times, when i was ready to
 faint. it was in my thoughts when i put it into my mouth, that if ever i
 returned, i would tell the world what a blessing the lord gave to such
 mean food. as we went along they killed a deer, with a young one in her,
 they gave me a piece of the fawn, and it was so young and tender, that one
 might eat the bones as well as the flesh, and yet i thought it very good.
 when night came on we sat down; it rained, but they quickly got up a bark
 wigwam, where i lay dry that night. i looked out in the morning, and many
 of them had lain in the rain all night, i saw by their reeking. thus the
 lord dealt mercifully with me many times, and i fared better than many of
 them. in the morning they took the blood of the deer, and put it into the
 paunch, and so boiled it. i could eat nothing of that, though they ate it
 sweetly. and yet they were so nice in other things, that when i had
 fetched water, and had put the dish i dipped the water with into the
 kettle of water which i brought, they would say they would knock me down;
 for they said, it was a sluttish trick.
 we went on our travel. i having got one handful of ground nuts, for my
 support that day, they gave me my load, and i went on cheerfully (with the
 thoughts of going homeward), having my burden more on my back than my
 spirit. we came to banquang river again that day, near which we abode a
 few days. sometimes one of them would give me a pipe, another a little
 tobacco, another a little salt: which i would change for a little
 victuals. i cannot but think what a wolvish appetite persons have in a
 starving condition; for many times when they gave me that which was hot, i
 was so greedy, that i should burn my mouth, that it would trouble me hours
 after, and yet i should quickly do the same again. and after i was
 thoroughly hungry, i was never again satisfied. for though sometimes it
 fell out, that i got enough, and did eat till i could eat no more, yet i
 was as unsatisfied as i was when i began. and now could i see that
 scripture verified (there being many scriptures which we do not take
 notice of, or understand till we are afflicted) "thou shalt eat and not be
 satisfied" (micah .). now might i see more than ever before, the
 miseries that sin hath brought upon us. many times i should be ready to
 run against the heathen, but the scripture would quiet me again, "shall
 there be evil in a city and the lord hath not done it?" (amos .). the
 lord help me to make a right improvement of his word, and that i might
 learn that great lesson: "he hath showed thee (oh man) what is good, and
 what doth the lord require of thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and
 walk humbly with thy god? hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it"
 (micah .-).
 we began this remove with wading over banquang river: the water was up to
 the knees, and the stream very swift, and so cold that i thought it would
 have cut me in sunder. i was so weak and feeble, that i reeled as i went
 along, and thought there i must end my days at last, after my bearing and
 getting through so many difficulties. the indians stood laughing to see me
 staggering along; but in my distress the lord gave me experience of the
 truth, and goodness of that promise, "when thou passest through the
 waters, i will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not
 overflow thee" (isaiah .). then i sat down to put on my stockings and
 shoes, with the tears running down mine eyes, and sorrowful thoughts in my
 heart, but i got up to go along with them. quickly there came up to us an
 indian, who informed them that i must go to wachusett to my master, for
 there was a letter come from the council to the sagamores, about redeeming
 the captives, and that there would be another in fourteen days, and that i
 must be there ready. my heart was so heavy before that i could scarce
 speak or go in the path; and yet now so light, that i could run. my
 strength seemed to come again, and recruit my feeble knees, and aching
 heart. yet it pleased them to go but one mile that night, and there we
 stayed two days. in that time came a company of indians to us, near
 thirty, all on horseback. my heart skipped within me, thinking they had
 been englishmen at the first sight of them, for they were dressed in
 english apparel, with hats, white neckcloths, and sashes about their
 waists; and ribbons upon their shoulders; but when they came near, there
 was a vast difference between the lovely faces of christians, and foul
 looks of those heathens, which much damped my spirit again.
 a comfortable remove it was to me, because of my hopes. they gave me a
 pack, and along we went cheerfully; but quickly my will proved more than
 my strength; having little or no refreshing, my strength failed me, and my
 spirits were almost quite gone. now may i say with david "i am poor and
 needy, and my heart is wounded within me. i am gone like the shadow when
 it declineth: i am tossed up and down like the locust; my knees are weak
 through fasting, and my flesh faileth of fatness" (psalm .-). at
 night we came to an indian town, and the indians sat down by a wigwam
 discoursing, but i was almost spent, and could scarce speak. i laid down
 my load, and went into the wigwam, and there sat an indian boiling of
 horses feet (they being wont to eat the flesh first, and when the feet
 were old and dried, and they had nothing else, they would cut off the feet
 and use them). i asked him to give me a little of his broth, or water they
 were boiling in; he took a dish, and gave me one spoonful of samp, and bid
 me take as much of the broth as i would. then i put some of the hot water
 to the samp, and drank it up, and my spirit came again. he gave me also a
 piece of the ruff or ridding of the small guts, and i broiled it on the
 coals; and now may i say with jonathan, "see, i pray you, how mine eyes
 have been enlightened, because i tasted a little of this honey" ( samuel
 .). now is my spirit revived again; though means be never so
 inconsiderable, yet if the lord bestow his blessing upon them, they shall
 refresh both soul and body.
 we took up our packs and along we went, but a wearisome day i had of it.
 as we went along i saw an englishman stripped naked, and lying dead upon
 the ground, but knew not who it was. then we came to another indian town,
 where we stayed all night. in this town there were four english children,
 captives; and one of them my own sister's. i went to see how she did, and
 she was well, considering her captive condition. i would have tarried that
 night with her, but they that owned her would not suffer it. then i went
 into another wigwam, where they were boiling corn and beans, which was a
 lovely sight to see, but i could not get a taste thereof. then i went to
 another wigwam, where there were two of the english children; the squaw
 was boiling horses feet; then she cut me off a little piece, and gave one
 of the english children a piece also. being very hungry i had quickly eat
 up mine, but the child could not bite it, it was so tough and sinewy, but
 lay sucking, gnawing, chewing and slabbering of it in the mouth and hand.
 then i took it of the child, and eat it myself, and savory it was to my
 taste. then i may say as job ., "the things that my soul refused to
 touch are as my sorrowful meat." thus the lord made that pleasant
 refreshing, which another time would have been an abomination. then i went
 home to my mistress's wigwam; and they told me i disgraced my master with
 begging, and if i did so any more, they would knock me in the head. i told
 them, they had as good knock me in head as starve me to death.
 they said, when we went out, that we must travel to wachusett this day.
 but a bitter weary day i had of it, traveling now three days together,
 without resting any day between. at last, after many weary steps, i saw
 wachusett hills, but many miles off. then we came to a great swamp,
 through which we traveled, up to the knees in mud and water, which was
 heavy going to one tired before. being almost spent, i thought i should
 have sunk down at last, and never got out; but i may say, as in psalm
 ., "when my foot slipped, thy mercy, o lord, held me up." going along,
 having indeed my life, but little spirit, philip, who was in the company,
 came up and took me by the hand, and said, two weeks more and you shall be
 mistress again. i asked him, if he spake true? he answered, "yes, and
 quickly you shall come to your master again; who had been gone from us
 three weeks." after many weary steps we came to wachusett, where he was:
 and glad i was to see him. he asked me, when i washed me? i told him not
 this month. then he fetched me some water himself, and bid me wash, and
 gave me the glass to see how i looked; and bid his squaw give me something
 to eat. so she gave me a mess of beans and meat, and a little ground nut
 cake. i was wonderfully revived with this favor showed me: "he made them
 also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives" (psalm .).
 my master had three squaws, living sometimes with one, and sometimes with
 another one, this old squaw, at whose wigwam i was, and with whom my
 master had been those three weeks. another was wattimore [weetamoo] with
 whom i had lived and served all this while. a severe and proud dame she
 was, bestowing every day in dressing herself neat as much time as any of
 the gentry of the land: powdering her hair, and painting her face, going
 with necklaces, with jewels in her ears, and bracelets upon her hands.
 when she had dressed herself, her work was to make girdles of wampum and
 beads. the third squaw was a younger one, by whom he had two papooses. by
 the time i was refreshed by the old squaw, with whom my master was,
 weetamoo's maid came to call me home, at which i fell aweeping. then the
 old squaw told me, to encourage me, that if i wanted victuals, i should
 come to her, and that i should lie there in her wigwam. then i went with
 the maid, and quickly came again and lodged there. the squaw laid a mat
 under me, and a good rug over me; the first time i had any such kindness
 showed me. i understood that weetamoo thought that if she should let me go
 and serve with the old squaw, she would be in danger to lose not only my
 service, but the redemption pay also. and i was not a little glad to hear
 this; being by it raised in my hopes, that in god's due time there would
 be an end of this sorrowful hour. then came an indian, and asked me to
 knit him three pair of stockings, for which i had a hat, and a silk
 handkerchief. then another asked me to make her a shift, for which she
 gave me an apron.
 then came tom and peter, with the second letter from the council, about
 the captives. though they were indians, i got them by the hand, and burst
 out into tears. my heart was so full that i could not speak to them; but
 recovering myself, i asked them how my husband did, and all my friends and
 acquaintance? they said, "they are all very well but melancholy." they
 brought me two biscuits, and a pound of tobacco. the tobacco i quickly
 gave away. when it was all gone, one asked me to give him a pipe of
 tobacco. i told him it was all gone. then began he to rant and threaten. i
 told him when my husband came i would give him some. hang him rogue (says
 he) i will knock out his brains, if he comes here. and then again, in the
 same breath they would say that if there should come an hundred without
 guns, they would do them no hurt. so unstable and like madmen they were.
 so that fearing the worst, i durst not send to my husband, though there
 were some thoughts of his coming to redeem and fetch me, not knowing what
 might follow. for there was little more trust to them than to the master
 they served. when the letter was come, the sagamores met to consult about
 the captives, and called me to them to inquire how much my husband would
 give to redeem me. when i came i sat down among them, as i was wont to do,
 as their manner is. then they bade me stand up, and said they were the
 general court. they bid me speak what i thought he would give. now knowing
 that all we had was destroyed by the indians, i was in a great strait. i
 thought if i should speak of but a little it would be slighted, and hinder
 the matter; if of a great sum, i knew not where it would be procured. yet
 at a venture i said "twenty pounds," yet desired them to take less. but
 they would not hear of that, but sent that message to boston, that for
 twenty pounds i should be redeemed. it was a praying indian that wrote
 their letter for them. there was another praying indian, who told me, that
 he had a brother, that would not eat horse; his conscience was so tender
 and scrupulous (though as large as hell, for the destruction of poor
 christians). then he said, he read that scripture to him, "there was a
 famine in samaria, and behold they besieged it, until an ass's head was
 sold for four-score pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cab of
 dove's dung for five pieces of silver" ( kings .). he expounded this
 place to his brother, and showed him that it was lawful to eat that in a
 famine which is not at another time. and now, says he, he will eat horse
 with any indian of them all. there was another praying indian, who when he
 had done all the mischief that he could, betrayed his own father into the
 english hands, thereby to purchase his own life. another praying indian
 was at sudbury fight, though, as he deserved, he was afterward hanged for
 it. there was another praying indian, so wicked and cruel, as to wear a
 string about his neck, strung with christians' fingers. another praying
 indian, when they went to sudbury fight, went with them, and his squaw
 also with him, with her papoose at her back. before they went to that
 fight they got a company together to pow-wow. the manner was as followeth:
 there was one that kneeled upon a deerskin, with the company round him in
 a ring who kneeled, and striking upon the ground with their hands, and
 with sticks, and muttering or humming with their mouths. besides him who
 kneeled in the ring, there also stood one with a gun in his hand. then he
 on the deerskin made a speech, and all manifested assent to it; and so
 they did many times together. then they bade him with the gun go out of
 the ring, which he did. but when he was out, they called him in again; but
 he seemed to make a stand; then they called the more earnestly, till he
 returned again. then they all sang. then they gave him two guns, in either
 hand one. and so he on the deerskin began again; and at the end of every
 sentence in his speaking, they all assented, humming or muttering with
 their mouths, and striking upon the ground with their hands. then they
 bade him with the two guns go out of the ring again; which he did, a
 little way. then they called him in again, but he made a stand. so they
 called him with greater earnestness; but he stood reeling and wavering as
 if he knew not whither he should stand or fall, or which way to go. then
 they called him with exceeding great vehemency, all of them, one and
 another. after a little while he turned in, staggering as he went, with
 his arms stretched out, in either hand a gun. as soon as he came in they
 all sang and rejoiced exceedingly a while. and then he upon the deerskin,
 made another speech unto which they all assented in a rejoicing manner.
 and so they ended their business, and forthwith went to sudbury fight. to
 my thinking they went without any scruple, but that they should prosper,
 and gain the victory. and they went out not so rejoicing, but they came
 home with as great a victory. for they said they had killed two captains
 and almost an hundred men. one englishman they brought along with them:
 and he said, it was too true, for they had made sad work at sudbury, as
 indeed it proved. yet they came home without that rejoicing and triumphing
 over their victory which they were wont to show at other times; but rather
 like dogs (as they say) which have lost their ears. yet i could not
 perceive that it was for their own loss of men. they said they had not
 lost above five or six; and i missed none, except in one wigwam. when they
 went, they acted as if the devil had told them that they should gain the
 victory; and now they acted as if the devil had told them they should have
 a fall. whither it were so or no, i cannot tell, but so it proved, for
 quickly they began to fall, and so held on that summer, till they came to
 utter ruin. they came home on a sabbath day, and the powaw that kneeled
 upon the deer-skin came home (i may say, without abuse) as black as the
 devil. when my master came home, he came to me and bid me make a shirt for
 his papoose, of a holland-laced pillowbere. about that time there came an
 indian to me and bid me come to his wigwam at night, and he would give me
 some pork and ground nuts. which i did, and as i was eating, another
 indian said to me, he seems to be your good friend, but he killed two
 englishmen at sudbury, and there lie their clothes behind you: i looked
 behind me, and there i saw bloody clothes, with bullet-holes in them. yet
 the lord suffered not this wretch to do me any hurt. yea, instead of that,
 he many times refreshed me; five or six times did he and his squaw refresh
 my feeble carcass. if i went to their wigwam at any time, they would
 always give me something, and yet they were strangers that i never saw
 before. another squaw gave me a piece of fresh pork, and a little salt
 with it, and lent me her pan to fry it in; and i cannot but remember what
 a sweet, pleasant and delightful relish that bit had to me, to this day.
 so little do we prize common mercies when we have them to the full.
 it was their usual manner to remove, when they had done any mischief, lest
 they should be found out; and so they did at this time. we went about
 three or four miles, and there they built a great wigwam, big enough to
 hold an hundred indians, which they did in preparation to a great day of
 dancing. they would say now amongst themselves, that the governor would be
 so angry for his loss at sudbury, that he would send no more about the
 captives, which made me grieve and tremble. my sister being not far from
 the place where we now were, and hearing that i was here, desired her
 master to let her come and see me, and he was willing to it, and would go
 with her; but she being ready before him, told him she would go before,
 and was come within a mile or two of the place. then he overtook her, and
 began to rant as if he had been mad, and made her go back again in the
 rain; so that i never saw her till i saw her in charlestown. but the lord
 requited many of their ill doings, for this indian her master, was hanged
 afterward at boston. the indians now began to come from all quarters,
 against their merry dancing day. among some of them came one goodwife
 kettle. i told her my heart was so heavy that it was ready to break. "so
 is mine too," said she, but yet said, "i hope we shall hear some good news
 shortly." i could hear how earnestly my sister desired to see me, and i as
 earnestly desired to see her; and yet neither of us could get an
 opportunity. my daughter was also now about a mile off, and i had not seen
 her in nine or ten weeks, as i had not seen my sister since our first
 taking. i earnestly desired them to let me go and see them: yea, i
 entreated, begged, and persuaded them, but to let me see my daughter; and
 yet so hard-hearted were they, that they would not suffer it. they made
 use of their tyrannical power whilst they had it; but through the lord's
 wonderful mercy, their time was now but short.
 on a sabbath day, the sun being about an hour high in the afternoon, came
 mr. john hoar (the council permitting him, and his own foreward spirit
 inclining him), together with the two forementioned indians, tom and
 peter, with their third letter from the council. when they came near, i
 was abroad. though i saw them not, they presently called me in, and bade
 me sit down and not stir. then they catched up their guns, and away they
 ran, as if an enemy had been at hand, and the guns went off apace. i
 manifested some great trouble, and they asked me what was the matter? i
 told them i thought they had killed the englishman (for they had in the
 meantime informed me that an englishman was come). they said, no. they
 shot over his horse and under and before his horse, and they pushed him
 this way and that way, at their pleasure, showing what they could do. then
 they let them come to their wigwams. i begged of them to let me see the
 englishman, but they would not. but there was i fain to sit their
 pleasure. when they had talked their fill with him, they suffered me to go
 to him. we asked each other of our welfare, and how my husband did, and
 all my friends? he told me they were all well, and would be glad to see
 me. amongst other things which my husband sent me, there came a pound of
 tobacco, which i sold for nine shillings in money; for many of the indians
 for want of tobacco, smoked hemlock, and ground ivy. it was a great
 mistake in any, who thought i sent for tobacco; for through the favor of
 god, that desire was overcome. i now asked them whether i should go home
 with mr. hoar? they answered no, one and another of them, and it being
 night, we lay down with that answer. in the morning mr. hoar invited the
 sagamores to dinner; but when we went to get it ready we found that they
 had stolen the greatest part of the provision mr. hoar had brought, out of
 his bags, in the night. and we may see the wonderful power of god, in that
 one passage, in that when there was such a great number of the indians
 together, and so greedy of a little good food, and no english there but
 mr. hoar and myself, that there they did not knock us in the head, and
 take what we had, there being not only some provision, but also
 trading-cloth, a part of the twenty pounds agreed upon. but instead of
 doing us any mischief, they seemed to be ashamed of the fact, and said, it
 were some matchit indian that did it. oh, that we could believe that there
 is nothing too hard for god! god showed his power over the heathen in
 this, as he did over the hungry lions when daniel was cast into the den.
 mr. hoar called them betime to dinner, but they ate very little, they
 being so busy in dressing themselves, and getting ready for their dance,
 which was carried on by eight of them, four men and four squaws. my master
 and mistress being two. he was dressed in his holland shirt, with great
 laces sewed at the tail of it; he had his silver buttons, his white
 stockings, his garters were hung round with shillings, and he had girdles
 of wampum upon his head and shoulders. she had a kersey coat, and covered
 with girdles of wampum from the loins upward. her arms from her elbows to
 her hands were covered with bracelets; there were handfuls of necklaces
 about her neck, and several sorts of jewels in her ears. she had fine red
 stockings, and white shoes, her hair powdered and face painted red, that
 was always before black. and all the dancers were after the same manner.
 there were two others singing and knocking on a kettle for their music.
 they kept hopping up and down one after another, with a kettle of water in
 the midst, standing warm upon some embers, to drink of when they were dry.
 they held on till it was almost night, throwing out wampum to the standers
 by. at night i asked them again, if i should go home? they all as one said
 no, except my husband would come for me. when we were lain down, my master
 went out of the wigwam, and by and by sent in an indian called james the
 printer, who told mr. hoar, that my master would let me go home tomorrow,
 if he would let him have one pint of liquors. then mr. hoar called his own
 indians, tom and peter, and bid them go and see whether he would promise
 it before them three; and if he would, he should have it; which he did,
 and he had it. then philip smelling the business called me to him, and
 asked me what i would give him, to tell me some good news, and speak a
 good word for me. i told him i could not tell what to give him. i would
 [give him] anything i had, and asked him what he would have? he said two
 coats and twenty shillings in money, and half a bushel of seed corn, and
 some tobacco. i thanked him for his love; but i knew the good news as well
 as the crafty fox. my master after he had had his drink, quickly came
 ranting into the wigwam again, and called for mr. hoar, drinking to him,
 and saying, he was a good man, and then again he would say, "hang him
 rogue." being almost drunk, he would drink to him, and yet presently say
 he should be hanged. then he called for me. i trembled to hear him, yet i
 was fain to go to him, and he drank to me, showing no incivility. he was
 the first indian i saw drunk all the while that i was amongst them. at
 last his squaw ran out, and he after her, round the wigwam, with his money
 jingling at his knees. but she escaped him. but having an old squaw he ran
 to her; and so through the lord's mercy, we were no more troubled that
 night. yet i had not a comfortable night's rest; for i think i can say, i
 did not sleep for three nights together. the night before the letter came
 from the council, i could not rest, i was so full of fears and troubles,
 god many times leaving us most in the dark, when deliverance is nearest.
 yea, at this time i could not rest night nor day. the next night i was
 overjoyed, mr. hoar being come, and that with such good tidings. the third
 night i was even swallowed up with the thoughts of things, viz. that ever
 i should go home again; and that i must go, leaving my children behind me
 in the wilderness; so that sleep was now almost departed from mine eyes.
 on tuesday morning they called their general court (as they call it) to
 consult and determine, whether i should go home or no. and they all as one
 man did seemingly consent to it, that i should go home; except philip, who
 would not come among them.
 but before i go any further, i would take leave to mention a few
 remarkable passages of providence, which i took special notice of in my
 afflicted time.
 . of the fair opportunity lost in the long march, a little after the fort
 fight, when our english army was so numerous, and in pursuit of the enemy,
 and so near as to take several and destroy them, and the enemy in such
 distress for food that our men might track them by their rooting in the
 earth for ground nuts, whilst they were flying for their lives. i say,
 that then our army should want provision, and be forced to leave their
 pursuit and return homeward; and the very next week the enemy came upon
 our town, like bears bereft of their whelps, or so many ravenous wolves,
 rending us and our lambs to death. but what shall i say? god seemed to
 leave his people to themselves, and order all things for his own holy
 ends. shall there be evil in the city and the lord hath not done it? they
 are not grieved for the affliction of joseph, therefore shall they go
 captive, with the first that go captive. it is the lord's doing, and it
 should be marvelous in our eyes.
 . i cannot but remember how the indians derided the slowness, and
 dullness of the english army, in its setting out. for after the
 desolations at lancaster and medfield, as i went along with them, they
 asked me when i thought the english army would come after them? i told
 them i could not tell. "it may be they will come in may," said they. thus
 did they scoff at us, as if the english would be a quarter of a year
 getting ready.
 . which also i have hinted before, when the english army with new
 supplies were sent forth to pursue after the enemy, and they understanding
 it, fled before them till they came to banquang river, where they
 forthwith went over safely; that that river should be impassable to the
 english. i can but admire to see the wonderful providence of god in
 preserving the heathen for further affliction to our poor country. they
 could go in great numbers over, but the english must stop. god had an
 over-ruling hand in all those things.
 . it was thought, if their corn were cut down, they would starve and die
 with hunger, and all their corn that could be found, was destroyed, and
 they driven from that little they had in store, into the woods in the
 midst of winter; and yet how to admiration did the lord preserve them for
 his holy ends, and the destruction of many still amongst the english!
 strangely did the lord provide for them; that i did not see (all the time
 i was among them) one man, woman, or child, die with hunger.
 though many times they would eat that, that a hog or a dog would hardly
 touch; yet by that god strengthened them to be a scourge to his people.
 the chief and commonest food was ground nuts. they eat also nuts and
 acorns, artichokes, lilly roots, ground beans, and several other weeds and
 roots, that i know not.
 they would pick up old bones, and cut them to pieces at the joints, and if
 they were full of worms and maggots, they would scald them over the fire
 to make the vermine come out, and then boil them, and drink up the liquor,
 and then beat the great ends of them in a mortar, and so eat them. they
 would eat horse's guts, and ears, and all sorts of wild birds which they
 could catch; also bear, venison, beaver, tortoise, frogs, squirrels, dogs,
 skunks, rattlesnakes; yea, the very bark of trees; besides all sorts of
 creatures, and provision which they plundered from the english. i can but
 stand in admiration to see the wonderful power of god in providing for
 such a vast number of our enemies in the wilderness, where there was
 nothing to be seen, but from hand to mouth. many times in a morning, the
 generality of them would eat up all they had, and yet have some further
 supply against they wanted. it is said, "oh, that my people had hearkened
 to me, and israel had walked in my ways, i should soon have subdued their
 enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries" (psalm .-).
 but now our perverse and evil carriages in the sight of the lord, have so
 offended him, that instead of turning his hand against them, the lord
 feeds and nourishes them up to be a scourge to the whole land.
 . another thing that i would observe is the strange providence of god, in
 turning things about when the indians was at the highest, and the english
 at the lowest. i was with the enemy eleven weeks and five days, and not
 one week passed without the fury of the enemy, and some desolation by fire
 and sword upon one place or other. they mourned (with their black faces)
 for their own losses, yet triumphed and rejoiced in their inhumane, and
 many times devilish cruelty to the english. they would boast much of their
 victories; saying that in two hours time they had destroyed such a captain
 and his company at such a place; and boast how many towns they had
 destroyed, and then scoff, and say they had done them a good turn to send
 them to heaven so soon. again, they would say this summer that they would
 knock all the rogues in the head, or drive them into the sea, or make them
 fly the country; thinking surely, agag-like, "the bitterness of death is
 past." now the heathen begins to think all is their own, and the poor
 christians' hopes to fail (as to man) and now their eyes are more to god,
 and their hearts sigh heaven-ward; and to say in good earnest, "help lord,
 or we perish." when the lord had brought his people to this, that they saw
 no help in anything but himself; then he takes the quarrel into his own
 hand; and though they had made a pit, in their own imaginations, as deep
 as hell for the christians that summer, yet the lord hurled themselves
 into it. and the lord had not so many ways before to preserve them, but
 now he hath as many to destroy them.
 but to return again to my going home, where we may see a remarkable change
 of providence. at first they were all against it, except my husband would
 come for me, but afterwards they assented to it, and seemed much to
 rejoice in it; some asked me to send them some bread, others some tobacco,
 others shaking me by the hand, offering me a hood and scarfe to ride in;
 not one moving hand or tongue against it. thus hath the lord answered my
 poor desire, and the many earnest requests of others put up unto god for
 me. in my travels an indian came to me and told me, if i were willing, he
 and his squaw would run away, and go home along with me. i told him no: i
 was not willing to run away, but desired to wait god's time, that i might
 go home quietly, and without fear. and now god hath granted me my desire.
 o the wonderful power of god that i have seen, and the experience that i
 have had. i have been in the midst of those roaring lions, and savage
 bears, that feared neither god, nor man, nor the devil, by night and day,
 alone and in company, sleeping all sorts together, and yet not one of them
 ever offered me the least abuse of unchastity to me, in word or action.
 though some are ready to say i speak it for my own credit; but i speak it
 in the presence of god, and to his glory. god's power is as great now, and
 as sufficient to save, as when he preserved daniel in the lion's den; or
 the three children in the fiery furnace. i may well say as his psalm
 . "oh give thanks unto the lord for he is good, for his mercy
 endureth for ever." let the redeemed of the lord say so, whom he hath
 redeemed from the hand of the enemy, especially that i should come away in
 the midst of so many hundreds of enemies quietly and peaceably, and not a
 dog moving his tongue. so i took my leave of them, and in coming along my
 heart melted into tears, more than all the while i was with them, and i
 was almost swallowed up with the thoughts that ever i should go home
 again. about the sun going down, mr. hoar, and myself, and the two indians
 came to lancaster, and a solemn sight it was to me. there had i lived many
 comfortable years amongst my relations and neighbors, and now not one
 christian to be seen, nor one house left standing. we went on to a
 farmhouse that was yet standing, where we lay all night, and a comfortable
 lodging we had, though nothing but straw to lie on. the lord preserved us
 in safety that night, and raised us up again in the morning, and carried
 us along, that before noon, we came to concord. now was i full of joy, and
 yet not without sorrow; joy to see such a lovely sight, so many christians
 together, and some of them my neighbors. there i met with my brother, and
 my brother-in-law, who asked me, if i knew where his wife was? poor heart!
 he had helped to bury her, and knew it not. she being shot down by the
 house was partly burnt, so that those who were at boston at the desolation
 of the town, and came back afterward, and buried the dead, did not know
 her. yet i was not without sorrow, to think how many were looking and
 longing, and my own children amongst the rest, to enjoy that deliverance
 that i had now received, and i did not know whether ever i should see them
 again. being recruited with food and raiment we went to boston that day,
 where i met with my dear husband, but the thoughts of our dear children,
 one being dead, and the other we could not tell where, abated our comfort
 each to other. i was not before so much hemmed in with the merciless and
 cruel heathen, but now as much with pitiful, tender-hearted and
 compassionate christians. in that poor, and distressed, and beggarly
 condition i was received in; i was kindly entertained in several houses.
 so much love i received from several (some of whom i knew, and others i
 knew not) that i am not capable to declare it. but the lord knows them all
 by name. the lord reward them sevenfold into their bosoms of his
 spirituals, for their temporals. the twenty pounds, the price of my
 redemption, was raised by some boston gentlemen, and mrs. usher, whose
 bounty and religious charity, i would not forget to make mention of. then
 mr. thomas shepard of charlestown received us into his house, where we
 continued eleven weeks; and a father and mother they were to us. and many
 more tender-hearted friends we met with in that place. we were now in the
 midst of love, yet not without much and frequent heaviness of heart for
 our poor children, and other relations, who were still in affliction. the
 week following, after my coming in, the governor and council sent forth to
 the indians again; and that not without success; for they brought in my
 sister, and goodwife kettle. their not knowing where our children were was
 a sore trial to us still, and yet we were not without secret hopes that we
 should see them again. that which was dead lay heavier upon my spirit,
 than those which were alive and amongst the heathen: thinking how it
 suffered with its wounds, and i was no way able to relieve it; and how it
 was buried by the heathen in the wilderness from among all christians. we
 were hurried up and down in our thoughts, sometime we should hear a report
 that they were gone this way, and sometimes that; and that they were come
 in, in this place or that. we kept inquiring and listening to hear
 concerning them, but no certain news as yet. about this time the council
 had ordered a day of public thanksgiving. though i thought i had still
 cause of mourning, and being unsettled in our minds, we thought we would
 ride toward the eastward, to see if we could hear anything concerning our
 children. and as we were riding along (god is the wise disposer of all
 things) between ipswich and rowley we met with mr. william hubbard, who
 told us that our son joseph was come in to major waldron's, and another
 with him, which was my sister's son. i asked him how he knew it? he said
 the major himself told him so. so along we went till we came to newbury;
 and their minister being absent, they desired my husband to preach the
 thanksgiving for them; but he was not willing to stay there that night,
 but would go over to salisbury, to hear further, and come again in the
 morning, which he did, and preached there that day. at night, when he had
 done, one came and told him that his daughter was come in at providence.
 here was mercy on both hands. now hath god fulfilled that precious
 scripture which was such a comfort to me in my distressed condition. when
 my heart was ready to sink into the earth (my children being gone, i could
 not tell whither) and my knees trembling under me, and i was walking
 through the valley of the shadow of death; then the lord brought, and now
 has fulfilled that reviving word unto me: "thus saith the lord, refrain
 thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be
 rewarded, saith the lord, and they shall come again from the land of the
 enemy." now we were between them, the one on the east, and the other on
 the west. our son being nearest, we went to him first, to portsmouth,
 where we met with him, and with the major also, who told us he had done
 what he could, but could not redeem him under seven pounds, which the good
 people thereabouts were pleased to pay. the lord reward the major, and all
 the rest, though unknown to me, for their labor of love. my sister's son
 was redeemed for four pounds, which the council gave order for the payment
 of. having now received one of our children, we hastened toward the other.
 going back through newbury my husband preached there on the sabbath day;
 for which they rewarded him many fold.
 on monday we came to charlestown, where we heard that the governor of
 rhode island had sent over for our daughter, to take care of her, being
 now within his jurisdiction; which should not pass without our
 acknowledgments. but she being nearer rehoboth than rhode island, mr.
 newman went over, and took care of her and brought her to his own house.
 and the goodness of god was admirable to us in our low estate, in that he
 raised up passionate friends on every side to us, when we had nothing to
 recompense any for their love. the indians were now gone that way, that it
 was apprehended dangerous to go to her. but the carts which carried
 provision to the english army, being guarded, brought her with them to
 dorchester, where we received her safe. blessed be the lord for it, for
 great is his power, and he can do whatsoever seemeth him good. her coming
 in was after this manner: she was traveling one day with the indians, with
 her basket at her back; the company of indians were got before her, and
 gone out of sight, all except one squaw; she followed the squaw till
 night, and then both of them lay down, having nothing over them but the
 heavens and under them but the earth. thus she traveled three days
 together, not knowing whither she was going; having nothing to eat or
 drink but water, and green hirtle-berries. at last they came into
 providence, where she was kindly entertained by several of that town. the
 indians often said that i should never have her under twenty pounds. but
 now the lord hath brought her in upon free-cost, and given her to me the
 second time. the lord make us a blessing indeed, each to others. now have
 i seen that scripture also fulfilled, "if any of thine be driven out to
 the outmost parts of heaven, from thence will the lord thy god gather
 thee, and from thence will he fetch thee. and the lord thy god will put
 all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them which hate thee, which
 persecuted thee" (deuteronomy .-). thus hath the lord brought me and
 mine out of that horrible pit, and hath set us in the midst of
 tender-hearted and compassionate christians. it is the desire of my soul
 that we may walk worthy of the mercies received, and which we are
 receiving.
 our family being now gathered together (those of us that were living), the
 south church in boston hired an house for us. then we removed from mr.
 shepard's, those cordial friends, and went to boston, where we continued
 about three-quarters of a year. still the lord went along with us, and
 provided graciously for us. i thought it somewhat strange to set up
 house-keeping with bare walls; but as solomon says, "money answers all
 things" and that we had through the benevolence of christian friends, some
 in this town, and some in that, and others; and some from england; that in
 a little time we might look, and see the house furnished with love. the
 lord hath been exceeding good to us in our low estate, in that when we had
 neither house nor home, nor other necessaries, the lord so moved the
 hearts of these and those towards us, that we wanted neither food, nor
 raiment for ourselves or ours: "there is a friend which sticketh closer
 than a brother" (proverbs .). and how many such friends have we found,
 and now living amongst? and truly such a friend have we found him to be
 unto us, in whose house we lived, viz. mr. james whitcomb, a friend unto
 us near hand, and afar off.
 i can remember the time when i used to sleep quietly without workings in
 my thoughts, whole nights together, but now it is other ways with me. when
 all are fast about me, and no eye open, but his who ever waketh, my
 thoughts are upon things past, upon the awful dispensation of the lord
 towards us, upon his wonderful power and might, in carrying of us through
 so many difficulties, in returning us in safety, and suffering none to
 hurt us. i remember in the night season, how the other day i was in the
 midst of thousands of enemies, and nothing but death before me. it is then
 hard work to persuade myself, that ever i should be satisfied with bread
 again. but now we are fed with the finest of the wheat, and, as i may say,
 with honey out of the rock. instead of the husk, we have the fatted calf.
 the thoughts of these things in the particulars of them, and of the love
 and goodness of god towards us, make it true of me, what david said of
 himself, "i watered my couch with my tears" (psalm .). oh! the wonderful
 power of god that mine eyes have seen, affording matter enough for my
 thoughts to run in, that when others are sleeping mine eyes are weeping.
 i have seen the extreme vanity of this world: one hour i have been in
 health, and wealthy, wanting nothing. but the next hour in sickness and
 wounds, and death, having nothing but sorrow and affliction.
 before i knew what affliction meant, i was ready sometimes to wish for it.
 when i lived in prosperity, having the comforts of the world about me, my
 relations by me, my heart cheerful, and taking little care for anything,
 and yet seeing many, whom i preferred before myself, under many trials and
 afflictions, in sickness, weakness, poverty, losses, crosses, and cares of
 the world, i should be sometimes jealous least i should have my portion in
 this life, and that scripture would come to my mind, "for whom the lord
 loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth" (hebrews
 .). but now i see the lord had his time to scourge and chasten me. the
 portion of some is to have their afflictions by drops, now one drop and
 then another; but the dregs of the cup, the wine of astonishment, like a
 sweeping rain that leaveth no food, did the lord prepare to be my portion.
 affliction i wanted, and affliction i had, full measure (i thought),
 pressed down and running over. yet i see, when god calls a person to
 anything, and through never so many difficulties, yet he is fully able to
 carry them through and make them see, and say they have been gainers
 thereby. and i hope i can say in some measure, as david did, "it is good
 for me that i have been afflicted." the lord hath showed me the vanity of
 these outward things. that they are the vanity of vanities, and vexation
 of spirit, that they are but a shadow, a blast, a bubble, and things of no
 continuance. that we must rely on god himself, and our whole dependance
 must be upon him. if trouble from smaller matters begin to arise in me, i
 have something at hand to check myself with, and say, why am i troubled?
 it was but the other day that if i had had the world, i would have given
 it for my freedom, or to have been a servant to a christian. i have
 learned to look beyond present and smaller troubles, and to be quieted
 under them. as moses said, "stand still and see the salvation of the lord"
 (exodus .).
 finis.
end of project gutenberg's captivity and restoration, by mrs. mary rowlandson
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org////
produced by an anonymous volunteer, and david widger
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
