 and eventful day to all upon our plantation. we had been expecting it.
 freedom was in the air, and had been for months. deserting soldiers
 returning to their homes were to be seen every day. others who had been
 discharged, or whose regiments had been paroled, were constantly passing
 near our place. the "grape-vine telegraph" was kept busy night and day.
 the news and mutterings of great events were swiftly carried from one
 plantation to another. in the fear of "yankee" invasions, the silverware
 and other valuables were taken from the "big house," buried in the woods,
 and guarded by trusted slaves. woe be to any one who would have attempted
 to disturb the buried treasure. the slaves would give the yankee soldiers
 food, drink, clothing—anything but that which had been specifically
 intrusted to their care and honour. as the great day drew nearer, there
 was more singing in the slave quarters than usual. it was bolder, had more
 ring, and lasted later into the night. most of the verses of the
 plantation songs had some reference to freedom. true, they had sung those
 same verses before, but they had been careful to explain that the
 "freedom" in these songs referred to the next world, and had no connection
 with life in this world. now they gradually threw off the mask, and were
 not afraid to let it be known that the "freedom" in their songs meant
 freedom of the body in this world. the night before the eventful day, word
 was sent to the slave quarters to the effect that something unusual was
 going to take place at the "big house" the next morning. there was little,
 if any, sleep that night. all as excitement and expectancy. early the next
 morning word was sent to all the slaves, old and young, to gather at the
 house. in company with my mother, brother, and sister, and a large number
 of other slaves, i went to the master's house. all of our master's family
 were either standing or seated on the veranda of the house, where they
 could see what was to take place and hear what was said. there was a
 feeling of deep interest, or perhaps sadness, on their faces, but not
 bitterness. as i now recall the impression they made upon me, they did not
 at the moment seem to be sad because of the loss of property, but rather
 because of parting with those whom they had reared and who were in many
 ways very close to them. the most distinct thing that i now recall in
 connection with the scene was that some man who seemed to be a stranger (a
 united states officer, i presume) made a little speech and then read a
 rather long paper—the emancipation proclamation, i think. after the
 reading we were told that we were all free, and could go when and where we
 pleased. my mother, who was standing by my side, leaned over and kissed
 her children, while tears of joy ran down her cheeks. she explained to us
 what it all meant, that this was the day for which she had been so long
 praying, but fearing that she would never live to see.
 for some minutes there was great rejoicing, and thanksgiving, and wild
 scenes of ecstasy. but there was no feeling of bitterness. in fact, there
 was pity among the slaves for our former owners. the wild rejoicing on the
 part of the emancipated coloured people lasted but for a brief period, for
 i noticed that by the time they returned to their cabins there was a
 change in their feelings. the great responsibility of being free, of
 having charge of themselves, of having to think and plan for themselves
 and their children, seemed to take possession of them. it was very much
 like suddenly turning a youth of ten or twelve years out into the world to
 provide for himself. in a few hours the great questions with which the
 anglo-saxon race had been grappling for centuries had been thrown upon
 these people to be solved. these were the questions of a home, a living,
 the rearing of children, education, citizenship, and the establishment and
 support of churches. was it any wonder that within a few hours the wild
 rejoicing ceased and a feeling of deep gloom seemed to pervade the slave
 quarters? to some it seemed that, now that they were in actual possession
 of it, freedom was a more serious thing than they had expected to find it.
 some of the slaves were seventy or eighty years old; their best days were
 gone. they had no strength with which to earn a living in a strange place
 and among strange people, even if they had been sure where to find a new
 place of abode. to this class the problem seemed especially hard. besides,
 deep down in their hearts there was a strange and peculiar attachment to
 "old marster" and "old missus," and to their children, which they found it
 hard to think of breaking off. with these they had spent in some cases
 nearly a half-century, and it was no light thing to think of parting.
 gradually, one by one, stealthily at first, the older slaves began to
 wander from the slave quarters back to the "big house" to have a whispered
 conversation with their former owners as to the future.
 chapter ii. boyhood days
 after the coming of freedom there were two points upon which practically
 all the people on our place were agreed, and i found that this was
 generally true throughout the south: that they must change their names,
 and that they must leave the old plantation for at least a few days or
 weeks in order that they might really feel sure that they were free.
 in some way a feeling got among the coloured people that it was far from
 proper for them to bear the surname of their former owners, and a great
 many of them took other surnames. this was one of the first signs of
 freedom. when they were slaves, a coloured person was simply called "john"
 or "susan." there was seldom occasion for more than the use of the one
 name. if "john" or "susan" belonged to a white man by the name of
 "hatcher," sometimes he was called "john hatcher," or as often "hatcher's
 john." but there was a feeling that "john hatcher" or "hatcher's john" was
 not the proper title by which to denote a freeman; and so in many cases
 "john hatcher" was changed to "john s. lincoln" or "john s. sherman," the
 initial "s" standing for no name, it being simply a part of what the
 coloured man proudly called his "entitles."
 as i have stated, most of the coloured people left the old plantation for
 a short while at least, so as to be sure, it seemed, that they could leave
 and try their freedom on to see how it felt. after they had remained away
 for a while, many of the older slaves, especially, returned to their old
 homes and made some kind of contract with their former owners by which
 they remained on the estate.
 my mother's husband, who was the stepfather of my brother john and myself,
 did not belong to the same owners as did my mother. in fact, he seldom
 came to our plantation. i remember seeing him there perhaps once a year,
 that being about christmas time. in some way, during the war, by running
 away and following the federal soldiers, it seems, he found his way into
 the new state of west virginia. as soon as freedom was declared, he sent
 for my mother to come to the kanawha valley, in west virginia. at that
 time a journey from virginia over the mountains to west virginia was
 rather a tedious and in some cases a painful undertaking. what little
 clothing and few household goods we had were placed in a cart, but the
 children walked the greater portion of the distance, which was several
 hundred miles.
 i do not think any of us ever had been very far from the plantation, and
 the taking of a long journey into another state was quite an event. the
 parting from our former owners and the members of our own race on the
 plantation was a serious occasion. from the time of our parting till their
 death we kept up a correspondence with the older members of the family,
 and in later years we have kept in touch with those who were the younger
 members. we were several weeks making the trip, and most of the time we
 slept in the open air and did our cooking over a log fire out-of-doors.
 one night i recall that we camped near an abandoned log cabin, and my
 mother decided to build a fire in that for cooking, and afterward to make
 a "pallet" on the floor for our sleeping. just as the fire had gotten well
 started a large black snake fully a yard and a half long dropped down the
 chimney and ran out on the floor. of course we at once abandoned that
 cabin. finally we reached our destination—a little town called
 malden, which is about five miles from charleston, the present capital of
 the state.
 at that time salt-mining was the great industry in that part of west
 virginia, and the little town of malden was right in the midst of the
 salt-furnaces. my stepfather had already secured a job at a salt-furnace,
 and he had also secured a little cabin for us to live in. our new house
 was no better than the one we had left on the old plantation in virginia.
 in fact, in one respect it was worse. notwithstanding the poor condition
 of our plantation cabin, we were at all times sure of pure air. our new
 home was in the midst of a cluster of cabins crowded closely together, and
 as there were no sanitary regulations, the filth about the cabins was
 often intolerable. some of our neighbours were coloured people, and some
 were the poorest and most ignorant and degraded white people. it was a
 motley mixture. drinking, gambling, quarrels, fights, and shockingly
 immoral practices were frequent. all who lived in the little town were in
 one way or another connected with the salt business. though i was a mere
 child, my stepfather put me and my brother at work in one of the furnaces.
 often i began work as early as four o'clock in the morning.
 the first thing i ever learned in the way of book knowledge was while
 working in this salt-furnace. each salt-packer had his barrels marked with
 a certain number. the number allotted to my stepfather was "." at the
 close of the day's work the boss of the packers would come around and put
 "" on each of our barrels, and i soon learned to recognize that figure
 wherever i saw it, and after a while got to the point where i could make
 that figure, though i knew nothing about any other figures or letters.
 from the time that i can remember having any thoughts about anything, i
 recall that i had an intense longing to learn to read. i determined, when
 quite a small child, that, if i accomplished nothing else in life, i would
 in some way get enough education to enable me to read common books and
 newspapers. soon after we got settled in some manner in our new cabin in
 west virginia, i induced my mother to get hold of a book for me. how or
 where she got it i do not know, but in some way she procured an old copy
 of webster's "blue-back" spelling-book, which contained the alphabet,
 followed by such meaningless words as "ab," "ba," "ca," "da." i began at
 once to devour this book, and i think that it was the first one i ever had
 in my hands. i had learned from somebody that the way to begin to read was
 to learn the alphabet, so i tried in all the ways i could think of to
 learn it,—all of course without a teacher, for i could find no one
 to teach me. at that time there was not a single member of my race
 anywhere near us who could read, and i was too timid to approach any of
 the white people. in some way, within a few weeks, i mastered the greater
 portion of the alphabet. in all my efforts to learn to read my mother
 shared fully my ambition, and sympathized with me and aided me in every
 way that she could. though she was totally ignorant, she had high
 ambitions for her children, and a large fund of good, hard, common sense,
 which seemed to enable her to meet and master every situation. if i have
 done anything in life worth attention, i feel sure that i inherited the
 disposition from my mother.
 in the midst of my struggles and longing for an education, a young
 coloured boy who had learned to read in the state of ohio came to malden.
 as soon as the coloured people found out that he could read, a newspaper
 was secured, and at the close of nearly every day's work this young man
 would be surrounded by a group of men and women who were anxious to hear
 him read the news contained in the papers. how i used to envy this man! he
 seemed to me to be the one young man in all the world who ought to be
 satisfied with his attainments.
 about this time the question of having some kind of a school opened for
 the coloured children in the village began to be discussed by members of
 the race. as it would be the first school for negro children that had ever
 been opened in that part of virginia, it was, of course, to be a great
 event, and the discussion excited the wildest interest. the most
 perplexing question was where to find a teacher. the young man from ohio
 who had learned to read the papers was considered, but his age was against
 him. in the midst of the discussion about a teacher, another young
 coloured man from ohio, who had been a soldier, in some way found his way
 into town. it was soon learned that he possessed considerable education,
 and he was engaged by the coloured people to teach their first school. as
 yet no free schools had been started for coloured people in that section,
 hence each family agreed to pay a certain amount per month, with the
 understanding that the teacher was to "board 'round"—that is, spend
 a day with each family. this was not bad for the teacher, for each family
 tried to provide the very best on the day the teacher was to be its guest.
 i recall that i looked forward with an anxious appetite to the "teacher's
 day" at our little cabin.
 this experience of a whole race beginning to go to school for the first
 time, presents one of the most interesting studies that has ever occurred
 in connection with the development of any race. few people who were not
 right in the midst of the scenes can form any exact idea of the intense
 desire which the people of my race showed for an education. as i have
 stated, it was a whole race trying to go to school. few were too young,
 and none too old, to make the attempt to learn. as fast as any kind of
 teachers could be secured, not only were day-schools filled, but
 night-schools as well. the great ambition of the older people was to try
 to learn to read the bible before they died. with this end in view men and
 women who were fifty or seventy-five years old would often be found in the
 night-school. some day-schools were formed soon after freedom, but the
 principal book studied in the sunday-school was the spelling-book.
 day-school, night-school, sunday-school, were always crowded, and often
 many had to be turned away for want of room.
 the opening of the school in the kanawha valley, however, brought to me
 one of the keenest disappointments that i ever experienced. i had been
 working in a salt-furnace for several months, and my stepfather had
 discovered that i had a financial value, and so, when the school opened,
 he decided that he could not spare me from my work. this decision seemed
 to cloud my every ambition. the disappointment was made all the more
 severe by reason of the fact that my place of work was where i could see
 the happy children passing to and from school mornings and afternoons.
 despite this disappointment, however, i determined that i would learn
 something, anyway. i applied myself with greater earnestness than ever to
 the mastering of what was in the "blue-back" speller.
 my mother sympathized with me in my disappointment, and sought to comfort
 me in all the ways she could, and to help me find a way to learn. after a
 while i succeeded in making arrangements with the teacher to give me some
 lessons at night, after the day's work was done. these night lessons were
 so welcome that i think i learned more at night than the other children
 did during the day. my own experiences in the night-school gave me faith
 in the night-school idea, with which, in after years, i had to do both at
 hampton and tuskegee. but my boyish heart was still set upon going to the
 day-school, and i let no opportunity slip to push my case. finally i won,
 and was permitted to go to the school in the day for a few months, with
 the understanding that i was to rise early in the morning and work in the
 furnace till nine o'clock, and return immediately after school closed in
 the afternoon for at least two more hours of work.
 the schoolhouse was some distance from the furnace, and as i had to work
 till nine o'clock, and the school opened at nine, i found myself in a
 difficulty. school would always be begun before i reached it, and
 sometimes my class had recited. to get around this difficulty i yielded to
 a temptation for which most people, i suppose, will condemn me; but since
 it is a fact, i might as well state it. i have great faith in the power
 and influence of facts. it is seldom that anything is permanently gained
 by holding back a fact. there was a large clock in a little office in the
 furnace. this clock, of course, all the hundred or more workmen depended
 upon to regulate their hours of beginning and ending the day's work. i got
 the idea that the way for me to reach school on time was to move the clock
 hands from half-past eight up to the nine o'clock mark. this i found
 myself doing morning after morning, till the furnace "boss" discovered
 that something was wrong, and locked the clock in a case. i did not mean
 to inconvenience anybody. i simply meant to reach that schoolhouse in
 time.
 when, however, i found myself at the school for the first time, i also
 found myself confronted with two other difficulties. in the first place, i
 found that all the other children wore hats or caps on their heads, and i
 had neither hat nor cap. in fact, i do not remember that up to the time of
 going to school i had ever worn any kind of covering upon my head, nor do
 i recall that either i or anybody else had even thought anything about the
 need of covering for my head. but, of course, when i saw how all the other
 boys were dressed, i began to feel quite uncomfortable. as usual, i put
 the case before my mother, and she explained to me that she had no money
 with which to buy a "store hat," which was a rather new institution at
 that time among the members of my race and was considered quite the thing
 for young and old to own, but that she would find a way to help me out of
 the difficulty. she accordingly got two pieces of "homespun" (jeans) and
 sewed them together, and i was soon the proud possessor of my first cap.
 the lesson that my mother taught me in this has always remained with me,
 and i have tried as best as i could to teach it to others. i have always
 felt proud, whenever i think of the incident, that my mother had strength
 of character enough not to be led into the temptation of seeming to be
 that which she was not—of trying to impress my schoolmates and
 others with the fact that she was able to buy me a "store hat" when she
 was not. i have always felt proud that she refused to go into debt for
 that which she did not have the money to pay for. since that time i have
 owned many kinds of caps and hats, but never one of which i have felt so
 proud as of the cap made of the two pieces of cloth sewed together by my
 mother. i have noted the fact, but without satisfaction, i need not add,
 that several of the boys who began their careers with "store hats" and who
 were my schoolmates and used to join in the sport that was made of me
 because i had only a "homespun" cap, have ended their careers in the
 penitentiary, while others are not able now to buy any kind of hat.
 my second difficulty was with regard to my name, or rather a name.
 from the time when i could remember anything, i had been called simply
 "booker." before going to school it had never occurred to me that it was
 needful or appropriate to have an additional name. when i heard the
 school-roll called, i noticed that all of the children had at least two
 names, and some of them indulged in what seemed to me the extravagance of
 having three. i was in deep perplexity, because i knew that the teacher
 would demand of me at least two names, and i had only one. by the time the
 occasion came for the enrolling of my name, an idea occurred to me which i
 thought would make me equal to the situation; and so, when the teacher
 asked me what my full name was, i calmly told him "booker washington," as
 if i had been called by that name all my life; and by that name i have
 since been known. later in my life i found that my mother had given me the
 name of "booker taliaferro" soon after i was born, but in some way that
 part of my name seemed to disappear and for a long while was forgotten,
 but as soon as i found out about it i revived it, and made my full name
 "booker taliaferro washington." i think there are not many men in our
 country who have had the privilege of naming themselves in the way that i
 have.
 more than once i have tried to picture myself in the position of a boy or
 man with an honoured and distinguished ancestry which i could trace back
 through a period of hundreds of years, and who had not only inherited a
 name, but fortune and a proud family homestead; and yet i have sometimes
 had the feeling that if i had inherited these, and had been a member of a
 more popular race, i should have been inclined to yield to the temptation
 of depending upon my ancestry and my colour to do that for me which i
 should do for myself. years ago i resolved that because i had no ancestry
 myself i would leave a record of which my children would be proud, and
 which might encourage them to still higher effort.
 the world should not pass judgment upon the negro, and especially the
 negro youth, too quickly or too harshly. the negro boy has obstacles,
 discouragements, and temptations to battle with that are little known to
 those not situated as he is. when a white boy undertakes a task, it is
 taken for granted that he will succeed. on the other hand, people are
 usually surprised if the negro boy does not fail. in a word, the negro
 youth starts out with the presumption against him.
 the influence of ancestry, however, is important in helping forward any
 individual or race, if too much reliance is not placed upon it. those who
 constantly direct attention to the negro youth's moral weaknesses, and
 compare his advancement with that of white youths, do not consider the
 influence of the memories which cling about the old family homesteads. i
 have no idea, as i have stated elsewhere, who my grandmother was. i have,
 or have had, uncles and aunts and cousins, but i have no knowledge as to
 where most of them are. my case will illustrate that of hundreds of
 thousands of black people in every part of our country. the very fact that
 the white boy is conscious that, if he fails in life, he will disgrace the
 whole family record, extending back through many generations, is of
 tremendous value in helping him to resist temptations. the fact that the
 individual has behind and surrounding him proud family history and
 connection serves as a stimulus to help him to overcome obstacles when
 striving for success.
 the time that i was permitted to attend school during the day was short,
 and my attendance was irregular. it was not long before i had to stop
 attending day-school altogether, and devote all of my time again to work.
 i resorted to the night-school again. in fact, the greater part of the
 education i secured in my boyhood was gathered through the night-school
 after my day's work was done. i had difficulty often in securing a
 satisfactory teacher. sometimes, after i had secured some one to teach me
 at night, i would find, much to my disappointment, that the teacher knew
 but little more than i did. often i would have to walk several miles at
 night in order to recite my night-school lessons. there was never a time
 in my youth, no matter how dark and discouraging the days might be, when
 one resolve did not continually remain with me, and that was a
 determination to secure an education at any cost.
 soon after we moved to west virginia, my mother adopted into our family,
 notwithstanding our poverty, an orphan boy, to whom afterward we gave the
 name of james b. washington. he has ever since remained a member of the
 family.
 after i had worked in the salt-furnace for some time, work was secured for
 me in a coal-mine which was operated mainly for the purpose of securing
 fuel for the salt-furnace. work in the coal-mine i always dreaded. one
 reason for this was that any one who worked in a coal-mine was always
 unclean, at least while at work, and it was a very hard job to get one's
 skin clean after the day's work was over. then it was fully a mile from
 the opening of the coal-mine to the face of the coal, and all, of course,
 was in the blackest darkness. i do not believe that one ever experiences
 anywhere else such darkness as he does in a coal-mine. the mine was
 divided into a large number of different "rooms" or departments, and, as i
 never was able to learn the location of all these "rooms," i many times
 found myself lost in the mine. to add to the horror of being lost,
 sometimes my light would go out, and then, if i did not happen to have a
 match, i would wander about in the darkness until by chance i found some
 one to give me a light. the work was not only hard, but it was dangerous.
 there was always the danger of being blown to pieces by a premature
 explosion of powder, or of being crushed by falling slate. accidents from
 one or the other of these causes were frequently occurring, and this kept
 me in constant fear. many children of the tenderest years were compelled
 then, as is now true i fear, in most coal-mining districts, to spend a
 large part of their lives in these coal-mines, with little opportunity to
 get an education; and, what is worse, i have often noted that, as a rule,
 young boys who begin life in a coal-mine are often physically and mentally
 dwarfed. they soon lose ambition to do anything else than to continue as a
 coal-miner.
 in those days, and later as a young man, i used to try to picture in my
 imagination the feelings and ambitions of a white boy with absolutely no
 limit placed upon his aspirations and activities. i used to envy the white
 boy who had no obstacles placed in the way of his becoming a congressman,
 governor, bishop, or president by reason of the accident of his birth or
 race. i used to picture the way that i would act under such circumstances;
 how i would begin at the bottom and keep rising until i reached the
 highest round of success.
 in later years, i confess that i do not envy the white boy as i once did.
 i have learned that success is to be measured not so much by the position
 that one has reached in life as by the obstacles which he has overcome
 while trying to succeed. looked at from this standpoint, i almost reached
 the conclusion that often the negro boy's birth and connection with an
 unpopular race is an advantage, so far as real life is concerned. with few
 exceptions, the negro youth must work harder and must perform his tasks
 even better than a white youth in order to secure recognition. but out of
 the hard and unusual struggle through which he is compelled to pass, he
 gets a strength, a confidence, that one misses whose pathway is
 comparatively smooth by reason of birth and race.
 from any point of view, i had rather be what i am, a member of the negro
 race, than be able to claim membership with the most favoured of any other
 race. i have always been made sad when i have heard members of any race
 claiming rights or privileges, or certain badges of distinction, on the
 ground simply that they were members of this or that race, regardless of
 their own individual worth or attainments. i have been made to feel sad
 for such persons because i am conscious of the fact that mere connection
 with what is known as a superior race will not permanently carry an
 individual forward unless he has individual worth, and mere connection
 with what is regarded as an inferior race will not finally hold an
 individual back if he possesses intrinsic, individual merit. every
 persecuted individual and race should get much consolation out of the
 great human law, which is universal and eternal, that merit, no matter
 under what skin found, is, in the long run, recognized and rewarded. this
 i have said here, not to call attention to myself as an individual, but to
 the race to which i am proud to belong.
 chapter iii. the struggle for an education
 one day, while at work in the coal-mine, i happened to overhear two miners
 talking about a great school for coloured people somewhere in virginia.
 this was the first time that i had ever heard anything about any kind of
 school or college that was more pretentious than the little coloured
 school in our town.
 in the darkness of the mine i noiselessly crept as close as i could to the
 two men who were talking. i heard one tell the other that not only was the
 school established for the members of any race, but the opportunities that
 it provided by which poor but worthy students could work out all or a part
 of the cost of a board, and at the same time be taught some trade or
 industry.
 as they went on describing the school, it seemed to me that it must be the
 greatest place on earth, and not even heaven presented more attractions
 for me at that time than did the hampton normal and agricultural institute
 in virginia, about which these men were talking. i resolved at once to go
 to that school, although i had no idea where it was, or how many miles
 away, or how i was going to reach it; i remembered only that i was on fire
 constantly with one ambition, and that was to go to hampton. this thought
 was with me day and night.
 after hearing of the hampton institute, i continued to work for a few
 months longer in the coal-mine. while at work there, i heard of a vacant
 position in the household of general lewis ruffner, the owner of the
 salt-furnace and coal-mine. mrs. viola ruffner, the wife of general
 ruffner, was a "yankee" woman from vermont. mrs. ruffner had a reputation
 all through the vicinity for being very strict with her servants, and
 especially with the boys who tried to serve her. few of them remained with
 her more than two or three weeks. they all left with the same excuse: she
 was too strict. i decided, however, that i would rather try mrs. ruffner's
 house than remain in the coal-mine, and so my mother applied to her for
 the vacant position. i was hired at a salary of $ per month.
 i had heard so much about mrs. ruffner's severity that i was almost afraid
 to see her, and trembled when i went into her presence. i had not lived
 with her many weeks, however, before i began to understand her. i soon
 began to learn that, first of all, she wanted everything kept clean about
 her, that she wanted things done promptly and systematically, and that at
 the bottom of everything she wanted absolute honesty and frankness.
 nothing must be sloven or slipshod; every door, every fence, must be kept
 in repair.
 i cannot now recall how long i lived with mrs. ruffner before going to
 hampton, but i think it must have been a year and a half. at any rate, i
 here repeat what i have said more than once before, that the lessons that
 i learned in the home of mrs. ruffner were as valuable to me as any
 education i have ever gotten anywhere else. even to this day i never see
 bits of paper scattered around a house or in the street that i do not want
 to pick them up at once. i never see a filthy yard that i do not want to
 clean it, a paling off of a fence that i do not want to put it on, an
 unpainted or unwhitewashed house that i do not want to paint or whitewash
 it, or a button off one's clothes, or a grease-spot on them or on a floor,
 that i do not want to call attention to it.
 from fearing mrs. ruffner i soon learned to look upon her as one of my
 best friends. when she found that she could trust me she did so
 implicitly. during the one or two winters that i was with her she gave me
 an opportunity to go to school for an hour in the day during a portion of
 the winter months, but most of my studying was done at night, sometimes
 alone, sometimes under some one whom i could hire to teach me. mrs.
 ruffner always encouraged and sympathized with me in all my efforts to get
 an education. it was while living with her that i began to get together my
 first library. i secured a dry-goods box, knocked out one side of it, put
 some shelves in it, and began putting into it every kind of book that i
 could get my hands upon, and called it my "library."
 notwithstanding my success at mrs. ruffner's i did not give up the idea of
 going to the hampton institute. in the fall of  i determined to make
 an effort to get there, although, as i have stated, i had no definite idea
 of the direction in which hampton was, or of what it would cost to go
 there. i do not think that any one thoroughly sympathized with me in my
 ambition to go to hampton unless it was my mother, and she was troubled
 with a grave fear that i was starting out on a "wild-goose chase." at any
 rate, i got only a half-hearted consent from her that i might start. the
 small amount of money that i had earned had been consumed by my stepfather
 and the remainder of the family, with the exception of a very few dollars,
 and so i had very little with which to buy clothes and pay my travelling
 expenses. my brother john helped me all that he could, but of course that
 was not a great deal, for his work was in the coal-mine, where he did not
 earn much, and most of what he did earn went in the direction of paying
 the household expenses.
 perhaps the thing that touched and pleased me most in connection with my
 starting for hampton was the interest that many of the older coloured
 people took in the matter. they had spent the best days of their lives in
 slavery, and hardly expected to live to see the time when they would see a
 member of their race leave home to attend a boarding-school. some of these
 older people would give me a nickel, others a quarter, or a handkerchief.
 finally the great day came, and i started for hampton. i had only a small,
 cheap satchel that contained a few articles of clothing i could get. my
 mother at the time was rather weak and broken in health. i hardly expected
 to see her again, and thus our parting was all the more sad. she, however,
 was very brave through it all. at that time there were no through trains
 connecting that part of west virginia with eastern virginia. trains ran
 only a portion of the way, and the remainder of the distance was travelled
 by stage-coaches.
 the distance from malden to hampton is about five hundred miles. i had not
 been away from home many hours before it began to grow painfully evident
 that i did not have enough money to pay my fare to hampton. one experience
 i shall long remember. i had been travelling over the mountains most of
 the afternoon in an old-fashion stage-coach, when, late in the evening,
 the coach stopped for the night at a common, unpainted house called a
 hotel. all the other passengers except myself were whites. in my ignorance
 i supposed that the little hotel existed for the purpose of accommodating
 the passengers who travelled on the stage-coach. the difference that the
 colour of one's skin would make i had not thought anything about. after
 all the other passengers had been shown rooms and were getting ready for
 supper, i shyly presented myself before the man at the desk. it is true i
 had practically no money in my pocket with which to pay for bed or food,
 but i had hoped in some way to beg my way into the good graces of the
 landlord, for at that season in the mountains of virginia the weather was
 cold, and i wanted to get indoors for the night. without asking as to
 whether i had any money, the man at the desk firmly refused to even
 consider the matter of providing me with food or lodging. this was my
 first experience in finding out what the colour of my skin meant. in some
 way i managed to keep warm by walking about, and so got through the night.
 my whole soul was so bent upon reaching hampton that i did not have time
 to cherish any bitterness toward the hotel-keeper.
 by walking, begging rides both in wagons and in the cars, in some way,
 after a number of days, i reached the city of richmond, virginia, about
 eighty-two miles from hampton. when i reached there, tired, hungry, and
 dirty, it was late in the night. i had never been in a large city, and
 this rather added to my misery. when i reached richmond, i was completely
 out of money. i had not a single acquaintance in the place, and, being
 unused to city ways, i did not know where to go. i applied at several
 places for lodging, but they all wanted money, and that was what i did not
 have. knowing nothing else better to do, i walked the streets. in doing
 this i passed by many food-stands where fried chicken and half-moon apple
 pies were piled high and made to present a most tempting appearance. at
 that time it seemed to me that i would have promised all that i expected
 to possess in the future to have gotten hold of one of those chicken legs
 or one of those pies. but i could not get either of these, nor anything
 else to eat.
 i must have walked the streets till after midnight. at last i became so
 exhausted that i could walk no longer. i was tired, i was hungry, i was
 everything but discouraged. just about the time when i reached extreme
 physical exhaustion, i came upon a portion of a street where the board
 sidewalk was considerably elevated. i waited for a few minutes, till i was
 sure that no passers-by could see me, and then crept under the sidewalk
 and lay for the night upon the ground, with my satchel of clothing for a
 pillow. nearly all night i could hear the tramp of feet over my head. the
 next morning i found myself somewhat refreshed, but i was extremely
 hungry, because it had been a long time since i had had sufficient food.
 as soon as it became light enough for me to see my surroundings i noticed
 that i was near a large ship, and that this ship seemed to be unloading a
 cargo of pig iron. i went at once to the vessel and asked the captain to
 permit me to help unload the vessel in order to get money for food. the
 captain, a white man, who seemed to be kind-hearted, consented. i worked
 long enough to earn money for my breakfast, and it seems to me, as i
 remember it now, to have been about the best breakfast that i have ever
 eaten.
 my work pleased the captain so well that he told me if i desired i could
 continue working for a small amount per day. this i was very glad to do. i
 continued working on this vessel for a number of days. after buying food
 with the small wages i received there was not much left to add on the
 amount i must get to pay my way to hampton. in order to economize in every
 way possible, so as to be sure to reach hampton in a reasonable time, i
 continued to sleep under the same sidewalk that gave me shelter the first
 night i was in richmond. many years after that the coloured citizens of
 richmond very kindly tendered me a reception at which there must have been
 two thousand people present. this reception was held not far from the spot
 where i slept the first night i spent in the city, and i must confess that
 my mind was more upon the sidewalk that first gave me shelter than upon
 the recognition, agreeable and cordial as it was.
 when i had saved what i considered enough money with which to reach
 hampton, i thanked the captain of the vessel for his kindness, and started
 again. without any unusual occurrence i reached hampton, with a surplus of
 exactly fifty cents with which to begin my education. to me it had been a
 long, eventful journey; but the first sight of the large, three-story,
 brick school building seemed to have rewarded me for all that i had
 undergone in order to reach the place. if the people who gave the money to
 provide that building could appreciate the influence the sight of it had
 upon me, as well as upon thousands of other youths, they would feel all
 the more encouraged to make such gifts. it seemed to me to be the largest
 and most beautiful building i had ever seen. the sight of it seemed to
 give me new life. i felt that a new kind of existence had now begun—that
 life would now have a new meaning. i felt that i had reached the promised
 land, and i resolved to let no obstacle prevent me from putting forth the
 highest effort to fit myself to accomplish the most good in the world.
 as soon as possible after reaching the grounds of the hampton institute, i
 presented myself before the head teacher for an assignment to a class.
 having been so long without proper food, a bath, and a change of clothing,
 i did not, of course, make a very favourable impression upon her, and i
 could see at once that there were doubts in her mind about the wisdom of
 admitting me as a student. i felt that i could hardly blame her if she got
 the idea that i was a worthless loafer or tramp. for some time she did not
 refuse to admit me, neither did she decide in my favour, and i continued
 to linger about her, and to impress her in all the ways i could with my
 worthiness. in the meantime i saw her admitting other students, and that
 added greatly to my discomfort, for i felt, deep down in my heart, that i
 could do as well as they, if i could only get a chance to show what was in
 me.
 after some hours had passed, the head teacher said to me: "the adjoining
 recitation-room needs sweeping. take the broom and sweep it."
 it occurred to me at once that here was my chance. never did i receive an
 order with more delight. i knew that i could sweep, for mrs. ruffner had
 thoroughly taught me how to do that when i lived with her.
 i swept the recitation-room three times. then i got a dusting-cloth and
 dusted it four times. all the woodwork around the walls, every bench,
 table, and desk, i went over four times with my dusting-cloth. besides,
 every piece of furniture had been moved and every closet and corner in the
 room had been thoroughly cleaned. i had the feeling that in a large
 measure my future depended upon the impression i made upon the teacher in
 the cleaning of that room. when i was through, i reported to the head
 teacher. she was a "yankee" woman who knew just where to look for dirt.
 she went into the room and inspected the floor and closets; then she took
 her handkerchief and rubbed it on the woodwork about the walls, and over
 the table and benches. when she was unable to find one bit of dirt on the
 floor, or a particle of dust on any of the furniture, she quietly
 remarked, "i guess you will do to enter this institution."
 i was one of the happiest souls on earth. the sweeping of that room was my
 college examination, and never did any youth pass an examination for
 entrance into harvard or yale that gave him more genuine satisfaction. i
 have passed several examinations since then, but i have always felt that
 this was the best one i ever passed.
 i have spoken of my own experience in entering the hampton institute.
 perhaps few, if any, had anything like the same experience that i had, but
 about the same period there were hundreds who found their way to hampton
 and other institutions after experiencing something of the same
 difficulties that i went through. the young men and women were determined
 to secure an education at any cost.
 the sweeping of the recitation-room in the manner that i did it seems to
 have paved the way for me to get through hampton. miss mary f. mackie, the
 head teacher, offered me a position as janitor. this, of course, i gladly
 accepted, because it was a place where i could work out nearly all the
 cost of my board. the work was hard and taxing but i stuck to it. i had a
 large number of rooms to care for, and had to work late into the night,
 while at the same time i had to rise by four o'clock in the morning, in
 order to build the fires and have a little time in which to prepare my
 lessons. in all my career at hampton, and ever since i have been out in
 the world, miss mary f. mackie, the head teacher to whom i have referred,
 proved one of my strongest and most helpful friends. her advice and
 encouragement were always helpful in strengthening to me in the darkest
 hour.
 i have spoken of the impression that was made upon me by the buildings and
 general appearance of the hampton institute, but i have not spoken of that
 which made the greatest and most lasting impression on me, and that was a
 great man—the noblest, rarest human being that it has ever been my
 privilege to meet. i refer to the late general samuel c. armstrong.
 it has been my fortune to meet personally many of what are called great
 characters, both in europe and america, but i do not hesitate to say that
 i never met any man who, in my estimation, was the equal of general
 armstrong. fresh from the degrading influences of the slave plantation and
 the coal-mines, it was a rare privilege for me to be permitted to come
 into direct contact with such a character as general armstrong. i shall
 always remember that the first time i went into his presence he made the
 impression upon me of being a perfect man: i was made to feel that there
 was something about him that was superhuman. it was my privilege to know
 the general personally from the time i entered hampton till he died, and
 the more i saw of him the greater he grew in my estimation. one might have
 removed from hampton all the buildings, class-rooms, teachers, and
 industries, and given the men and women there the opportunity of coming
 into daily contact with general armstrong, and that alone would have been
 a liberal education. the older i grow, the more i am convinced that there
 is no education which one can get from books and costly apparatus that is
 equal to that which can be gotten from contact with great men and women.
 instead of studying books so constantly, how i wish that our schools and
 colleges might learn to study men and things!
 general armstrong spent two of the last six months of his life in my home
 at tuskegee. at that time he was paralyzed to the extent that he had lost
 control of his body and voice in a very large degree. notwithstanding his
 affliction, he worked almost constantly night and day for the cause to
 which he had given his life. i never saw a man who so completely lost
 sight of himself. i do not believe he ever had a selfish thought. he was
 just as happy in trying to assist some other institution in the south as
 he was when working for hampton. although he fought the southern white man
 in the civil war, i never heard him utter a bitter word against him
 afterward. on the other hand, he was constantly seeking to find ways by
 which he could be of service to the southern whites.
 it would be difficult to describe the hold that he had upon the students
 at hampton, or the faith they had in him. in fact, he was worshipped by
 his students. it never occurred to me that general armstrong could fail in
 anything that he undertook. there is almost no request that he could have
 made that would not have been complied with. when he was a guest at my
 home in alabama, and was so badly paralyzed that he had to be wheeled
 about in an invalid's chair, i recall that one of the general's former
 students had occasion to push his chair up a long, steep hill that taxed
 his strength to the utmost. when the top of the hill was reached, the
 former pupil, with a glow of happiness on his face, exclaimed, "i am so
 glad that i have been permitted to do something that was real hard for the
 general before he dies!" while i was a student at hampton, the dormitories
 became so crowded that it was impossible to find room for all who wanted
 to be admitted. in order to help remedy the difficulty, the general
 conceived the plan of putting up tents to be used as rooms. as soon as it
 became known that general armstrong would be pleased if some of the older
 students would live in the tents during the winter, nearly every student
 in school volunteered to go.
 i was one of the volunteers. the winter that we spent in those tents was
 an intensely cold one, and we suffered severely—how much i am sure
 general armstrong never knew, because we made no complaints. it was enough
 for us to know that we were pleasing general armstrong, and that we were
 making it possible for an additional number of students to secure an
 education. more than once, during a cold night, when a stiff gale would be
 blowing, our tent was lifted bodily, and we would find ourselves in the
 open air. the general would usually pay a visit to the tents early in the
 morning, and his earnest, cheerful, encouraging voice would dispel any
 feeling of despondency.
 i have spoken of my admiration for general armstrong, and yet he was but a
 type of that christlike body of men and women who went into the negro
 schools at the close of the war by the hundreds to assist in lifting up my
 race. the history of the world fails to show a higher, purer, and more
 unselfish class of men and women than those who found their way into those
 negro schools.
 life at hampton was a constant revelation to me; was constantly taking me
 into a new world. the matter of having meals at regular hours, of eating
 on a tablecloth, using a napkin, the use of the bath-tub and of the
 tooth-brush, as well as the use of sheets upon the bed, were all new to
 me.
 i sometimes feel that almost the most valuable lesson i got at the hampton
 institute was in the use and value of the bath. i learned there for the
 first time some of its value, not only in keeping the body healthy, but in
 inspiring self-respect and promoting virtue. in all my travels in the
 south and elsewhere since leaving hampton i have always in some way sought
 my daily bath. to get it sometimes when i have been the guest of my own
 people in a single-roomed cabin has not always been easy to do, except by
 slipping away to some stream in the woods. i have always tried to teach my
 people that some provision for bathing should be a part of every house.
 for some time, while a student at hampton, i possessed but a single pair
 of socks, but when i had worn these till they became soiled, i would wash
 them at night and hang them by the fire to dry, so that i might wear them
 again the next morning.
 the charge for my board at hampton was ten dollars per month. i was
 expected to pay a part of this in cash and to work out the remainder. to
 meet this cash payment, as i have stated, i had just fifty cents when i
 reached the institution. aside from a very few dollars that my brother
 john was able to send me once in a while, i had no money with which to pay
 my board. i was determined from the first to make my work as janitor so
 valuable that my services would be indispensable. this i succeeded in
 doing to such an extent that i was soon informed that i would be allowed
 the full cost of my board in return for my work. the cost of tuition was
 seventy dollars a year. this, of course, was wholly beyond my ability to
 provide. if i had been compelled to pay the seventy dollars for tuition,
 in addition to providing for my board, i would have been compelled to
 leave the hampton school. general armstrong, however, very kindly got mr.
 s. griffitts morgan, of new bedford, mass., to defray the cost of my
 tuition during the whole time that i was at hampton. after i finished the
 course at hampton and had entered upon my lifework at tuskegee, i had the
 pleasure of visiting mr. morgan several times.
 after having been for a while at hampton, i found myself in difficulty
 because i did not have books and clothing. usually, however, i got around
 the trouble about books by borrowing from those who were more fortunate
 than myself. as to clothes, when i reached hampton i had practically
 nothing. everything that i possessed was in a small hand satchel. my
 anxiety about clothing was increased because of the fact that general
 armstrong made a personal inspection of the young men in ranks, to see
 that their clothes were clean. shoes had to be polished, there must be no
 buttons off the clothing, and no grease-spots. to wear one suit of clothes
 continually, while at work and in the schoolroom, and at the same time
 keep it clean, was rather a hard problem for me to solve. in some way i
 managed to get on till the teachers learned that i was in earnest and
 meant to succeed, and then some of them were kind enough to see that i was
 partly supplied with second-hand clothing that had been sent in barrels
 from the north. these barrels proved a blessing to hundreds of poor but
 deserving students. without them i question whether i should ever have
 gotten through hampton.
 when i first went to hampton i do not recall that i had ever slept in a
 bed that had two sheets on it. in those days there were not many buildings
 there, and room was very precious. there were seven other boys in the same
 room with me; most of them, however, students who had been there for some
 time. the sheets were quite a puzzle to me. the first night i slept under
 both of them, and the second night i slept on top of them; but by watching
 the other boys i learned my lesson in this, and have been trying to follow
 it ever since and to teach it to others.
 i was among the youngest of the students who were in hampton at the time.
 most of the students were men and women—some as old as forty years
 of age. as i now recall the scene of my first year, i do not believe that
 one often has the opportunity of coming into contact with three or four
 hundred men and women who were so tremendously in earnest as these men and
 women were. every hour was occupied in study or work. nearly all had had
 enough actual contact with the world to teach them the need of education.
 many of the older ones were, of course, too old to master the text-books
 very thoroughly, and it was often sad to watch their struggles; but they
 made up in earnest much of what they lacked in books. many of them were as
 poor as i was, and, besides having to wrestle with their books, they had
 to struggle with a poverty which prevented their having the necessities of
 life. many of them had aged parents who were dependent upon them, and some
 of them were men who had wives whose support in some way they had to
 provide for.
 the great and prevailing idea that seemed to take possession of every one
 was to prepare himself to lift up the people at his home. no one seemed to
 think of himself. and the officers and teachers, what a rare set of human
 beings they were! they worked for the students night and day, in seasons
 and out of season. they seemed happy only when they were helping the
 students in some manner. whenever it is written—and i hope it will
 be—the part that the yankee teachers played in the education of the
 negroes immediately after the war will make one of the most thrilling
 parts of the history off this country. the time is not far distant when
 the whole south will appreciate this service in a way that it has not yet
 been able to do.
 chapter iv. helping others
 at the end of my first year at hampton i was confronted with another
 difficulty. most of the students went home to spend their vacation. i had
 no money with which to go home, but i had to go somewhere. in those days
 very few students were permitted to remain at the school during vacation.
 it made me feel very sad and homesick to see the other students preparing
 to leave and starting for home. i not only had no money with which to go
 home, but i had none with which to go anywhere.
 in some way, however, i had gotten hold of an extra, second-hand coat
 which i thought was a pretty valuable coat. this i decided to sell, in
 order to get a little money for travelling expenses. i had a good deal of
 boyish pride, and i tried to hide, as far as i could, from the other
 students the fact that i had no money and nowhere to go. i made it known
 to a few people in the town of hampton that i had this coat to sell, and,
 after a good deal of persuading, one coloured man promised to come to my
 room to look the coat over and consider the matter of buying it. this
 cheered my drooping spirits considerably. early the next morning my
 prospective customer appeared. after looking the garment over carefully,
 he asked me how much i wanted for it. i told him i thought it was worth
 three dollars. he seemed to agree with me as to price, but remarked in the
 most matter-of-fact way: "i tell you what i will do; i will take the coat,
 and will pay you five cents, cash down, and pay you the rest of the money
 just as soon as i can get it." it is not hard to imagine what my feelings
 were at the time.
 with this disappointment i gave up all hope of getting out of the town of
 hampton for my vacation work. i wanted very much to go where i might
 secure work that would at least pay me enough to purchase some much-needed
 clothing and other necessities. in a few days practically all the students
 and teachers had left for their homes, and this served to depress my
 spirits even more.
 after trying for several days in and near the town of hampton, i finally
 secured work in a restaurant at fortress monroe. the wages, however, were
 very little more than my board. at night, and between meals, i found
 considerable time for study and reading; and in this direction i improved
 myself very much during the summer.
 when i left school at the end of my first year, i owed the institution
 sixteen dollars that i had not been able to work out. it was my greatest
 ambition during the summer to save money enough with which to pay this
 debt. i felt that this was a debt of honour, and that i could hardly bring
 myself to the point of even trying to enter school again till it was paid.
 i economized in every way that i could think of—did my own washing,
 and went without necessary garments—but still i found my summer
 vacation ending and i did not have the sixteen dollars.
 one day, during the last week of my stay in the restaurant, i found under
 one of the tables a crisp, new ten-dollar bill. i could hardly contain
 myself, i was so happy. as it was not my place of business i felt it to be
 the proper thing to show the money to the proprietor. this i did. he
 seemed as glad as i was, but he coolly explained to me that, as it was his
 place of business, he had a right to keep the money, and he proceeded to
 do so. this, i confess, was another pretty hard blow to me. i will not say
 that i became discouraged, for as i now look back over my life i do not
 recall that i ever became discouraged over anything that i set out to
 accomplish. i have begun everything with the idea that i could succeed,
 and i never had much patience with the multitudes of people who are always
 ready to explain why one cannot succeed. i determined to face the
 situation just as it was. at the end of the week i went to the treasurer
 of the hampton institute, general j.f.b. marshall, and told him frankly my
 condition. to my gratification he told me that i could reenter the
 institution, and that he would trust me to pay the debt when i could.
 during the second year i continued to work as a janitor.
 the education that i received at hampton out of the text-books was but a
 small part of what i learned there. one of the things that impressed
 itself upon me deeply, the second year, was the unselfishness of the
 teachers. it was hard for me to understand how any individuals could bring
 themselves to the point where they could be so happy in working for
 others. before the end of the year, i think i began learning that those
 who are happiest are those who do the most for others. this lesson i have
 tried to carry with me ever since.
 i also learned a valuable lesson at hampton by coming into contact with
 the best breeds of live stock and fowls. no student, i think, who has had
 the opportunity of doing this could go out into the world and content
 himself with the poorest grades.
 perhaps the most valuable thing that i got out of my second year was an
 understanding of the use and value of the bible. miss nathalie lord, one
 of the teachers, from portland, me., taught me how to use and love the
 bible. before this i had never cared a great deal about it, but now i
 learned to love to read the bible, not only for the spiritual help which
 it gives, but on account of it as literature. the lessons taught me in
 this respect took such a hold upon me that at the present time, when i am
 at home, no matter how busy i am, i always make it a rule to read a
 chapter or a portion of a chapter in the morning, before beginning the
 work of the day.
 whatever ability i may have as a public speaker i owe in a measure to miss
 lord. when she found out that i had some inclination in this direction,
 she gave me private lessons in the matter of breathing, emphasis, and
 articulation. simply to be able to talk in public for the sake of talking
 has never had the least attraction to me. in fact, i consider that there
 is nothing so empty and unsatisfactory as mere abstract public speaking;
 but from my early childhood i have had a desire to do something to make
 the world better, and then to be able to speak to the world about that
 thing.
 the debating societies at hampton were a constant source of delight to me.
 these were held on saturday evening; and during my whole life at hampton i
 do not recall that i missed a single meeting. i not only attended the
 weekly debating society, but was instrumental in organizing an additional
 society. i noticed that between the time when supper was over and the time
 to begin evening study there were about twenty minutes which the young men
 usually spent in idle gossip. about twenty of us formed a society for the
 purpose of utilizing this time in debate or in practice in public
 speaking. few persons ever derived more happiness or benefit from the use
 of twenty minutes of time than we did in this way.
 at the end of my second year at hampton, by the help of some money sent me
 by my mother and brother john, supplemented by a small gift from one of
 the teachers at hampton, i was enabled to return to my home in malden,
 west virginia, to spend my vacation. when i reached home i found that the
 salt-furnaces were not running, and that the coal-mine was not being
 operated on account of the miners being out on "strike." this was
 something which, it seemed, usually occurred whenever the men got two or
 three months ahead in their savings. during the strike, of course, they
 spent all that they had saved, and would often return to work in debt at
 the same wages, or would move to another mine at considerable expense. in
 either case, my observations convinced me that the miners were worse off
 at the end of the strike. before the days of strikes in that section of
 the country, i knew miners who had considerable money in the bank, but as
 soon as the professional labour agitators got control, the savings of even
 the more thrifty ones began disappearing.
 my mother and the other members of my family were, of course, much
 rejoiced to see me and to note the improvement that i had made during my
 two years' absence. the rejoicing on the part of all classes of the
 coloured people, and especially the older ones, over my return, was almost
 pathetic. i had to pay a visit to each family and take a meal with each,
 and at each place tell the story of my experiences at hampton. in addition
 to this i had to speak before the church and sunday-school, and at various
 other places. the thing that i was most in search of, though, work, i
 could not find. there was no work on account of the strike. i spent nearly
 the whole of the first month of my vacation in an effort to find something
 to do by which i could earn money to pay my way back to hampton and save a
 little money to use after reaching there.
 toward the end of the first month, i went to a place a considerable
 distance from my home, to try to find employment. i did not succeed, and
 it was night before i got started on my return. when i had gotten within a
 mile or so of my home i was so completely tired out that i could not walk
 any farther, and i went into an old, abandoned house to spend the
 remainder of the night. about three o'clock in the morning my brother john
 found me asleep in this house, and broke to me, as gently as he could, the
 sad news that our dear mother had died during the night.
 this seemed to me the saddest and blankest moment in my life. for several
 years my mother had not been in good health, but i had no idea, when i
 parted from her the previous day, that i should never see her alive again.
 besides that, i had always had an intense desire to be with her when she
 did pass away. one of the chief ambitions which spurred me on at hampton
 was that i might be able to get to be in a position in which i could
 better make my mother comfortable and happy. she had so often expressed
 the wish that she might be permitted to live to see her children educated
 and started out in the world.
 in a very short time after the death of my mother our little home was in
 confusion. my sister amanda, although she tried to do the best she could,
 was too young to know anything about keeping house, and my stepfather was
 not able to hire a housekeeper. sometimes we had food cooked for us, and
 sometimes we did not. i remember that more than once a can of tomatoes and
 some crackers constituted a meal. our clothing went uncared for, and
 everything about our home was soon in a tumble-down condition. it seems to
 me that this was the most dismal period of my life.
 my good friend, mrs. ruffner, to whom i have already referred, always made
 me welcome at her home, and assisted me in many ways during this trying
 period. before the end of the vacation she gave me some work, and this,
 together with work in a coal-mine at some distance from my home, enabled
 me to earn a little money.
 at one time it looked as if i would have to give up the idea of returning
 to hampton, but my heart was so set on returning that i determined not to
 give up going back without a struggle. i was very anxious to secure some
 clothes for the winter, but in this i was disappointed, except for a few
 garments which my brother john secured for me. notwithstanding my need of
 money and clothing, i was very happy in the fact that i had secured enough
 money to pay my travelling expenses back to hampton. once there, i knew
 that i could make myself so useful as a janitor that i could in some way
 get through the school year.
 three weeks before the time for the opening of the term at hampton, i was
 pleasantly surprised to receive a letter from my good friend miss mary f.
 mackie, the lady principal, asking me to return to hampton two weeks
 before the opening of the school, in order that i might assist her in
 cleaning the buildings and getting things in order for the new school
 year. this was just the opportunity i wanted. it gave me a chance to
 secure a credit in the treasurer's office. i started for hampton at once.
 during these two weeks i was taught a lesson which i shall never forget.
 miss mackie was a member of one of the oldest and most cultured families
 of the north, and yet for two weeks she worked by my side cleaning
 windows, dusting rooms, putting beds in order, and what not. she felt that
 things would not be in condition for the opening of school unless every
 window-pane was perfectly clean, and she took the greatest satisfaction in
 helping to clean them herself. the work which i have described she did
 every year that i was at hampton.
 it was hard for me at this time to understand how a woman of her education
 and social standing could take such delight in performing such service, in
 order to assist in the elevation of an unfortunate race. ever since then i
 have had no patience with any school for my race in the south which did
 not teach its students the dignity of labour.
 during my last year at hampton every minute of my time that was not
 occupied with my duties as janitor was devoted to hard study. i was
 determined, if possible, to make such a record in my class as would cause
 me to be placed on the "honour roll" of commencement speakers. this i was
 successful in doing. it was june of  when i finished the regular
 course of study at hampton. the greatest benefits that i got out of my my
 life at the hampton institute, perhaps, may be classified under two heads:—
 first was contact with a great man, general s.c. armstrong, who, i repeat,
 was, in my opinion, the rarest, strongest, and most beautiful character
 that it has ever been my privilege to meet.
 second, at hampton, for the first time, i learned what education was
 expected to do for an individual. before going there i had a good deal of
 the then rather prevalent idea among our people that to secure an
 education meant to have a good, easy time, free from all necessity for
 manual labour. at hampton i not only learned that it was not a disgrace to
 labour, but learned to love labour, not alone for its financial value, but
 for labour's own sake and for the independence and self-reliance which the
 ability to do something which the world wants done brings. at that
 institution i got my first taste of what it meant to live a life of
 unselfishness, my first knowledge of the fact that the happiest
 individuals are those who do the most to make others useful and happy.
 i was completely out of money when i graduated. in company with other
 hampton students, i secured a place as a table waiter in a summer hotel in
 connecticut, and managed to borrow enough money with which to get there. i
 had not been in this hotel long before i found out that i knew practically
 nothing about waiting on a hotel table. the head waiter, however, supposed
 that i was an accomplished waiter. he soon gave me charge of the table at
 which there sat four or five wealthy and rather aristocratic people. my
 ignorance of how to wait upon them was so apparent that they scolded me in
 such a severe manner that i became frightened and left their table,
 leaving them sitting there without food. as a result of this i was reduced
 from the position of waiter to that of a dish-carrier.
 but i determined to learn the business of waiting, and did so within a few
 weeks and was restored to my former position. i have had the satisfaction
 of being a guest in this hotel several times since i was a waiter there.
 at the close of the hotel season i returned to my former home in malden,
 and was elected to teach the coloured school at that place. this was the
 beginning of one of the happiest periods of my life. i now felt that i had
 the opportunity to help the people of my home town to a higher life. i
 felt from the first that mere book education was not all that the young
 people of that town needed. i began my work at eight o'clock in the
 morning, and, as a rule, it did not end until ten o'clock at night. in
 addition to the usual routine of teaching, i taught the pupils to comb
 their hair, and to keep their hands and faces clean, as well as their
 clothing. i gave special attention to teaching them the proper use of the
 tooth-brush and the bath. in all my teaching i have watched carefully the
 influence of the tooth-brush, and i am convinced that there are few single
 agencies of civilization that are more far-reaching.
 there were so many of the older boys and girls in the town, as well as men
 and women, who had to work in the daytime and still were craving an
 opportunity for an education, that i soon opened a night-school. from the
 first, this was crowded every night, being about as large as the school
 that i taught in the day. the efforts of some of the men and women, who in
 many cases were over fifty years of age, to learn, were in some cases very
 pathetic.
 my day and night school work was not all that i undertook. i established a
 small reading-room and a debating society. on sundays i taught two
 sunday-schools, one in the town of malden in the afternoon, and the other
 in the morning at a place three miles distant from malden. in addition to
 this, i gave private lessons to several young men whom i was fitting to
 send to the hampton institute. without regard to pay and with little
 thought of it, i taught any one who wanted to learn anything that i could
 teach him. i was supremely happy in the opportunity of being able to
 assist somebody else. i did receive, however, a small salary from the
 public fund, for my work as a public-school teacher.
 during the time that i was a student at hampton my older brother, john,
 not only assisted me all that he could, but worked all of the time in the
 coal-mines in order to support the family. he willingly neglected his own
 education that he might help me. it was my earnest wish to help him to
 prepare to enter hampton, and to save money to assist him in his expenses
 there. both of these objects i was successful in accomplishing. in three
 years my brother finished the course at hampton, and he is now holding the
 important position of superintendent of industries at tuskegee. when he
 returned from hampton, we both combined our efforts and savings to send
 our adopted brother, james, through the hampton institute. this we
 succeeded in doing, and he is now the postmaster at the tuskegee
 institute. the year , which was my second year of teaching in malden,
 i spent very much as i did the first.
 it was while my home was at malden that what was known as the "ku klux
 klan" was in the height of its activity. the "ku klux" were bands of men
 who had joined themselves together for the purpose of regulating the
 conduct of the coloured people, especially with the object of preventing
 the members of the race from exercising any influence in politics. they
 corresponded somewhat to the "patrollers" of whom i used to hear a great
 deal during the days of slavery, when i was a small boy. the "patrollers"
 were bands of white men—usually young men—who were organized
 largely for the purpose of regulating the conduct of the slaves at night
 in such matters as preventing the slaves from going from one plantation to
 another without passes, and for preventing them from holding any kind of
 meetings without permission and without the presence at these meetings of
 at least one white man.
 like the "patrollers" the "ku klux" operated almost wholly at night. they
 were, however, more cruel than the "patrollers." their objects, in the
 main, were to crush out the political aspirations of the negroes, but they
 did not confine themselves to this, because schoolhouses as well as
 churches were burned by them, and many innocent persons were made to
 suffer. during this period not a few coloured people lost their lives.
 as a young man, the acts of these lawless bands made a great impression
 upon me. i saw one open battle take place at malden between some of the
 coloured and white people. there must have been not far from a hundred
 persons engaged on each side; many on both sides were seriously injured,
 among them general lewis ruffner, the husband of my friend mrs. viola
 ruffner. general ruffner tried to defend the coloured people, and for this
 he was knocked down and so seriously wounded that he never completely
 recovered. it seemed to me as i watched this struggle between members of
 the two races, that there was no hope for our people in this country. the
 "ku klux" period was, i think, the darkest part of the reconstruction
 days.
 i have referred to this unpleasant part of the history of the south simply
 for the purpose of calling attention to the great change that has taken
 place since the days of the "ku klux." to-day there are no such
 organizations in the south, and the fact that such ever existed is almost
 forgotten by both races. there are few places in the south now where
 public sentiment would permit such organizations to exist.
 chapter v. the reconstruction period
 the years from  to  i think may be called the period of
 reconstruction. this included the time that i spent as a student at
 hampton and as a teacher in west virginia. during the whole of the
 reconstruction period two ideas were constantly agitating in the minds of
 the coloured people, or, at least, in the minds of a large part of the
 race. one of these was the craze for greek and latin learning, and the
 other was a desire to hold office.
 it could not have been expected that a people who had spent generations in
 slavery, and before that generations in the darkest heathenism, could at
 first form any proper conception of what an education meant. in every part
 of the south, during the reconstruction period, schools, both day and
 night, were filled to overflowing with people of all ages and conditions,
 some being as far along in age as sixty and seventy years. the ambition to
 secure an education was most praiseworthy and encouraging. the idea,
 however, was too prevalent that, as soon as one secured a little
 education, in some unexplainable way he would be free from most of the
 hardships of the world, and, at any rate, could live without manual
 labour. there was a further feeling that a knowledge, however little, of
 the greek and latin languages would make one a very superior human being,
 something bordering almost on the supernatural. i remember that the first
 coloured man whom i saw who knew something about foreign languages
 impressed me at the time as being a man of all others to be envied.
 naturally, most of our people who received some little education became
 teachers or preachers. while among those two classes there were many
 capable, earnest, godly men and women, still a large proportion took up
 teaching or preaching as an easy way to make a living. many became
 teachers who could do little more than write their names. i remember there
 came into our neighbourhood one of this class, who was in search of a
 school to teach, and the question arose while he was there as to the shape
 of the earth and how he could teach the children concerning the subject.
 he explained his position in the matter by saying that he was prepared to
 teach that the earth was either flat or round, according to the preference
 of a majority of his patrons.
 the ministry was the profession that suffered most—and still
 suffers, though there has been great improvement—on account of not
 only ignorant but in many cases immoral men who claimed that they were
 "called to preach." in the earlier days of freedom almost every coloured
 man who learned to read would receive "a call to preach" within a few days
 after he began reading. at my home in west virginia the process of being
 called to the ministry was a very interesting one. usually the "call" came
 when the individual was sitting in church. without warning the one called
 would fall upon the floor as if struck by a bullet, and would lie there
 for hours, speechless and motionless. then the news would spread all
 through the neighborhood that this individual had received a "call." if he
 were inclined to resist the summons, he would fall or be made to fall a
 second or third time. in the end he always yielded to the call. while i
 wanted an education badly, i confess that in my youth i had a fear that
 when i had learned to read and write very well i would receive one of
 these "calls"; but, for some reason, my call never came.
 when we add the number of wholly ignorant men who preached or "exhorted"
 to that of those who possessed something of an education, it can be seen
 at a glance that the supply of ministers was large. in fact, some time ago
 i knew a certain church that had a total membership of about two hundred,
 and eighteen of that number were ministers. but, i repeat, in many
 communities in the south the character of the ministry is being improved,
 and i believe that within the next two or three decades a very large
 proportion of the unworthy ones will have disappeared. the "calls" to
 preach, i am glad to say, are not nearly so numerous now as they were
 formerly, and the calls to some industrial occupation are growing more
 numerous. the improvement that has taken place in the character of the
 teachers is even more marked than in the case of the ministers.
 during the whole of the reconstruction period our people throughout the
 south looked to the federal government for everything, very much as a
 child looks to its mother. this was not unnatural. the central government
 gave them freedom, and the whole nation had been enriched for more than
 two centuries by the labour of the negro. even as a youth, and later in
 manhood, i had the feeling that it was cruelly wrong in the central
 government, at the beginning of our freedom, to fail to make some
 provision for the general education of our people in addition to what the
 states might do, so that the people would be the better prepared for the
 duties of citizenship.
 it is easy to find fault, to remark what might have been done, and
 perhaps, after all, and under all the circumstances, those in charge of
 the conduct of affairs did the only thing that could be done at the time.
 still, as i look back now over the entire period of our freedom, i cannot
 help feeling that it would have been wiser if some plan could have been
 put in operation which would have made the possession of a certain amount
 of education or property, or both, a test for the exercise of the
 franchise, and a way provided by which this test should be made to apply
 honestly and squarely to both the white and black races.
 though i was but little more than a youth during the period of
 reconstruction, i had the feeling that mistakes were being made, and that
 things could not remain in the condition that they were in then very long.
 i felt that the reconstruction policy, so far as it related to my race,
 was in a large measure on a false foundation, was artificial and forced.
 in many cases it seemed to me that the ignorance of my race was being used
 as a tool with which to help white men into office, and that there was an
 element in the north which wanted to punish the southern white men by
 forcing the negro into positions over the heads of the southern whites. i
 felt that the negro would be the one to suffer for this in the end.
 besides, the general political agitation drew the attention of our people
 away from the more fundamental matters of perfecting themselves in the
 industries at their doors and in securing property.
 the temptations to enter political life were so alluring that i came very
 near yielding to them at one time, but i was kept from doing so by the
 feeling that i would be helping in a more substantial way by assisting in
 the laying of the foundation of the race through a generous education of
 the hand, head, and heart. i saw coloured men who were members of the
 state legislatures, and county officers, who, in some cases, could not
 read or write, and whose morals were as weak as their education. not long
 ago, when passing through the streets of a certain city in the south, i
 heard some brick-masons calling out, from the top of a two-story brick
 building on which they were working, for the "governor" to "hurry up and
 bring up some more bricks." several times i heard the command, "hurry up,
 governor!" "hurry up, governor!" my curiosity was aroused to such an
 extent that i made inquiry as to who the "governor" was, and soon found
 that he was a coloured man who at one time had held the position of
 lieutenant-governor of his state.
 but not all the coloured people who were in office during reconstruction
 were unworthy of their positions, by any means. some of them, like the
 late senator b.k. bruce, governor pinchback, and many others, were strong,
 upright, useful men. neither were all the class designated as
 carpetbaggers dishonourable men. some of them, like ex-governor bullock,
 of georgia, were men of high character and usefulness.
 of course the coloured people, so largely without education, and wholly
 without experience in government, made tremendous mistakes, just as many
 people similarly situated would have done. many of the southern whites
 have a feeling that, if the negro is permitted to exercise his political
 rights now to any degree, the mistakes of the reconstruction period will
 repeat themselves. i do not think this would be true, because the negro is
 a much stronger and wiser man than he was thirty-five years ago, and he is
 fast learning the lesson that he cannot afford to act in a manner that
 will alienate his southern white neighbours from him. more and more i am
 convinced that the final solution of the political end of our race problem
 will be for each state that finds it necessary to change the law bearing
 upon the franchise to make the law apply with absolute honesty, and
 without opportunity for double dealing or evasion, to both races alike.
 any other course my daily observation in the south convinces me, will be
 unjust to the negro, unjust to the white man, and unfair to the rest of
 the state in the union, and will be, like slavery, a sin that at some time
 we shall have to pay for.
 in the fall of , after having taught school in malden for two years,
 and after i had succeeded in preparing several of the young men and women,
 besides my two brothers, to enter the hampton institute, i decided to
 spend some months in study at washington, d.c. i remained there for eight
 months. i derived a great deal of benefit from the studies which i
 pursued, and i came into contact with some strong men and women. at the
 institution i attended there was no industrial training given to the
 students, and i had an opportunity of comparing the influence of an
 institution with no industrial training with that of one like the hampton
 institute, that emphasizes the industries. at this school i found the
 students, in most cases, had more money, were better dressed, wore the
 latest style of all manner of clothing, and in some cases were more
 brilliant mentally. at hampton it was a standing rule that, while the
 institution would be responsible for securing some one to pay the tuition
 for the students, the men and women themselves must provide for their own
 board, books, clothing, and room wholly by work, or partly by work and
 partly in cash. at the institution at which i now was, i found that a
 large portion of the students by some means had their personal expenses
 paid for them. at hampton the student was constantly making the effort
 through the industries to help himself, and that very effort was of
 immense value in character-building. the students at the other school
 seemed to be less self-dependent. they seemed to give more attention to
 mere outward appearances. in a word, they did not appear to me to be
 beginning at the bottom, on a real, solid foundation, to the extent that
 they were at hampton. they knew more about latin and greek when they left
 school, but they seemed to know less about life and its conditions as they
 would meet it at their homes. having lived for a number of years in the
 midst of comfortable surroundings, they were not as much inclined as the
 hampton students to go into the country districts of the south, where
 there was little of comfort, to take up work for our people, and they were
 more inclined to yield to the temptation to become hotel waiters and
 pullman-car porters as their life-work.
 during the time i was a student at washington the city was crowded with
 coloured people, many of whom had recently come from the south. a large
 proportion of these people had been drawn to washington because they felt
 that they could lead a life of ease there. others had secured minor
 government positions, and still another large class was there in the hope
 of securing federal positions. a number of coloured men—some of them
 very strong and brilliant—were in the house of representatives at
 that time, and one, the hon. b.k. bruce, was in the senate. all this
 tended to make washington an attractive place for members of the coloured
 race. then, too, they knew that at all times they could have the
 protection of the law in the district of columbia. the public schools in
 washington for coloured people were better then than they were elsewhere.
 i took great interest in studying the life of our people there closely at
 that time. i found that while among them there was a large element of
 substantial, worthy citizens, there was also a superficiality about the
 life of a large class that greatly alarmed me. i saw young coloured men
 who were not earning more than four dollars a week spend two dollars or
 more for a buggy on sunday to ride up and down pennsylvania avenue in, in
 order that they might try to convince the world that they were worth
 thousands. i saw other young men who received seventy-five or one hundred
 dollars per month from the government, who were in debt at the end of
 every month. i saw men who but a few months previous were members of
 congress, then without employment and in poverty. among a large class
 there seemed to be a dependence upon the government for every conceivable
 thing. the members of this class had little ambition to create a position
 for themselves, but wanted the federal officials to create one for them.
 how many times i wished then, and have often wished since, that by some
 power of magic i might remove the great bulk of these people into the
 county districts and plant them upon the soil, upon the solid and never
 deceptive foundation of mother nature, where all nations and races that
 have ever succeeded have gotten their start,—a start that at first
 may be slow and toilsome, but one that nevertheless is real.
 in washington i saw girls whose mothers were earning their living by
 laundrying. these girls were taught by their mothers, in rather a crude
 way it is true, the industry of laundrying. later, these girls entered the
 public schools and remained there perhaps six or eight years. when the
 public school course was finally finished, they wanted more costly
 dresses, more costly hats and shoes. in a word, while their wants have
 been increased, their ability to supply their wants had not been increased
 in the same degree. on the other hand, their six or eight years of book
 education had weaned them away from the occupation of their mothers. the
 result of this was in too many cases that the girls went to the bad. i
 often thought how much wiser it would have been to give these girls the
 same amount of maternal training—and i favour any kind of training,
 whether in the languages or mathematics, that gives strength and culture
 to the mind—but at the same time to give them the most thorough
 training in the latest and best methods of laundrying and other kindred
 occupations.
 chapter vi. black race and red race
 during the year that i spent in washington, and for some little time
 before this, there had been considerable agitation in the state of west
 virginia over the question of moving the capital of the state from
 wheeling to some other central point. as a result of this, the legislature
 designated three cities to be voted upon by the citizens of the state as
 the permanent seat of government. among these cities was charleston, only
 five miles from malden, my home. at the close of my school year in
 washington i was very pleasantly surprised to receive, from a committee of
 three white people in charleston, an invitation to canvass the state in
 the interests of that city. this invitation i accepted, and spent nearly
 three months in speaking in various parts of the state. charleston was
 successful in winning the prize, and is now the permanent seat of
 government.
 the reputation that i made as a speaker during this campaign induced a
 number of persons to make an earnest effort to get me to enter political
 life, but i refused, still believing that i could find other service which
 would prove of more permanent value to my race. even then i had a strong
 feeling that what our people most needed was to get a foundation in
 education, industry, and property, and for this i felt that they could
 better afford to strive than for political preferment. as for my
 individual self, it appeared to me to be reasonably certain that i could
 succeed in political life, but i had a feeling that it would be a rather
 selfish kind of success—individual success at the cost of failing to
 do my duty in assisting in laying a foundation for the masses.
 at this period in the progress of our race a very large proportion of the
 young men who went to school or to college did so with the expressed
 determination to prepare themselves to be great lawyers, or congressmen,
 and many of the women planned to become music teachers; but i had a
 reasonably fixed idea, even at that early period in my life, that there
 was a need for something to be done to prepare the way for successful
 lawyers, congressmen, and music teachers.
 i felt that the conditions were a good deal like those of an old coloured
 man, during the days of slavery, who wanted to learn how to play on the
 guitar. in his desire to take guitar lessons he applied to one of his
 young masters to teach him, but the young man, not having much faith in
 the ability of the slave to master the guitar at his age, sought to
 discourage him by telling him: "uncle jake, i will give you guitar
 lessons; but, jake, i will have to charge you three dollars for the first
 lesson, two dollars for the second lesson, and one dollar for the third
 lesson. but i will charge you only twenty-five cents for the last lesson."
 uncle jake answered: "all right, boss, i hires you on dem terms. but,
 boss! i wants yer to be sure an' give me dat las' lesson first."
 soon after my work in connection with the removal of the capital was
 finished, i received an invitation which gave me great joy and which at
 the same time was a very pleasant surprise. this was a letter from general
 armstrong, inviting me to return to hampton at the next commencement to
 deliver what was called the "post-graduate address." this was an honour
 which i had not dreamed of receiving. with much care i prepared the best
 address that i was capable of. i chose for my subject "the force that
 wins."
 as i returned to hampton for the purpose of delivering this address, i
 went over much of the same ground—now, however, covered entirely by
 railroad—that i had traversed nearly six years before, when i first
 sought entrance into hampton institute as a student. now i was able to
 ride the whole distance in the train. i was constantly contrasting this
 with my first journey to hampton. i think i may say, without seeming
 egotism, that it is seldom that five years have wrought such a change in
 the life and aspirations of an individual.
 at hampton i received a warm welcome from teachers and students. i found
 that during my absence from hampton the institute each year had been
 getting closer to the real needs and conditions of our people; that the
 industrial teaching, as well as that of the academic department, had
 greatly improved. the plan of the school was not modelled after that of
 any other institution then in existence, but every improvement was made
 under the magnificent leadership of general armstrong solely with the view
 of meeting and helping the needs of our people as they presented
 themselves at the time. too often, it seems to me, in missionary and
 educational work among underdeveloped races, people yield to the
 temptation of doing that which was done a hundred years before, or is
 being done in other communities a thousand miles away. the temptation
 often is to run each individual through a certain educational mould,
 regardless of the condition of the subject or the end to be accomplished.
 this was not so at hampton institute.
 the address which i delivered on commencement day seems to have pleased
 every one, and many kind and encouraging words were spoken to me regarding
 it. soon after my return to my home in west virginia, where i had planned
 to continue teaching, i was again surprised to receive a letter from
 general armstrong, asking me to return to hampton partly as a teacher and
 partly to pursue some supplementary studies. this was in the summer of
 . soon after i began my first teaching in west virginia i had picked
 out four of the brightest and most promising of my pupils, in addition to
 my two brothers, to whom i have already referred, and had given them
 special attention, with the view of having them go to hampton. they had
 gone there, and in each case the teachers had found them so well prepared
 that they entered advanced classes. this fact, it seems, led to my being
 called back to hampton as a teacher. one of the young men that i sent to
 hampton in this way is now dr. samuel e. courtney, a successful physician
 in boston, and a member of the school board of that city.
 about this time the experiment was being tried for the first time, by
 general armstrong, of educating indians at hampton. few people then had
 any confidence in the ability of the indians to receive education and to
 profit by it. general armstrong was anxious to try the experiment
 systematically on a large scale. he secured from the reservations in the
 western states over one hundred wild and for the most part perfectly
 ignorant indians, the greater proportion of whom were young men. the
 special work which the general desired me to do was to be a sort of "house
 father" to the indian young men—that is, i was to live in the
 building with them and have the charge of their discipline, clothing,
 rooms, and so on. this was a very tempting offer, but i had become so much
 absorbed in my work in west virginia that i dreaded to give it up.
 however, i tore myself away from it. i did not know how to refuse to
 perform any service that general armstrong desired of me.
 on going to hampton, i took up my residence in a building with about
 seventy-five indian youths. i was the only person in the building who was
 not a member of their race. at first i had a good deal of doubt about my
 ability to succeed. i knew that the average indian felt himself above the
 white man, and, of course, he felt himself far above the negro, largely on
 account of the fact of the negro having submitted to slavery—a thing
 which the indian would never do. the indians, in the indian territory,
 owned a large number of slaves during the days of slavery. aside from
 this, there was a general feeling that the attempt to educate and civilize
 the red men at hampton would be a failure. all this made me proceed very
 cautiously, for i felt keenly the great responsibility. but i was
 determined to succeed. it was not long before i had the complete
 confidence of the indians, and not only this, but i think i am safe in
 saying that i had their love and respect. i found that they were about
 like any other human beings; that they responded to kind treatment and
 resented ill-treatment. they were continually planning to do something
 that would add to my happiness and comfort. the things that they disliked
 most, i think, were to have their long hair cut, to give up wearing their
 blankets, and to cease smoking; but no white american ever thinks that any
 other race is wholly civilized until he wears the white man's clothes,
 eats the white man's food, speaks the white man's language, and professes
 the white man's religion.
 when the difficulty of learning the english language was subtracted, i
 found that in the matter of learning trades and in mastering academic
 studies there was little difference between the coloured and indian
 students. it was a constant delight to me to note the interest which the
 coloured students took in trying to help the indians in every way
 possible. there were a few of the coloured students who felt that the
 indians ought not to be admitted to hampton, but these were in the
 minority. whenever they were asked to do so, the negro students gladly
 took the indians as room-mates, in order that they might teach them to
 speak english and to acquire civilized habits.
 i have often wondered if there was a white institution in this country
 whose students would have welcomed the incoming of more than a hundred
 companions of another race in the cordial way that these black students at
 hampton welcomed the red ones. how often i have wanted to say to white
 students that they lift themselves up in proportion as they help to lift
 others, and the more unfortunate the race, and the lower in the scale of
 civilization, the more does one raise one's self by giving the assistance.
 this reminds me of a conversation which i once had with the hon. frederick
 douglass. at one time mr. douglass was travelling in the state of
 pennsylvania, and was forced, on account of his colour, to ride in the
 baggage-car, in spite of the fact that he had paid the same price for his
 passage that the other passengers had paid. when some of the white
 passengers went into the baggage-car to console mr. douglass, and one of
 them said to him: "i am sorry, mr. douglass, that you have been degraded
 in this manner," mr. douglass straightened himself up on the box upon
 which he was sitting, and replied: "they cannot degrade frederick
 douglass. the soul that is within me no man can degrade. i am not the one
 that is being degraded on account of this treatment, but those who are
 inflicting it upon me."
 in one part of the country, where the law demands the separation of the
 races on the railroad trains, i saw at one time a rather amusing instance
 which showed how difficult it sometimes is to know where the black begins
 and the white ends.
 there was a man who was well known in his community as a negro, but who
 was so white that even an expert would have hard work to classify him as a
 black man. this man was riding in the part of the train set aside for the
 coloured passengers. when the train conductor reached him, he showed at
 once that he was perplexed. if the man was a negro, the conductor did not
 want to send him to the white people's coach; at the same time, if he was
 a white man, the conductor did not want to insult him by asking him if he
 was a negro. the official looked him over carefully, examining his hair,
 eyes, nose, and hands, but still seemed puzzled. finally, to solve the
 difficulty, he stooped over and peeped at the man's feet. when i saw the
 conductor examining the feet of the man in question, i said to myself,
 "that will settle it;" and so it did, for the trainman promptly decided
 that the passenger was a negro, and let him remain where he was. i
 congratulated myself that my race was fortunate in not losing one of its
 members.
 my experience has been that the time to test a true gentleman is to
 observe him when he is in contact with individuals of a race that is less
 fortunate than his own. this is illustrated in no better way than by
 observing the conduct of the old-school type of southern gentleman when he
 is in contact with his former slaves or their descendants.
 an example of what i mean is shown in a story told of george washington,
 who, meeting a coloured man in the road once, who politely lifted his hat,
 lifted his own in return. some of his white friends who saw the incident
 criticised washington for his action. in reply to their criticism george
 washington said: "do you suppose that i am going to permit a poor,
 ignorant, coloured man to be more polite than i am?"
 while i was in charge of the indian boys at hampton, i had one or two
 experiences which illustrate the curious workings of caste in america. one
 of the indian boys was taken ill, and it became my duty to take him to
 washington, deliver him over to the secretary of the interior, and get a
 receipt for him, in order that he might be returned to his western
 reservation. at that time i was rather ignorant of the ways of the world.
 during my journey to washington, on a steamboat, when the bell rang for
 dinner, i was careful to wait and not enter the dining room until after
 the greater part of the passengers had finished their meal. then, with my
 charge, i went to the dining saloon. the man in charge politely informed
 me that the indian could be served, but that i could not. i never could
 understand how he knew just where to draw the colour line, since the
 indian and i were of about the same complexion. the steward, however,
 seemed to be an expert in this manner. i had been directed by the
 authorities at hampton to stop at a certain hotel in washington with my
 charge, but when i went to this hotel the clerk stated that he would be
 glad to receive the indian into the house, but said that he could not
 accommodate me.
 an illustration of something of this same feeling came under my
 observation afterward. i happened to find myself in a town in which so
 much excitement and indignation were being expressed that it seemed likely
 for a time that there would be a lynching. the occasion of the trouble was
 that a dark-skinned man had stopped at the local hotel. investigation,
 however, developed the fact that this individual was a citizen of morocco,
 and that while travelling in this country he spoke the english language.
 as soon as it was learned that he was not an american negro, all the signs
 of indignation disappeared. the man who was the innocent cause of the
 excitement, though, found it prudent after that not to speak english.
 at the end of my first year with the indians there came another opening
 for me at hampton, which, as i look back over my life now, seems to have
 come providentially, to help to prepare me for my work at tuskegee later.
 general armstrong had found out that there was quite a number of young
 coloured men and women who were intensely in earnest in wishing to get an
 education, but who were prevented from entering hampton institute because
 they were too poor to be able to pay any portion of the cost of their
 board, or even to supply themselves with books. he conceived the idea of
 starting a night-school in connection with the institute, into which a
 limited number of the most promising of these young men and women would be
 received, on condition that they were to work for ten hours during the
 day, and attend school for two hours at night. they were to be paid
 something above the cost of their board for their work. the greater part
 of their earnings was to be reserved in the school's treasury as a fund to
 be drawn on to pay their board when they had become students in the
 day-school, after they had spent one or two years in the night-school. in
 this way they would obtain a start in their books and a knowledge of some
 trade or industry, in addition to the other far-reaching benefits of the
 institution.
 general armstrong asked me to take charge of the night-school, and i did
 so. at the beginning of this school there were about twelve strong,
 earnest men and women who entered the class. during the day the greater
 part of the young men worked in the school's sawmill, and the young women
 worked in the laundry. the work was not easy in either place, but in all
 my teaching i never taught pupils who gave me much genuine satisfaction as
 these did. they were good students, and mastered their work thoroughly.
 they were so much in earnest that only the ringing of the retiring-bell
 would make them stop studying, and often they would urge me to continue
 the lessons after the usual hour for going to bed had come.
 these students showed so much earnestness, both in their hard work during
 the day, as well as in their application to their studies at night, that i
 gave them the name of "the plucky class"—a name which soon grew
 popular and spread throughout the institution. after a student had been in
 the night-school long enough to prove what was in him, i gave him a
 printed certificate which read something like this:—
 "this is to certify that james smith is a member of the plucky class of
 the hampton institute, and is in good and regular standing."
 the students prized these certificates highly, and they added greatly to
 the popularity of the night-school. within a few weeks this department had
 grown to such an extent that there were about twenty-five students in
 attendance. i have followed the course of many of these twenty-five men
 and women ever since then, and they are now holding important and useful
 positions in nearly every part of the south. the night-school at hampton,
 which started with only twelve students, now numbers between three and
 four hundred, and is one of the permanent and most important features of
 the institution.
 chapter vii. early days at tuskegee
 during the time that i had charge of the indians and the night-school at
 hampton, i pursued some studies myself, under the direction of the
 instructors there. one of these instructors was the rev. dr. h.b.
 frissell, the present principal of the hampton institute, general
 armstrong's successor.
 in may, , near the close of my first year in teaching the
 night-school, in a way that i had not dared expect, the opportunity opened
 for me to begin my life-work. one night in the chapel, after the usual
 chapel exercises were over, general armstrong referred to the fact that he
 had received a letter from some gentlemen in alabama asking him to
 recommend some one to take charge of what was to be a normal school for
 the coloured people in the little town of tuskegee in that state. these
 gentlemen seemed to take it for granted that no coloured man suitable for
 the position could be secured, and they were expecting the general to
 recommend a white man for the place. the next day general armstrong sent
 for me to come to his office, and, much to my surprise, asked me if i
 thought i could fill the position in alabama. i told him that i would be
 willing to try. accordingly, he wrote to the people who had applied to him
 for the information, that he did not know of any white man to suggest, but
 if they would be willing to take a coloured man, he had one whom he could
 recommend. in this letter he gave them my name.
 several days passed before anything more was heard about the matter. some
 time afterward, one sunday evening during the chapel exercises, a
 messenger came in and handed the general a telegram. at the end of the
 exercises he read the telegram to the school. in substance, these were its
 words: "booker t. washington will suit us. send him at once."
 there was a great deal of joy expressed among the students and teachers,
 and i received very hearty congratulations. i began to get ready at once
 to go to tuskegee. i went by way of my old home in west virginia, where i
 remained for several days, after which i proceeded to tuskegee. i found
 tuskegee to be a town of about two thousand inhabitants, nearly one-half
 of whom were coloured. it was in what was known as the black belt of the
 south. in the county in which tuskegee is situated the coloured people
 outnumbered the whites by about three to one. in some of the adjoining and
 near-by counties the proportion was not far from six coloured persons to
 one white.
 i have often been asked to define the term "black belt." so far as i can
 learn, the term was first used to designate a part of the country which
 was distinguished by the colour of the soil. the part of the country
 possessing this thick, dark, and naturally rich soil was, of course, the
 part of the south where the slaves were most profitable, and consequently
 they were taken there in the largest numbers. later, and especially since
 the war, the term seems to be used wholly in a political sense—that
 is, to designate the counties where the black people outnumber the white.
 before going to tuskegee i had expected to find there a building and all
 the necessary apparatus ready for me to begin teaching. to my
 disappointment, i found nothing of the kind. i did find, though, that
 which no costly building and apparatus can supply,—hundreds of
 hungry, earnest souls who wanted to secure knowledge.
 tuskegee seemed an ideal place for the school. it was in the midst of the
 great bulk of the negro population, and was rather secluded, being five
 miles from the main line of railroad, with which it was connected by a
 short line. during the days of slavery, and since, the town had been a
 centre for the education of the white people. this was an added advantage,
 for the reason that i found the white people possessing a degree of
 culture and education that is not surpassed by many localities. while the
 coloured people were ignorant, they had not, as a rule, degraded and
 weakened their bodies by vices such as are common to the lower class of
 people in the large cities. in general, i found the relations between the
 two races pleasant. for example, the largest, and i think at that time the
 only hardware store in the town was owned and operated jointly by a
 coloured man and a white man. this copartnership continued until the death
 of the white partner.
 i found that about a year previous to my going to tuskegee some of the
 coloured people who had heard something of the work of education being
 done at hampton had applied to the state legislature, through their
 representatives, for a small appropriation to be used in starting a normal
 school in tuskegee. this request the legislature had complied with to the
 extent of granting an annual appropriation of two thousand dollars. i soon
 learned, however, that this money could be used only for the payment of
 the salaries of the instructors, and that there was no provision for
 securing land, buildings, or apparatus. the task before me did not seem a
 very encouraging one. it seemed much like making bricks without straw. the
 coloured people were overjoyed, and were constantly offering their
 services in any way in which they could be of assistance in getting the
 school started.
 my first task was to find a place in which to open the school. after
 looking the town over with some care, the most suitable place that could
 be secured seemed to be a rather dilapidated shanty near the coloured
 methodist church, together with the church itself as a sort of
 assembly-room. both the church and the shanty were in about as bad
 condition as was possible. i recall that during the first months of school
 that i taught in this building it was in such poor repair that, whenever
 it rained, one of the older students would very kindly leave his lessons
 and hold an umbrella over me while i heard the recitations of the others.
 i remember, also, that on more than one occasion my landlady held an
 umbrella over me while i ate breakfast.
 at the time i went to alabama the coloured people were taking considerable
 interest in politics, and they were very anxious that i should become one
 of them politically, in every respect. they seemed to have a little
 distrust of strangers in this regard. i recall that one man, who seemed to
 have been designated by the others to look after my political destiny,
 came to me on several occasions and said, with a good deal of earnestness:
 "we wants you to be sure to vote jes' like we votes. we can't read de
 newspapers very much, but we knows how to vote, an' we wants you to vote
 jes' like we votes." he added: "we watches de white man, and we keeps
 watching de white man till we finds out which way de white man's gwine to
 vote; an' when we finds out which way de white man's gwine to vote, den we
 votes 'xactly de other way. den we knows we's right."
 i am glad to add, however, that at the present time the disposition to
 vote against the white man merely because he is white is largely
 disappearing, and the race is learning to vote from principle, for what
 the voter considers to be for the best interests of both races.
 i reached tuskegee, as i have said, early in june, . the first month i
 spent in finding accommodations for the school, and in travelling through
 alabama, examining into the actual life of the people, especially in the
 court districts, and in getting the school advertised among the class of
 people that i wanted to have attend it. the most of my travelling was done
 over the country roads, with a mule and a cart or a mule and a buggy wagon
 for conveyance. i ate and slept with the people, in their little cabins. i
 saw their farms, their schools, their churches. since, in the case of the
 most of these visits, there had been no notice given in advance that a
 stranger was expected, i had the advantage of seeing the real, everyday
 life of the people.
 in the plantation districts i found that, as a rule, the whole family
 slept in one room, and that in addition to the immediate family there
 sometimes were relatives, or others not related to the family, who slept
 in the same room. on more than one occasion i went outside the house to
 get ready for bed, or to wait until the family had gone to bed. they
 usually contrived some kind of a place for me to sleep, either on the
 floor or in a special part of another's bed. rarely was there any place
 provided in the cabin where one could bathe even the face and hands, but
 usually some provision was made for this outside the house, in the yard.
 the common diet of the people was fat pork and corn bread. at times i have
 eaten in cabins where they had only corn bread and "black-eye peas" cooked
 in plain water. the people seemed to have no other idea than to live on
 this fat meat and corn bread,—the meat, and the meal of which the
 bread was made, having been bought at a high price at a store in town,
 notwithstanding the face that the land all about the cabin homes could
 easily have been made to produce nearly every kind of garden vegetable
 that is raised anywhere in the country. their one object seemed to be to
 plant nothing but cotton; and in many cases cotton was planted up to the
 very door of the cabin.
 in these cabin homes i often found sewing-machines which had been bought,
 or were being bought, on instalments, frequently at a cost of as much as
 sixty dollars, or showy clocks for which the occupants of the cabins had
 paid twelve or fourteen dollars. i remember that on one occasion when i
 went into one of these cabins for dinner, when i sat down to the table for
 a meal with the four members of the family, i noticed that, while there
 were five of us at the table, there was but one fork for the five of us to
 use. naturally there was an awkward pause on my part. in the opposite
 corner of that same cabin was an organ for which the people told me they
 were paying sixty dollars in monthly instalments. one fork, and a
 sixty-dollar organ!
 in most cases the sewing-machine was not used, the clocks were so
 worthless that they did not keep correct time—and if they had, in
 nine cases out of ten there would have been no one in the family who could
 have told the time of day—while the organ, of course, was rarely
 used for want of a person who could play upon it.
 in the case to which i have referred, where the family sat down to the
 table for the meal at which i was their guest, i could see plainly that
 this was an awkward and unusual proceeding, and was done in my honour. in
 most cases, when the family got up in the morning, for example, the wife
 would put a piece of meat in a frying-pan and put a lump of dough in a
 "skillet," as they called it. these utensils would be placed on the fire,
 and in ten or fifteen minutes breakfast would be ready. frequently the
 husband would take his bread and meat in his hand and start for the field,
 eating as he walked. the mother would sit down in a corner and eat her
 breakfast, perhaps from a plate and perhaps directly from the "skillet" or
 frying-pan, while the children would eat their portion of the bread and
 meat while running about the yard. at certain seasons of the year, when
 meat was scarce, it was rarely that the children who were not old enough
 or strong enough to work in the fields would have the luxury of meat.
 the breakfast over, and with practically no attention given to the house,
 the whole family would, as a general thing, proceed to the cotton-field.
 every child that was large enough to carry a hoe was put to work, and the
 baby—for usually there was at least one baby—would be laid
 down at the end of the cotton row, so that its mother could give it a
 certain amount of attention when she had finished chopping her row. the
 noon meal and the supper were taken in much the same way as the breakfast.
 all the days of the family would be spent after much this same routine,
 except saturday and sunday. on saturday the whole family would spent at
 least half a day, and often a whole day, in town. the idea in going to
 town was, i suppose, to do shopping, but all the shopping that the whole
 family had money for could have been attended to in ten minutes by one
 person. still, the whole family remained in town for most of the day,
 spending the greater part of the time in standing on the streets, the
 women, too often, sitting about somewhere smoking or dipping snuff. sunday
 was usually spent in going to some big meeting. with few exceptions, i
 found that the crops were mortgaged in the counties where i went, and that
 the most of the coloured farmers were in debt. the state had not been able
 to build schoolhouses in the country districts, and, as a rule, the
 schools were taught in churches or in log cabins. more than once, while on
 my journeys, i found that there was no provision made in the house used
 for school purposes for heating the building during the winter, and
 consequently a fire had to be built in the yard, and teacher and pupils
 passed in and out of the house as they got cold or warm. with few
 exceptions, i found the teachers in these country schools to be miserably
 poor in preparation for their work, and poor in moral character. the
 schools were in session from three to five months. there was practically
 no apparatus in the schoolhouses, except that occasionally there was a
 rough blackboard. i recall that one day i went into a schoolhouse—or
 rather into an abandoned log cabin that was being used as a schoolhouse—and
 found five pupils who were studying a lesson from one book. two of these,
 on the front seat, were using the book between them; behind these were two
 others peeping over the shoulders of the first two, and behind the four
 was a fifth little fellow who was peeping over the shoulders of all four.
 what i have said concerning the character of the schoolhouses and teachers
 will also apply quite accurately as a description of the church buildings
 and the ministers.
 i met some very interesting characters during my travels. as illustrating
 the peculiar mental processes of the country people, i remember that i
 asked one coloured man, who was about sixty years old, to tell me
 something of his history. he said that he had been born in virginia, and
 sold into alabama in . i asked him how many were sold at the same
 time. he said, "there were five of us; myself and brother and three
 mules."
 in giving all these descriptions of what i saw during my month of travel
 in the country around tuskegee, i wish my readers to keep in mind the fact
 that there were many encouraging exceptions to the conditions which i have
 described. i have stated in such plain words what i saw, mainly for the
 reason that later i want to emphasize the encouraging changes that have
 taken place in the community, not wholly by the work of the tuskegee
 school, but by that of other institutions as well.
 chapter viii. teaching school in a stable and a hen-house
 i confess that what i saw during my month of travel and investigation left
 me with a very heavy heart. the work to be done in order to lift these
 people up seemed almost beyond accomplishing. i was only one person, and
 it seemed to me that the little effort which i could put forth could go
 such a short distance toward bringing about results. i wondered if i could
 accomplish anything, and if it were worth while for me to try.
 of one thing i felt more strongly convinced than ever, after spending this
 month in seeing the actual life of the coloured people, and that was that,
 in order to lift them up, something must be done more than merely to
 imitate new england education as it then existed. i saw more clearly than
 ever the wisdom of the system which general armstrong had inaugurated at
 hampton. to take the children of such people as i had been among for a
 month, and each day give them a few hours of mere book education, i felt
 would be almost a waste of time.
 after consultation with the citizens of tuskegee, i set july , , as
 the day for the opening of the school in the little shanty and church
 which had been secured for its accommodation. the white people, as well as
 the coloured, were greatly interested in the starting of the new school,
 and the opening day was looked forward to with much earnest discussion.
 there were not a few white people in the vicinity of tuskegee who looked
 with some disfavour upon the project. they questioned its value to the
 coloured people, and had a fear that it might result in bringing about
 trouble between the races. some had the feeling that in proportion as the
 negro received education, in the same proportion would his value decrease
 as an economic factor in the state. these people feared the result of
 education would be that the negroes would leave the farms, and that it
 would be difficult to secure them for domestic service.
 the white people who questioned the wisdom of starting this new school had
 in their minds pictures of what was called an educated negro, with a high
 hat, imitation gold eye-glasses, a showy walking-stick, kid gloves, fancy
 boots, and what not—in a word, a man who was determined to live by
 his wits. it was difficult for these people to see how education would
 produce any other kind of a coloured man.
 in the midst of all the difficulties which i encountered in getting the
 little school started, and since then through a period of nineteen years,
 there are two men among all the many friends of the school in tuskegee
 upon whom i have depended constantly for advice and guidance; and the
 success of the undertaking is largely due to these men, from whom i have
 never sought anything in vain. i mention them simply as types. one is a
 white man and an ex-slaveholder, mr. george w. campbell; the other is a
 black man and an ex-slave, mr. lewis adams. these were the men who wrote
 to general armstrong for a teacher.
 mr. campbell is a merchant and banker, and had had little experience in
 dealing with matters pertaining to education. mr. adams was a mechanic,
 and had learned the trades of shoemaking, harness-making, and tinsmithing
 during the days of slavery. he had never been to school a day in his life,
 but in some way he had learned to read and write while a slave. from the
 first, these two men saw clearly what my plan of education was,
 sympathized with me, and supported me in every effort. in the days which
 were darkest financially for the school, mr. campbell was never appealed
 to when he was not willing to extend all the aid in his power. i do not
 know two men, one an ex-slaveholder, one an ex-slave, whose advice and
 judgment i would feel more like following in everything which concerns the
 life and development of the school at tuskegee than those of these two
 men.
 i have always felt that mr. adams, in a large degree, derived his unusual
 power of mind from the training given his hands in the process of
 mastering well three trades during the days of slavery. if one goes to-day
 into any southern town, and asks for the leading and most reliable
 coloured man in the community, i believe that in five cases out of ten he
 will be directed to a negro who learned a trade during the days of
 slavery.
 on the morning that the school opened, thirty students reported for
 admission. i was the only teacher. the students were about equally divided
 between the sexes. most of them lived in macon county, the county in which
 tuskegee is situated, and of which it is the county-seat. a great many
 more students wanted to enter the school, but it had been decided to
 receive only those who were above fifteen years of age, and who had
 previously received some education. the greater part of the thirty were
 public-school teachers, and some of them were nearly forty years of age.
 with the teachers came some of their former pupils, and when they were
 examined it was amusing to note that in several cases the pupil entered a
 higher class than did his former teacher. it was also interesting to note
 how many big books some of them had studied, and how many high-sounding
 subjects some of them claimed to have mastered. the bigger the book and
 the longer the name of the subject, the prouder they felt of their
 accomplishment. some had studied latin, and one or two greek. this they
 thought entitled them to special distinction.
 in fact, one of the saddest things i saw during the month of travel which
 i have described was a young man, who had attended some high school,
 sitting down in a one-room cabin, with grease on his clothing, filth all
 around him, and weeds in the yard and garden, engaged in studying a french
 grammar.
 the students who came first seemed to be fond of memorizing long and
 complicated "rules" in grammar and mathematics, but had little thought or
 knowledge of applying these rules to their everyday affairs of their life.
 one subject which they liked to talk about, and tell me that they had
 mastered, in arithmetic, was "banking and discount," but i soon found out
 that neither they nor almost any one in the neighbourhood in which they
 had lived had ever had a bank account. in registering the names of the
 students, i found that almost every one of them had one or more middle
 initials. when i asked what the "j" stood for, in the name of john j.
 jones, it was explained to me that this was a part of his "entitles." most
 of the students wanted to get an education because they thought it would
 enable them to earn more money as school-teachers.
 notwithstanding what i have said about them in these respects, i have
 never seen a more earnest and willing company of young men and women than
 these students were. they were all willing to learn the right thing as
 soon as it was shown them what was right. i was determined to start them
 off on a solid and thorough foundation, so far as their books were
 concerned. i soon learned that most of them had the merest smattering of
 the high-sounding things that they had studied. while they could locate
 the desert of sahara or the capital of china on an artificial globe, i
 found out that the girls could not locate the proper places for the knives
 and forks on an actual dinner-table, or the places on which the bread and
 meat should be set.
 i had to summon a good deal of courage to take a student who had been
 studying cube root and "banking and discount," and explain to him that the
 wisest thing for him to do first was thoroughly master the multiplication
 table.
 the number of pupils increased each week, until by the end of the first
 month there were nearly fifty. many of them, however, said that, as they
 could remain only for two or three months, they wanted to enter a high
 class and get a diploma the first year if possible.
 at the end of the first six weeks a new and rare face entered the school
 as a co-teacher. this was miss olivia a. davidson, who later became my
 wife. miss davidson was born in ohio, and received her preparatory
 education in the public schools of that state. when little more than a
 girl, she heard of the need of teachers in the south. she went to the
 state of mississippi and began teaching there. later she taught in the
 city of memphis. while teaching in mississippi, one of her pupils became
 ill with smallpox. every one in the community was so frightened that no
 one would nurse the boy. miss davidson closed her school and remained by
 the bedside of the boy night and day until he recovered. while she was at
 her ohio home on her vacation, the worst epidemic of yellow fever broke
 out in memphis, tenn., that perhaps has ever occurred in the south. when
 she heard of this, she at once telegraphed the mayor of memphis, offering
 her services as a yellow-fever nurse, although she had never had the
 disease.
 miss davidon's experience in the south showed her that the people needed
 something more than mere book-learning. she heard of the hampton system of
 education, and decided that this was what she wanted in order to prepare
 herself for better work in the south. the attention of mrs. mary hemenway,
 of boston, was attracted to her rare ability. through mrs. hemenway's
 kindness and generosity, miss davidson, after graduating at hampton,
 received an opportunity to complete a two years' course of training at the
 massachusetts state normal school at framingham.
 before she went to framingham, some one suggested to miss davidson that,
 since she was so very light in colour, she might find it more comfortable
 not to be known as a coloured women in this school in massachusetts. she
 at once replied that under no circumstances and for no considerations
 would she consent to deceive any one in regard to her racial identity.
 soon after her graduation from the framingham institution, miss davidson
 came to tuskegee, bringing into the school many valuable and fresh ideas
 as to the best methods of teaching, as well as a rare moral character and
 a life of unselfishness that i think has seldom been equalled. no single
 individual did more toward laying the foundations of the tuskegee
 institute so as to insure the successful work that has been done there
 than olivia a. davidson.
 miss davidson and i began consulting as to the future of the school from
 the first. the students were making progress in learning books and in
 developing their minds; but it became apparent at once that, if we were to
 make any permanent impression upon those who had come to us for training
 we must do something besides teach them mere books. the students had come
 from homes where they had had no opportunities for lessons which would
 teach them how to care for their bodies. with few exceptions, the homes in
 tuskegee in which the students boarded were but little improvement upon
 those from which they had come. we wanted to teach the students how to
 bathe; how to care for their teeth and clothing. we wanted to teach them
 what to eat, and how to eat it properly, and how to care for their rooms.
 aside from this, we wanted to give them such a practical knowledge of some
 one industry, together with the spirit of industry, thrift, and economy,
 that they would be sure of knowing how to make a living after they had
 left us. we wanted to teach them to study actual things instead of mere
 books alone.
 we found that the most of our students came from the country districts,
 where agriculture in some form or other was the main dependence of the
 people. we learned that about eighty-five per cent of the coloured people
 in the gulf states depended upon agriculture for their living. since this
 was true, we wanted to be careful not to educate our students out of
 sympathy with agricultural life, so that they would be attracted from the
 country to the cities, and yield to the temptation of trying to live by
 their wits. we wanted to give them such an education as would fit a large
 proportion of them to be teachers, and at the same time cause them to
 return to the plantation districts and show the people there how to put
 new energy and new ideas into farming, as well as into the intellectual
 and moral and religious life of the people.
 all these ideas and needs crowded themselves upon us with a seriousness
 that seemed well-nigh overwhelming. what were we to do? we had only the
 little old shanty and the abandoned church which the good coloured people
 of the town of tuskegee had kindly loaned us for the accommodation of the
 classes. the number of students was increasing daily. the more we saw of
 them, and the more we travelled through the country districts, the more we
 saw that our efforts were reaching, to only a partial degree, the actual
 needs of the people whom we wanted to lift up through the medium of the
 students whom we should educate and send out as leaders.
 the more we talked with the students, who were then coming to us from
 several parts of the state, the more we found that the chief ambition
 among a large proportion of them was to get an education so that they
 would not have to work any longer with their hands.
 this is illustrated by a story told of a coloured man in alabama, who, one
 hot day in july, while he was at work in a cotton-field, suddenly stopped,
 and, looking toward the skies, said: "o lawd, de cotton am so grassy, de
 work am so hard, and the sun am so hot dat i b'lieve dis darky am called
 to preach!"
 about three months after the opening of the school, and at the time when
 we were in the greatest anxiety about our work, there came into market for
 sale an old and abandoned plantation which was situated about a mile from
 the town of tuskegee. the mansion house—or "big house," as it would
 have been called—which had been occupied by the owners during
 slavery, had been burned. after making a careful examination of the place,
 it seemed to be just the location that we wanted in order to make our work
 effective and permanent.
 but how were we to get it? the price asked for it was very little—only
 five hundred dollars—but we had no money, and we were strangers in
 the town and had no credit. the owner of the land agreed to let us occupy
 the place if we could make a payment of two hundred and fifty dollars
 down, with the understanding that the remaining two hundred and fifty
 dollars must be paid within a year. although five hundred dollars was
 cheap for the land, it was a large sum when one did not have any part of
 it.
 in the midst of the difficulty i summoned a great deal of courage and
 wrote to my friend general j.f.b. marshall, the treasurer of the hampton
 institute, putting the situation before him and beseeching him to lend me
 the two hundred and fifty dollars on my own personal responsibility.
 within a few days a reply came to the effect that he had no authority to
 lend me the money belonging to the hampton institute, but that he would
 gladly lend me the amount needed from his own personal funds.
 i confess that the securing of this money in this way was a great surprise
 to me, as well as a source of gratification. up to that time i never had
 had in my possession so much money as one hundred dollars at a time, and
 the loan which i had asked general marshall for seemed a tremendously
 large sum to me. the fact of my being responsible for the repaying of such
 a large amount of money weighed very heavily upon me.
 i lost no time in getting ready to move the school on to the new farm. at
 the time we occupied the place there were standing upon it a cabin,
 formerly used as a dining room, an old kitchen, a stable, and an old
 hen-house. within a few weeks we had all of these structures in use. the
 stable was repaired and used as a recitation-room, and very presently the
 hen-house was utilized for the same purpose.
 i recall that one morning, when i told an old coloured man who lived near,
 and who sometimes helped me, that our school had grown so large that it
 would be necessary for us to use the hen-house for school purposes, and
 that i wanted him to help me give it a thorough cleaning out the next day,
 he replied, in the most earnest manner: "what you mean, boss? you sholy
 ain't gwine clean out de hen-house in de day-time?"
 nearly all the work of getting the new location ready for school purposes
 was done by the students after school was over in the afternoon. as soon
 as we got the cabins in condition to be used, i determined to clear up
 some land so that we could plant a crop. when i explained my plan to the
 young men, i noticed that they did not seem to take to it very kindly. it
 was hard for them to see the connection between clearing land and an
 education. besides, many of them had been school-teachers, and they
 questioned whether or not clearing land would be in keeping with their
 dignity. in order to relieve them from any embarrassment, each afternoon
 after school i took my axe and led the way to the woods. when they saw
 that i was not afraid or ashamed to work, they began to assist with more
 enthusiasm. we kept at the work each afternoon, until we had cleared about
 twenty acres and had planted a crop.
 in the meantime miss davidson was devising plans to repay the loan. her
 first effort was made by holding festivals, or "suppers." she made a
 personal canvass among the white and coloured families in the town of
 tuskegee, and got them to agree to give something, like a cake, a chicken,
 bread, or pies, that could be sold at the festival. of course the coloured
 people were glad to give anything that they could spare, but i want to add
 that miss davidson did not apply to a single white family, so far as i now
 remember, that failed to donate something; and in many ways the white
 families showed their interest in the school.
 several of these festivals were held, and quite a little sum of money was
 raised. a canvass was also made among the people of both races for direct
 gifts of money, and most of those applied to gave small sums. it was often
 pathetic to note the gifts of the older coloured people, most of whom had
 spent their best days in slavery. sometimes they would give five cents,
 sometimes twenty-five cents. sometimes the contribution was a quilt, or a
 quantity of sugarcane. i recall one old coloured women who was about
 seventy years of age, who came to see me when we were raising money to pay
 for the farm. she hobbled into the room where i was, leaning on a cane.
 she was clad in rags; but they were clean. she said: "mr. washin'ton, god
 knows i spent de bes' days of my life in slavery. god knows i's ignorant
 an' poor; but," she added, "i knows what you an' miss davidson is tryin'
 to do. i knows you is tryin' to make better men an' better women for de
 coloured race. i ain't got no money, but i wants you to take dese six
 eggs, what i's been savin' up, an' i wants you to put dese six eggs into
 the eddication of dese boys an' gals."
 since the work at tuskegee started, it has been my privilege to receive
 many gifts for the benefit of the institution, but never any, i think,
 that touched me so deeply as this one.
 chapter ix. anxious days and sleepless nights
 the coming of christmas, that first year of our residence in alabama, gave
 us an opportunity to get a farther insight into the real life of the
 people. the first thing that reminded us that christmas had arrived was
 the "foreday" visits of scores of children rapping at our doors, asking
 for "chris'mus gifts! chris'mus gifts!" between the hours of two o'clock
 and five o'clock in the morning i presume that we must have had a
 half-hundred such calls. this custom prevails throughout this portion of
 the south to-day.
 during the days of slavery it was a custom quite generally observed
 throughout all the southern states to give the coloured people a week of
 holiday at christmas, or to allow the holiday to continue as long as the
 "yule log" lasted. the male members of the race, and often the female
 members, were expected to get drunk. we found that for a whole week the
 coloured people in and around tuskegee dropped work the day before
 christmas, and that it was difficult for any one to perform any service
 from the time they stopped work until after the new year. persons who at
 other times did not use strong drink thought it quite the proper thing to
 indulge in it rather freely during the christmas week. there was a
 widespread hilarity, and a free use of guns, pistols, and gunpowder
 generally. the sacredness of the season seemed to have been almost wholly
 lost sight of.
 during this first christmas vacation i went some distance from the town to
 visit the people on one of the large plantations. in their poverty and
 ignorance it was pathetic to see their attempts to get joy out of the
 season that in most parts of the country is so sacred and so dear to the
 heart. in one cabin i notice that all that the five children had to remind
 them of the coming of christ was a single bunch of firecrackers, which
 they had divided among them. in another cabin, where there were at least a
 half-dozen persons, they had only ten cents' worth of ginger-cakes, which
 had been bought in the store the day before. in another family they had
 only a few pieces of sugarcane. in still another cabin i found nothing but
 a new jug of cheap, mean whiskey, which the husband and wife were making
 free use of, notwithstanding the fact that the husband was one of the
 local ministers. in a few instances i found that the people had gotten
 hold of some bright-coloured cards that had been designed for advertising
 purposes, and were making the most of these. in other homes some member of
 the family had bought a new pistol. in the majority of cases there was
 nothing to be seen in the cabin to remind one of the coming of the
 saviour, except that the people had ceased work in the fields and were
 lounging about their homes. at night, during christmas week, they usually
 had what they called a "frolic," in some cabin on the plantation. that
 meant a kind of rough dance, where there was likely to be a good deal of
 whiskey used, and where there might be some shooting or cutting with
 razors.
 while i was making this christmas visit i met an old coloured man who was
 one of the numerous local preachers, who tried to convince me, from the
 experience adam had in the garden of eden, that god had cursed all labour,
 and that, therefore, it was a sin for any man to work. for that reason
 this man sought to do as little work as possible. he seemed at that time
 to be supremely happy, because he was living, as he expressed it, through
 one week that was free from sin.
 in the school we made a special effort to teach our students the meaning
 of christmas, and to give them lessons in its proper observance. in this
 we have been successful to a degree that makes me feel safe in saying that
 the season now has a new meaning, not only through all that immediate
 region, but, in a measure, wherever our graduates have gone.
 at the present time one of the most satisfactory features of the christmas
 and thanksgiving season at tuskegee is the unselfish and beautiful way in
 which our graduates and students spend their time in administering to the
 comfort and happiness of others, especially the unfortunate. not long ago
 some of our young men spent a holiday in rebuilding a cabin for a helpless
 coloured women who was about seventy-five years old. at another time i
 remember that i made it known in chapel, one night, that a very poor
 student was suffering from cold, because he needed a coat. the next
 morning two coats were sent to my office for him.
 i have referred to the disposition on the part of the white people in the
 town of tuskegee and vicinity to help the school. from the first, i
 resolved to make the school a real part of the community in which it was
 located. i was determined that no one should have the feeling that it was
 a foreign institution, dropped down in the midst of the people, for which
 they had no responsibility and in which they had no interest. i noticed
 that the very fact that they had been asking to contribute toward the
 purchase of the land made them begin to feel as if it was going to be
 their school, to a large degree. i noted that just in proportion as we
 made the white people feel that the institution was a part of the life of
 the community, and that, while we wanted to make friends in boston, for
 example, we also wanted to make white friends in tuskegee, and that we
 wanted to make the school of real service to all the people, their
 attitude toward the school became favourable.
 perhaps i might add right here, what i hope to demonstrate later, that, so
 far as i know, the tuskegee school at the present time has no warmer and
 more enthusiastic friends anywhere than it has among the white citizens of
 tuskegee and throughout the state of alabama and the entire south. from
 the first, i have advised our people in the south to make friends in every
 straightforward, manly way with their next-door neighbour, whether he be a
 black man or a white man. i have also advised them, where no principle is
 at stake, to consult the interests of their local communities, and to
 advise with their friends in regard to their voting.
 for several months the work of securing the money with which to pay for
 the farm went on without ceasing. at the end of three months enough was
 secured to repay the loan of two hundred and fifty dollars to general
 marshall, and within two months more we had secured the entire five
 hundred dollars and had received a deed of the one hundred acres of land.
 this gave us a great deal of satisfaction. it was not only a source of
 satisfaction to secure a permanent location for the school, but it was
 equally satisfactory to know that the greater part of the money with which
 it was paid for had been gotten from the white and coloured people in the
 town of tuskegee. the most of this money was obtained by holding festivals
 and concerts, and from small individual donations.
 our next effort was in the direction of increasing the cultivation of the
 land, so as to secure some return from it, and at the same time give the
 students training in agriculture. all the industries at tuskegee have been
 started in natural and logical order, growing out of the needs of a
 community settlement. we began with farming, because we wanted something
 to eat.
 many of the students, also, were able to remain in school but a few weeks
 at a time, because they had so little money with which to pay their board.
 thus another object which made it desirable to get an industrial system
 started was in order to make it available as a means of helping the
 students to earn money enough so that they might be able to remain in
 school during the nine months' session of the school year.
 the first animal that the school came into possession of was an old blind
 horse given us by one of the white citizens of tuskegee. perhaps i may add
 here that at the present time the school owns over two hundred horses,
 colts, mules, cows, calves, and oxen, and about seven hundred hogs and
 pigs, as well as a large number of sheep and goats.
 the school was constantly growing in numbers, so much so that, after we
 had got the farm paid for, the cultivation of the land begun, and the old
 cabins which we had found on the place somewhat repaired, we turned our
 attention toward providing a large, substantial building. after having
 given a good deal of thought to the subject, we finally had the plans
 drawn for a building that was estimated to cost about six thousand
 dollars. this seemed to us a tremendous sum, but we knew that the school
 must go backward or forward, and that our work would mean little unless we
 could get hold of the students in their home life.
 one incident which occurred about this time gave me a great deal of
 satisfaction as well as surprise. when it became known in the town that we
 were discussing the plans for a new, large building, a southern white man
 who was operating a sawmill not far from tuskegee came to me and said that
 he would gladly put all the lumber necessary to erect the building on the
 grounds, with no other guarantee for payment than my word that it would be
 paid for when we secured some money. i told the man frankly that at the
 time we did not have in our hands one dollar of the money needed.
 notwithstanding this, he insisted on being allowed to put the lumber on
 the grounds. after we had secured some portion of the money we permitted
 him to do this.
 miss davidson again began the work of securing in various ways small
 contributions for the new building from the white and coloured people in
 and near tuskegee. i think i never saw a community of people so happy over
 anything as were the coloured people over the prospect of this new
 building. one day, when we were holding a meeting to secure funds for its
 erection, an old, ante-bellum coloured man came a distance of twelve miles
 and brought in his ox-cart a large hog. when the meeting was in progress,
 he rose in the midst of the company and said that he had no money which he
 could give, but he had raised two fine hogs, and that he had brought one
 of them as a contribution toward the expenses of the building. he closed
 his announcement by saying: "any nigger that's got any love for his race,
 or any respect for himself, will bring a hog to the next meeting." quite a
 number of men in the community also volunteered to give several days'
 work, each, toward the erection of the building.
 after we had secured all the help that we could in tuskegee, miss davidson
 decided to go north for the purpose of securing additional funds. for
 weeks she visited individuals and spoke in churches and before sunday
 schools and other organizations. she found this work quite trying, and
 often embarrassing. the school was not known, but she was not long in
 winning her way into the confidence of the best people in the north.
 the first gift from any northern person was received from a new york lady
 whom miss davidson met on the boat that was bringing her north. they fell
 into a conversation, and the northern lady became so much interested in
 the effort being made at tuskegee that before they parted miss davidson
 was handed a check for fifty dollars. for some time before our marriage,
 and also after it, miss davidson kept up the work of securing money in the
 north and in the south by interesting people by personal visits and
 through correspondence. at the same time she kept in close touch with the
 work at tuskegee, as lady principal and classroom teacher. in addition to
 this, she worked among the older people in and near tuskegee, and taught a
 sunday school class in the town. she was never very strong, but never
 seemed happy unless she was giving all of her strength to the cause which
 she loved. often, at night, after spending the day in going from door to
 door trying to interest persons in the work at tuskegee, she would be so
 exhausted that she could not undress herself. a lady upon whom she called,
 in boston, afterward told me that at one time when miss davidson called
 her to see and send up her card the lady was detained a little before she
 could see miss davidson, and when she entered the parlour she found miss
 davidson so exhausted that she had fallen asleep.
 while putting up our first building, which was named porter hall, after
 mr. a.h. porter, of brooklyn, n.y., who gave a generous sum toward its
 erection, the need for money became acute. i had given one of our
 creditors a promise that upon a certain day he should be paid four hundred
 dollars. on the morning of that day we did not have a dollar. the mail
 arrived at the school at ten o'clock, and in this mail there was a check
 sent by miss davidson for exactly four hundred dollars. i could relate
 many instances of almost the same character. this four hundred dollars was
 given by two ladies in boston. two years later, when the work at tuskegee
 had grown considerably, and when we were in the midst of a season when we
 were so much in need of money that the future looked doubtful and gloomy,
 the same two boston ladies sent us six thousand dollars. words cannot
 describe our surprise, or the encouragement that the gift brought to us.
 perhaps i might add here that for fourteen years these same friends have
 sent us six thousand dollars a year.
 as soon as the plans were drawn for the new building, the students began
 digging out the earth where the foundations were to be laid, working after
 the regular classes were over. they had not fully outgrown the idea that
 it was hardly the proper thing for them to use their hands, since they had
 come there, as one of them expressed it, "to be educated, and not to
 work." gradually, though, i noted with satisfaction that a sentiment in
 favour of work was gaining ground. after a few weeks of hard work the
 foundations were ready, and a day was appointed for the laying of the
 corner-stone.
 when it is considered that the laying of this corner-stone took place in
 the heart of the south, in the "black belt," in the centre of that part of
 our country that was most devoted to slavery; that at that time slavery
 had been abolished only about sixteen years; that only sixteen years
 before no negro could be taught from books without the teacher receiving
 the condemnation of the law or of public sentiment—when all this is
 considered, the scene that was witnessed on that spring day at tuskegee
 was a remarkable one. i believe there are few places in the world where it
 could have taken place.
 the principal address was delivered by the hon. waddy thompson, the
 superintendent of education for the county. about the corner-stone were
 gathered the teachers, the students, their parents and friends, the county
 officials—who were white—and all the leading white men in that
 vicinity, together with many of the black men and women whom the same
 white people but a few years before had held a title to as property. the
 members of both races were anxious to exercise the privilege of placing
 under the corner-stone some momento.
 before the building was completed we passed through some very trying
 seasons. more than once our hearts were made to bleed, as it were, because
 bills were falling due that we did not have the money to meet. perhaps no
 one who has not gone through the experience, month after month, of trying
 to erect buildings and provide equipment for a school when no one knew
 where the money was to come from, can properly appreciate the difficulties
 under which we laboured. during the first years at tuskegee i recall that
 night after night i would roll and toss on my bed, without sleep, because
 of the anxiety and uncertainty which we were in regarding money. i knew
 that, in a large degree, we were trying an experiment—that of
 testing whether or not it was possible for negroes to build up and control
 the affairs of a large education institution. i knew that if we failed it
 would injure the whole race. i knew that the presumption was against us. i
 knew that in the case of white people beginning such an enterprise it
 would be taken for granted that they were going to succeed, but in our
 case i felt that people would be surprised if we succeeded. all this made
 a burden which pressed down on us, sometimes, it seemed, at the rate of a
 thousand pounds to the square inch.
 in all our difficulties and anxieties, however, i never went to a white or
 a black person in the town of tuskegee for any assistance that was in
 their power to render, without being helped according to their means. more
 than a dozen times, when bills figuring up into the hundreds of dollars
 were falling due, i applied to the white men of tuskegee for small loans,
 often borrowing small amounts from as many as a half-dozen persons, to
 meet our obligations. one thing i was determined to do from the first, and
 that was to keep the credit of the school high; and this, i think i can
 say without boasting, we have done all through these years.
 i shall always remember a bit of advice given me by mr. george w.
 campbell, the white man to whom i have referred to as the one who induced
 general armstrong to send me to tuskegee. soon after i entered upon the
 work mr. campbell said to me, in his fatherly way: "washington, always
 remember that credit is capital."
 at one time when we were in the greatest distress for money that we ever
 experienced, i placed the situation frankly before general armstrong.
 without hesitation he gave me his personal check for all the money which
 he had saved for his own use. this was not the only time that general
 armstrong helped tuskegee in this way. i do not think i have ever made
 this fact public before.
 during the summer of , at the end of the first year's work of the
 school, i was married to miss fannie n. smith, of malden, w. va. we began
 keeping house in tuskegee early in the fall. this made a home for our
 teachers, who now had been increase to four in number. my wife was also a
 graduate of the hampton institute. after earnest and constant work in the
 interests of the school, together with her housekeeping duties, my wife
 passed away in may, . one child, portia m. washington, was born during
 our marriage.
 from the first, my wife most earnestly devoted her thoughts and time to
 the work of the school, and was completely one with me in every interest
 and ambition. she passed away, however, before she had an opportunity of
 seeing what the school was designed to be.
 chapter x. a harder task than making bricks without straw
 from the very beginning, at tuskegee, i was determined to have the
 students do not only the agricultural and domestic work, but to have them
 erect their own buildings. my plan was to have them, while performing this
 service, taught the latest and best methods of labour, so that the school
 would not only get the benefit of their efforts, but the students
 themselves would be taught to see not only utility in labour, but beauty
 and dignity; would be taught, in fact, how to lift labour up from mere
 drudgery and toil, and would learn to love work for its own sake. my plan
 was not to teach them to work in the old way, but to show them how to make
 the forces of nature—air, water, steam, electricity, horse-power—assist
 them in their labour.
 at first many advised against the experiment of having the buildings
 erected by the labour of the students, but i was determined to stick to
 it. i told those who doubted the wisdom of the plan that i knew that our
 first buildings would not be so comfortable or so complete in their finish
 as buildings erected by the experienced hands of outside workmen, but that
 in the teaching of civilization, self-help, and self-reliance, the
 erection of buildings by the students themselves would more than
 compensate for any lack of comfort or fine finish.
 i further told those who doubted the wisdom of this plan, that the
 majority of our students came to us in poverty, from the cabins of the
 cotton, sugar, and rice plantations of the south, and that while i knew it
 would please the students very much to place them at once in finely
 constructed buildings, i felt that it would be following out a more
 natural process of development to teach them how to construct their own
 buildings. mistakes i knew would be made, but these mistakes would teach
 us valuable lessons for the future.
 during the now nineteen years' existence of the tuskegee school, the plan
 of having the buildings erected by student labour has been adhered to. in
 this time forty buildings, counting small and large, have been built, and
 all except four are almost wholly the product of student labour. as an
 additional result, hundreds of men are now scattered throughout the south
 who received their knowledge of mechanics while being taught how to erect
 these buildings. skill and knowledge are now handed down from one set of
 students to another in this way, until at the present time a building of
 any description or size can be constructed wholly by our instructors and
 students, from the drawing of the plans to the putting in of the electric
 fixtures, without going off the grounds for a single workman.
 not a few times, when a new student has been led into the temptation of
 marring the looks of some building by leadpencil marks or by the cuts of a
 jack-knife, i have heard an old student remind him: "don't do that. that
 is our building. i helped put it up."
 in the early days of the school i think my most trying experience was in
 the matter of brickmaking. as soon as we got the farm work reasonably well
 started, we directed our next efforts toward the industry of making
 bricks. we needed these for use in connection with the erection of our own
 buildings; but there was also another reason for establishing this
 industry. there was no brickyard in the town, and in addition to our own
 needs there was a demand for bricks in the general market.
 i had always sympathized with the "children of israel," in their task of
 "making bricks without straw," but ours was the task of making bricks with
 no money and no experience.
 in the first place, the work was hard and dirty, and it was difficult to
 get the students to help. when it came to brickmaking, their distaste for
 manual labour in connection with book education became especially
 manifest. it was not a pleasant task for one to stand in the mud-pit for
 hours, with the mud up to his knees. more than one man became disgusted
 and left the school.
 we tried several locations before we opened up a pit that furnished brick
 clay. i had always supposed that brickmaking was very simple, but i soon
 found out by bitter experience that it required special skill and
 knowledge, particularly in the burning of the bricks. after a good deal of
 effort we moulded about twenty-five thousand bricks, and put them into a
 kiln to be burned. this kiln turned out to be a failure, because it was
 not properly constructed or properly burned. we began at once, however, on
 a second kiln. this, for some reason, also proved a failure. the failure
 of this kiln made it still more difficult to get the students to take part
 in the work. several of the teachers, however, who had been trained in the
 industries at hampton, volunteered their services, and in some way we
 succeeded in getting a third kiln ready for burning. the burning of a kiln
 required about a week. toward the latter part of the week, when it seemed
 as if we were going to have a good many thousand bricks in a few hours, in
 the middle of the night the kiln fell. for the third time we had failed.
 the failure of this last kiln left me without a single dollar with which
 to make another experiment. most of the teachers advised the abandoning of
 the effort to make bricks. in the midst of my troubles i thought of a
 watch which had come into my possession years before. i took the watch to
 the city of montgomery, which was not far distant, and placed it in a
 pawn-shop. i secured cash upon it to the amount of fifteen dollars, with
 which to renew the brickmaking experiment. i returned to tuskegee, and,
 with the help of the fifteen dollars, rallied our rather demoralized and
 discouraged forces and began a fourth attempt to make bricks. this time, i
 am glad to say, we were successful. before i got hold of any money, the
 time-limit on my watch had expired, and i have never seen it since; but i
 have never regretted the loss of it.
 brickmaking has now become such an important industry at the school that
 last season our students manufactured twelve hundred thousand of
 first-class bricks, of a quality suitable to be sold in any market. aside
 from this, scores of young men have mastered the brickmaking trade—both
 the making of bricks by hand and by machinery—and are now engaged in
 this industry in many parts of the south.
 the making of these bricks taught me an important lesson in regard to the
 relations of the two races in the south. many white people who had had no
 contact with the school, and perhaps no sympathy with it, came to us to
 buy bricks because they found out that ours were good bricks. they
 discovered that we were supplying a real want in the community. the making
 of these bricks caused many of the white residents of the neighbourhood to
 begin to feel that the education of the negro was not making him
 worthless, but that in educating our students we were adding something to
 the wealth and comfort of the community. as the people of the
 neighbourhood came to us to buy bricks, we got acquainted with them; they
 traded with us and we with them. our business interests became
 intermingled. we had something which they wanted; they had something which
 we wanted. this, in a large measure, helped to lay the foundation for the
 pleasant relations that have continued to exist between us and the white
 people in that section, and which now extend throughout the south.
 wherever one of our brickmakers has gone in the south, we find that he has
 something to contribute to the well-being of the community into which he
 has gone; something that has made the community feel that, in a degree, it
 is indebted to him, and perhaps, to a certain extent, dependent upon him.
 in this way pleasant relations between the races have been simulated.
 my experience is that there is something in human nature which always
 makes an individual recognize and reward merit, no matter under what
 colour of skin merit is found. i have found, too, that it is the visible,
 the tangible, that goes a long ways in softening prejudices. the actual
 sight of a first-class house that a negro has built is ten times more
 potent than pages of discussion about a house that he ought to build, or
 perhaps could build.
 the same principle of industrial education has been carried out in the
 building of our own wagons, carts, and buggies, from the first. we now own
 and use on our farm and about the school dozens of these vehicles, and
 every one of them has been built by the hands of the students. aside from
 this, we help supply the local market with these vehicles. the supplying
 of them to the people in the community has had the same effect as the
 supplying of bricks, and the man who learns at tuskegee to build and
 repair wagons and carts is regarded as a benefactor by both races in the
 community where he goes. the people with whom he lives and works are going
 to think twice before they part with such a man.
 the individual who can do something that the world wants done will, in the
 end, make his way regardless of race. one man may go into a community
 prepared to supply the people there with an analysis of greek sentences.
 the community may not at the time be prepared for, or feel the need of,
 greek analysis, but it may feel its need of bricks and houses and wagons.
 if the man can supply the need for those, then, it will lead eventually to
 a demand for the first product, and with the demand will come the ability
 to appreciate it and to profit by it.
 about the time that we succeeded in burning our first kiln of bricks we
 began facing in an emphasized form the objection of the students to being
 taught to work. by this time it had gotten to be pretty well advertised
 throughout the state that every student who came to tuskegee, no matter
 what his financial ability might be, must learn some industry. quite a
 number of letters came from parents protesting against their children
 engaging in labour while they were in the school. other parents came to
 the school to protest in person. most of the new students brought a
 written or a verbal request from their parents to the effect that they
 wanted their children taught nothing but books. the more books, the larger
 they were, and the longer the titles printed upon them, the better pleased
 the students and their parents seemed to be.
 i gave little heed to these protests, except that i lost no opportunity to
 go into as many parts of the state as i could, for the purpose of speaking
 to the parents, and showing them the value of industrial education.
 besides, i talked to the students constantly on the subject.
 notwithstanding the unpopularity of industrial work, the school continued
 to increase in numbers to such an extent that by the middle of the second
 year there was an attendance of about one hundred and fifty, representing
 almost all parts of the state of alabama, and including a few from other
 states.
 in the summer of  miss davidson and i both went north and engaged in
 the work of raising funds for the completion of our new building. on my
 way north i stopped in new york to try to get a letter of recommendation
 from an officer of a missionary organization who had become somewhat
 acquainted with me a few years previous. this man not only refused to give
 me the letter, but advised me most earnestly to go back home at once, and
 not make any attempt to get money, for he was quite sure that i would
 never get more than enough to pay my travelling expenses. i thanked him
 for his advice, and proceeded on my journey.
 the first place i went to in the north, was northampton, mass., where i
 spent nearly a half-day in looking for a coloured family with whom i could
 board, never dreaming that any hotel would admit me. i was greatly
 surprised when i found that i would have no trouble in being accommodated
 at a hotel.
 we were successful in getting money enough so that on thanksgiving day of
 that year we held our first service in the chapel of porter hall, although
 the building was not completed.
 in looking about for some one to preach the thanksgiving sermon, i found
 one of the rarest men that it has ever been my privilege to know. this was
 the rev. robert c. bedford, a white man from wisconsin, who was then
 pastor of a little coloured congregational church in montgomery, ala.
 before going to montgomery to look for some one to preach this sermon i
 had never heard of mr. bedford. he had never heard of me. he gladly
 consented to come to tuskegee and hold the thanksgiving service. it was
 the first service of the kind that the coloured people there had ever
 observed, and what a deep interest they manifested in it! the sight of the
 new building made it a day of thanksgiving for them never to be forgotten.
 mr. bedford consented to become one of the trustees of the school, and in
 that capacity, and as a worker for it, he has been connected with it for
 eighteen years. during this time he has borne the school upon his heart
 night and day, and is never so happy as when he is performing some
 service, no matter how humble, for it. he completely obliterates himself
 in everything, and looks only for permission to serve where service is
 most disagreeable, and where others would not be attracted. in all my
 relations with him he has seemed to me to approach as nearly to the spirit
 of the master as almost any man i ever met.
 a little later there came into the service of the school another man,
 quite young at the time, and fresh from hampton, without whose service the
 school never could have become what it is. this was mr. warren logan, who
 now for seventeen years has been the treasurer of the institute, and the
 acting principal during my absence. he has always shown a degree of
 unselfishness and an amount of business tact, coupled with a clear
 judgment, that has kept the school in good condition no matter how long i
 have been absent from it. during all the financial stress through which
 the school has passed, his patience and faith in our ultimate success have
 not left him.
 as soon as our first building was near enough to completion so that we
 could occupy a portion of it—which was near the middle of the second
 year of the school—we opened a boarding department. students had
 begun coming from quite a distance, and in such increasing numbers that we
 felt more and more that we were merely skimming over the surface, in that
 we were not getting hold of the students in their home life.
 we had nothing but the students and their appetites with which to begin a
 boarding department. no provision had been made in the new building for a
 kitchen and dining room; but we discovered that by digging out a large
 amount of earth from under the building we could make a partially lighted
 basement room that could be used for a kitchen and dining room. again i
 called on the students to volunteer for work, this time to assist in
 digging out the basement. this they did, and in a few weeks we had a place
 to cook and eat in, although it was very rough and uncomfortable. any one
 seeing the place now would never believe that it was once used for a
 dining room.
 the most serious problem, though, was to get the boarding department
 started off in running order, with nothing to do with in the way of
 furniture, and with no money with which to buy anything. the merchants in
 the town would let us have what food we wanted on credit. in fact, in
 those earlier years i was constantly embarrassed because people seemed to
 have more faith in me than i had in myself. it was pretty hard to cook,
 however, without stoves, and awkward to eat without dishes. at first the
 cooking was done out-of-doors, in the old-fashioned, primitive style, in
 pots and skillets placed over a fire. some of the carpenters' benches that
 had been used in the construction of the building were utilized for
 tables. as for dishes, there were too few to make it worth while to spend
 time in describing them.
 no one connected with the boarding department seemed to have any idea that
 meals must be served at certain fixed and regular hours, and this was a
 source of great worry. everything was so out of joint and so inconvenient
 that i feel safe in saying that for the first two weeks something was
 wrong at every meal. either the meat was not done or had been burnt, or
 the salt had been left out of the bread, or the tea had been forgotten.
 early one morning i was standing near the dining-room door listening to
 the complaints of the students. the complaints that morning were
 especially emphatic and numerous, because the whole breakfast had been a
 failure. one of the girls who had failed to get any breakfast came out and
 went to the well to draw some water to drink and take the place of the
 breakfast which she had not been able to get. when she reached the well,
 she found that the rope was broken and that she could get no water. she
 turned from the well and said, in the most discouraged tone, not knowing
 that i was where i could hear her, "we can't even get water to drink at
 this school." i think no one remark ever came so near discouraging me as
 that one.
 at another time, when mr. bedford—whom i have already spoken of as
 one of our trustees, and a devoted friend of the institution—was
 visiting the school, he was given a bedroom immediately over the dining
 room. early in the morning he was awakened by a rather animated discussion
 between two boys in the dining room below. the discussion was over the
 question as to whose turn it was to use the coffee-cup that morning. one
 boy won the case by proving that for three mornings he had not had an
 opportunity to use the cup at all.
 but gradually, with patience and hard work, we brought order out of chaos,
 just as will be true of any problem if we stick to it with patience and
 wisdom and earnest effort.
 as i look back now over that part of our struggle, i am glad to see that
 we had it. i am glad that we endured all those discomforts and
 inconveniences. i am glad that our students had to dig out the place for
 their kitchen and dining room. i am glad that our first boarding-place was
 in the dismal, ill-lighted, and damp basement. had we started in a fine,
 attractive, convenient room, i fear we would have "lost our heads" and
 become "stuck up." it means a great deal, i think, to start off on a
 foundation which one has made for one's self.
 when our old students return to tuskegee now, as they often do, and go
 into our large, beautiful, well-ventilated, and well-lighted dining room,
 and see tempting, well-cooked food—largely grown by the students
 themselves—and see tables, neat tablecloths and napkins, and vases
 of flowers upon the tables, and hear singing birds, and note that each
 meal is served exactly upon the minute, with no disorder, and with almost
 no complaint coming from the hundreds that now fill our dining room, they,
 too, often say to me that they are glad that we started as we did, and
 built ourselves up year by year, by a slow and natural process of growth.
 chapter xi. making their beds before they could lie on them
 a little later in the history of the school we had a visit from general
 j.f.b. marshall, the treasurer of the hampton institute, who had had faith
 enough to lend us the first two hundred and fifty dollars with which to
 make a payment down on the farm. he remained with us a week, and made a
 careful inspection of everything. he seemed well pleased with our
 progress, and wrote back interesting and encouraging reports to hampton. a
 little later miss mary f. mackie, the teacher who had given me the
 "sweeping" examination when i entered hampton, came to see us, and still
 later general armstrong himself came.
 at the time of the visits of these hampton friends the number of teachers
 at tuskegee had increased considerably, and the most of the new teachers
 were graduates of the hampton institute. we gave our hampton friends,
 especially general armstrong, a cordial welcome. they were all surprised
 and pleased at the rapid progress that the school had made within so short
 a time. the coloured people from miles around came to the school to get a
 look at general armstrong, about whom they had heard so much. the general
 was not only welcomed by the members of my own race, but by the southern
 white people as well.
 this first visit which general armstrong made to tuskegee gave me an
 opportunity to get an insight into his character such as i had not before
 had. i refer to his interest in the southern white people. before this i
 had had the thought that general armstrong, having fought the southern
 white man, rather cherished a feeling of bitterness toward the white
 south, and was interested in helping only the coloured man there. but this
 visit convinced me that i did not know the greatness and the generosity of
 the man. i soon learned, by his visits to the southern white people, and
 from his conversations with them, that he was as anxious about the
 prosperity and the happiness of the white race as the black. he cherished
 no bitterness against the south, and was happy when an opportunity offered
 for manifesting his sympathy. in all my acquaintance with general
 armstrong i never heard him speak, in public or in private, a single
 bitter word against the white man in the south. from his example in this
 respect i learned the lesson that great men cultivate love, and that only
 little men cherish a spirit of hatred. i learned that assistance given to
 the weak makes the one who gives it strong; and that oppression of the
 unfortunate makes one weak.
 it is now long ago that i learned this lesson from general armstrong, and
 resolved that i would permit no man, no matter what his colour might be,
 to narrow and degrade my soul by making me hate him. with god's help, i
 believe that i have completely rid myself of any ill feeling toward the
 southern white man for any wrong that he may have inflicted upon my race.
 i am made to feel just as happy now when i am rendering service to
 southern white men as when the service is rendered to a member of my own
 race. i pity from the bottom of my heart any individual who is so
 unfortunate as to get into the habit of holding race prejudice.
 the more i consider the subject, the more strongly i am convinced that the
 most harmful effect of the practice to which the people in certain
 sections of the south have felt themselves compelled to resort, in order
 to get rid of the force of the negroes' ballot, is not wholly in the wrong
 done to the negro, but in the permanent injury to the morals of the white
 man. the wrong to the negro is temporary, but to the morals of the white
 man the injury is permanent. i have noted time and time again that when an
 individual perjures himself in order to break the force of the black man's
 ballot, he soon learns to practise dishonesty in other relations of life,
 not only where the negro is concerned, but equally so where a white man is
 concerned. the white man who begins by cheating a negro usually ends by
 cheating a white man. the white man who begins to break the law by
 lynching a negro soon yields to the temptation to lynch a white man. all
 this, it seems to me, makes it important that the whole nation lend a hand
 in trying to lift the burden of ignorance from the south.
 another thing that is becoming more apparent each year in the development
 of education in the south is the influence of general armstrong's idea of
 education; and this not upon the blacks alone, but upon the whites also.
 at the present time there is almost no southern state that is not putting
 forth efforts in the direction of securing industrial education for its
 white boys and girls, and in most cases it is easy to trace the history of
 these efforts back to general armstrong.
 soon after the opening of our humble boarding department students began
 coming to us in still larger numbers. for weeks we not only had to contend
 with the difficulty of providing board, with no money, but also with that
 of providing sleeping accommodations. for this purpose we rented a number
 of cabins near the school. these cabins were in a dilapidated condition,
 and during the winter months the students who occupied them necessarily
 suffered from the cold. we charge the students eight dollars a month—all
 they were able to pay—for their board. this included, besides board,
 room, fuel, and washing. we also gave the students credit on their board
 bills for all the work which they did for the school which was of any
 value to the institution. the cost of tuition, which was fifty dollars a
 year for each student, we had to secure then, as now, wherever we could.
 this small charge in cash gave us no capital with which to start a
 boarding department. the weather during the second winter of our work was
 very cold. we were not able to provide enough bed-clothes to keep the
 students warm. in fact, for some time we were not able to provide, except
 in a few cases, bedsteads and mattresses of any kind. during the coldest
 nights i was so troubled about the discomfort of the students that i could
 not sleep myself. i recall that on several occasions i went in the middle
 of the night to the shanties occupied by the young men, for the purpose of
 confronting them. often i found some of them sitting huddled around a
 fire, with the one blanket which we had been able to provide wrapped
 around them, trying in this way to keep warm. during the whole night some
 of them did not attempt to lie down. one morning, when the night previous
 had been unusually cold, i asked those of the students in the chapel who
 thought that they had been frostbitten during the night to raise their
 hands. three hands went up. notwithstanding these experiences, there was
 almost no complaining on the part of the students. they knew that we were
 doing the best that we could for them. they were happy in the privilege of
 being permitted to enjoy any kind of opportunity that would enable them to
 improve their condition. they were constantly asking what they might do to
 lighten the burdens of the teachers.
 i have heard it stated more than once, both in the north and in the south,
 that coloured people would not obey and respect each other when one member
 of the race is placed in a position of authority over others. in regard to
 this general belief and these statements, i can say that during the
 nineteen years of my experience at tuskegee i never, either by word or
 act, have been treated with disrespect by any student or officer connected
 with the institution. on the other hand, i am constantly embarrassed by
 the many acts of thoughtful kindness. the students do not seem to want to
 see me carry a large book or a satchel or any kind of a burden through the
 grounds. in such cases more than one always offers to relieve me. i almost
 never go out of my office when the rain is falling that some student does
 not come to my side with an umbrella and ask to be allowed to hold it over
 me.
 while writing upon this subject, it is a pleasure for me to add that in
 all my contact with the white people of the south i have never received a
 single personal insult. the white people in and near tuskegee, to an
 especial degree, seem to count it as a privilege to show me all the
 respect within their power, and often go out of their way to do this.
 not very long ago i was making a journey between dallas (texas) and
 houston. in some way it became known in advance that i was on the train.
 at nearly every station at which the train stopped, numbers of white
 people, including in most cases of the officials of the town, came aboard
 and introduced themselves and thanked me heartily for the work that i was
 trying to do for the south.
 on another occasion, when i was making a trip from augusta, georgia, to
 atlanta, being rather tired from much travel, i rode in a pullman sleeper.
 when i went into the car, i found there two ladies from boston whom i knew
 well. these good ladies were perfectly ignorant, it seems, of the customs
 of the south, and in the goodness of their hearts insisted that i take a
 seat with them in their section. after some hesitation i consented. i had
 been there but a few minutes when one of them, without my knowledge,
 ordered supper to be served for the three of us. this embarrassed me still
 further. the car was full of southern white men, most of whom had their
 eyes on our party. when i found that supper had been ordered, i tried to
 contrive some excuse that would permit me to leave the section, but the
 ladies insisted that i must eat with them. i finally settled back in my
 seat with a sigh, and said to myself, "i am in for it now, sure."
 to add further to the embarrassment of the situation, soon after the
 supper was placed on the table one of the ladies remembered that she had
 in her satchel a special kind of tea which she wished served, and as she
 said she felt quite sure the porter did not know how to brew it properly,
 she insisted upon getting up and preparing and serving it herself. at last
 the meal was over; and it seemed the longest one that i had ever eaten.
 when we were through, i decided to get myself out of the embarrassing
 situation and go to the smoking-room, where most of the men were by that
 time, to see how the land lay. in the meantime, however, it had become
 known in some way throughout the car who i was. when i went into the
 smoking-room i was never more surprised in my life than when each man,
 nearly every one of them a citizen of georgia, came up and introduced
 himself to me and thanked me earnestly for the work that i was trying to
 do for the whole south. this was not flattery, because each one of these
 individuals knew that he had nothing to gain by trying to flatter me.
 from the first i have sought to impress the students with the idea that
 tuskegee is not my institution, or that of the officers, but that it is
 their institution, and that they have as much interest in it as any of the
 trustees or instructors. i have further sought to have them feel that i am
 at the institution as their friend and adviser, and not as their overseer.
 it has been my aim to have them speak with directness and frankness about
 anything that concerns the life of the school. two or three times a year i
 ask the students to write me a letter criticising or making complaints or
 suggestions about anything connected with the institution. when this is
 not done, i have them meet me in the chapel for a heart-to-heart talk
 about the conduct of the school. there are no meetings with our students
 that i enjoy more than these, and none are more helpful to me in planning
 for the future. these meetings, it seems to me, enable me to get at the
 very heart of all that concerns the school. few things help an individual
 more than to place responsibility upon him, and to let him know that you
 trust him. when i have read of labour troubles between employers and
 employees, i have often thought that many strikes and similar disturbances
 might be avoided if the employers would cultivate the habit of getting
 nearer to their employees, of consulting and advising with them, and
 letting them feel that the interests of the two are the same. every
 individual responds to confidence, and this is not more true of any race
 than of the negroes. let them once understand that you are unselfishly
 interested in them, and you can lead them to any extent.
 it was my aim from the first at tuskegee to not only have the buildings
 erected by the students themselves, but to have them make their own
 furniture as far as was possible. i now marvel at the patience of the
 students while sleeping upon the floor while waiting for some kind of a
 bedstead to be constructed, or at their sleeping without any kind of a
 mattress while waiting for something that looked like a mattress to be
 made.
 in the early days we had very few students who had been used to handling
 carpenters' tools, and the bedsteads made by the students then were very
 rough and very weak. not unfrequently when i went into the students' rooms
 in the morning i would find at least two bedsteads lying about on the
 floor. the problem of providing mattresses was a difficult one to solve.
 we finally mastered this, however, by getting some cheap cloth and sewing
 pieces of this together as to make large bags. these bags we filled with
 the pine straw—or, as it is sometimes called, pine needles—which
 we secured from the forests near by. i am glad to say that the industry of
 mattress-making has grown steadily since then, and has been improved to
 such an extent that at the present time it is an important branch of the
 work which is taught systematically to a number of our girls, and that the
 mattresses that now come out of the mattress-shop at tuskegee are about as
 good as those bought in the average store. for some time after the opening
 of the boarding department we had no chairs in the students' bedrooms or
 in the dining rooms. instead of chairs we used stools which the students
 constructed by nailing together three pieces of rough board. as a rule,
 the furniture in the students' rooms during the early days of the school
 consisted of a bed, some stools, and sometimes a rough table made by the
 students. the plan of having the students make the furniture is still
 followed, but the number of pieces in a room has been increased, and the
 workmanship has so improved that little fault can be found with the
 articles now. one thing that i have always insisted upon at tuskegee is
 that everywhere there should be absolute cleanliness. over and over again
 the students were reminded in those first years—and are reminded now—that
 people would excuse us for our poverty, for our lack of comforts and
 conveniences, but that they would not excuse us for dirt.
 another thing that has been insisted upon at the school is the use of the
 tooth-brush. "the gospel of the tooth-brush," as general armstrong used to
 call it, is part of our creed at tuskegee. no student is permitted to
 retain who does not keep and use a tooth-brush. several times, in recent
 years, students have come to us who brought with them almost no other
 article except a tooth-brush. they had heard from the lips of other
 students about our insisting upon the use of this, and so, to make a good
 impression, they brought at least a tooth-brush with them. i remember that
 one morning, not long ago, i went with the lady principal on her usual
 morning tour of inspection of the girls' rooms. we found one room that
 contained three girls who had recently arrived at the school. when i asked
 them if they had tooth-brushes, one of the girls replied, pointing to a
 brush: "yes, sir. that is our brush. we bought it together, yesterday." it
 did not take them long to learn a different lesson.
 it has been interesting to note the effect that the use of the tooth-brush
 has had in bringing about a higher degree of civilization among the
 students. with few exceptions, i have noticed that, if we can get a
 student to the point where, when the first or second tooth-brush
 disappears, he of his own motion buys another, i have not been
 disappointed in the future of that individual. absolute cleanliness of the
 body has been insisted upon from the first. the students have been taught
 to bathe as regularly as to take their meals. this lesson we began
 teaching before we had anything in the shape of a bath-house. most of the
 students came from plantation districts, and often we had to teach them
 how to sleep at night; that is, whether between the two sheets—after
 we got to the point where we could provide them two sheets—or under
 both of them. naturally i found it difficult to teach them to sleep
 between two sheets when we were able to supply but one. the importance of
 the use of the night-gown received the same attention.
 for a long time one of the most difficult tasks was to teach the students
 that all the buttons were to be kept on their clothes, and that there must
 be no torn places or grease-spots. this lesson, i am pleased to be able to
 say, has been so thoroughly learned and so faithfully handed down from
 year to year by one set of students to another that often at the present
 time, when the students march out of the chapel in the evening and their
 dress is inspected, as it is every night, not one button is found to be
 missing.
 chapter xii. raising money
 when we opened our boarding department, we provided rooms in the attic of
 porter hall, our first building, for a number of girls. but the number of
 students, of both sexes, continued to increase. we could find rooms
 outside the school grounds for many of the young men, but the girls we did
 not care to expose in this way. very soon the problem of providing more
 rooms for the girls, as well as a larger boarding department for all the
 students, grew serious. as a result, we finally decided to undertake the
 construction of a still larger building—a building that would
 contain rooms for the girls and boarding accommodations for all.
 after having had a preliminary sketch of the needed building made, we
 found that it would cost about ten thousand dollars. we had no money
 whatever with which to begin; still we decided to give the needed building
 a name. we knew we could name it, even though we were in doubt about our
 ability to secure the means for its construction. we decided to call the
 proposed building alabama hall, in honour of the state in which we were
 labouring. again miss davidson began making efforts to enlist the interest
 and help of the coloured and white people in and near tuskegee. they
 responded willingly, in proportion to their means. the students, as in the
 case of our first building, porter hall, began digging out the dirt in
 order to allow the laying of the foundations.
 when we seemed at the end of our resources, so far as securing money was
 concerned, something occurred which showed the greatness of general
 armstrong—something which proved how far he was above the ordinary
 individual. when we were in the midst of great anxiety as to where and how
 we were to get funds for the new building, i received a telegram from
 general armstrong asking me if i could spend a month travelling with him
 through the north, and asking me, if i could do so, to come to hampton at
 once. of course i accepted general armstrong's invitation, and went to
 hampton immediately. on arriving there i found that the general had
 decided to take a quartette of singers through the north, and hold
 meetings for a month in important cities, at which meetings he and i were
 to speak. imagine my surprise when the general told me, further, that
 these meetings were to be held, not in the interests of hampton, but in
 the interests of tuskegee, and that the hampton institute was to be
 responsible for all the expenses.
 although he never told me so in so many words, i found that general
 armstrong took this method of introducing me to the people of the north,
 as well as for the sake of securing some immediate funds to be used in the
 erection of alabama hall. a weak and narrow man would have reasoned that
 all the money which came to tuskegee in this way would be just so much
 taken from the hampton institute; but none of these selfish or
 short-sighted feelings ever entered the breast of general armstrong. he
 was too big to be little, too good to be mean. he knew that the people in
 the north who gave money gave it for the purpose of helping the whole
 cause of negro civilization, and not merely for the advancement of any one
 school. the general knew, too, that the way to strengthen hampton was to
 make it a centre of unselfish power in the working out of the whole
 southern problem.
 in regard to the addresses which i was to make in the north, i recall just
 one piece of advice which the general gave me. he said: "give them an idea
 for every word." i think it would be hard to improve upon this advice; and
 it might be made to apply to all public speaking. from that time to the
 present i have always tried to keep his advice in mind.
 meetings were held in new york, brooklyn, boston, philadelphia, and other
 large cities, and at all of these meetings general armstrong pleased,
 together with myself, for help, not for hampton, but for tuskegee. at
 these meetings an especial effort was made to secure help for the building
 of alabama hall, as well as to introduce the school to the attention of
 the general public. in both these respects the meetings proved successful.
 after that kindly introduction i began going north alone to secure funds.
 during the last fifteen years i have been compelled to spend a large
 proportion of my time away from the school, in an effort to secure money
 to provide for the growing needs of the institution. in my efforts to get
 funds i have had some experiences that may be of interest to my readers.
 time and time again i have been asked, by people who are trying to secure
 money for philanthropic purposes, what rule or rules i followed to secure
 the interest and help of people who were able to contribute money to
 worthy objects. as far as the science of what is called begging can be
 reduced to rules, i would say that i have had but two rules. first, always
 to do my whole duty regarding making our work known to individuals and
 organizations; and, second, not to worry about the results. this second
 rule has been the hardest for me to live up to. when bills are on the eve
 of falling due, with not a dollar in hand with which to meet them, it is
 pretty difficult to learn not to worry, although i think i am learning
 more and more each year that all worry simply consumes, and to no purpose,
 just so much physical and mental strength that might otherwise be given to
 effective work. after considerable experience in coming into contact with
 wealthy and noted men, i have observed that those who have accomplished
 the greatest results are those who "keep under the body"; are those who
 never grow excited or lose self-control, but are always calm,
 self-possessed, patient, and polite. i think that president william
 mckinley is the best example of a man of this class that i have ever seen.
 in order to be successful in any kind of undertaking, i think the main
 thing is for one to grow to the point where he completely forgets himself;
 that is, to lose himself in a great cause. in proportion as one loses
 himself in the way, in the same degree does he get the highest happiness
 out of his work.
 my experience in getting money for tuskegee has taught me to have no
 patience with those people who are always condemning the rich because they
 are rich, and because they do not give more to objects of charity. in the
 first place, those who are guilty of such sweeping criticisms do not know
 how many people would be made poor, and how much suffering would result,
 if wealthy people were to part all at once with any large proportion of
 their wealth in a way to disorganize and cripple great business
 enterprises. then very few persons have any idea of the large number of
 applications for help that rich people are constantly being flooded with.
 i know wealthy people who receive as much as twenty calls a day for help.
 more than once when i have gone into the offices of rich men, i have found
 half a dozen persons waiting to see them, and all come for the same
 purpose, that of securing money. and all these calls in person, to say
 nothing of the applications received through the mails. very few people
 have any idea of the amount of money given away by persons who never
 permit their names to be known. i have often heard persons condemned for
 not giving away money, who, to my own knowledge, were giving away
 thousands of dollars every year so quietly that the world knew nothing
 about it.
 as an example of this, there are two ladies in new york, whose names
 rarely appear in print, but who, in a quiet way, have given us the means
 with which to erect three large and important buildings during the last
 eight years. besides the gift of these buildings, they have made other
 generous donations to the school. and they not only help tuskegee, but
 they are constantly seeking opportunities to help other worthy causes.
 although it has been my privilege to be the medium through which a good
 many hundred thousand dollars have been received for the work at tuskegee,
 i have always avoided what the world calls "begging." i often tell people
 that i have never "begged" any money, and that i am not a "beggar." my
 experience and observation have convinced me that persistent asking
 outright for money from the rich does not, as a rule, secure help. i have
 usually proceeded on the principle that persons who possess sense enough
 to earn money have sense enough to know how to give it away, and that the
 mere making known of the facts regarding tuskegee, and especially the
 facts regarding the work of the graduates, has been more effective than
 outright begging. i think that the presentation of facts, on a high,
 dignified plane, is all the begging that most rich people care for.
 while the work of going from door to door and from office to office is
 hard, disagreeable, and costly in bodily strength, yet it has some
 compensations. such work gives one a rare opportunity to study human
 nature. it also has its compensations in giving one an opportunity to meet
 some of the best people in the world—to be more correct, i think i
 should say the best people in the world. when one takes a broad survey of
 the country, he will find that the most useful and influential people in
 it are those who take the deepest interest in institutions that exist for
 the purpose of making the world better.
 at one time, when i was in boston, i called at the door of a rather
 wealthy lady, and was admitted to the vestibule and sent up my card. while
 i was waiting for an answer, her husband came in, and asked me in the most
 abrupt manner what i wanted. when i tried to explain the object of my
 call, he became still more ungentlemanly in his words and manner, and
 finally grew so excited that i left the house without waiting for a reply
 from the lady. a few blocks from that house i called to see a gentleman
 who received me in the most cordial manner. he wrote me his check for a
 generous sum, and then, before i had had an opportunity to thank him,
 said: "i am so grateful to you, mr. washington, for giving me the
 opportunity to help a good cause. it is a privilege to have a share in it.
 we in boston are constantly indebted to you for doing our work." my
 experience in securing money convinces me that the first type of man is
 growing more rare all the time, and that the latter type is increasing;
 that is, that, more and more, rich people are coming to regard men and
 women who apply to them for help for worthy objects, not as beggars, but
 as agents for doing their work.
 in the city of boston i have rarely called upon an individual for funds
 that i have not been thanked for calling, usually before i could get an
 opportunity to thank the donor for the money. in that city the donors seem
 to feel, in a large degree, that an honour is being conferred upon them in
 their being permitted to give. nowhere else have i met with, in so large a
 measure, this fine and christlike spirit as in the city of boston,
 although there are many notable instances of it outside that city. i
 repeat my belief that the world is growing in the direction of giving. i
 repeat that the main rule by which i have been guided in collecting money
 is to do my full duty in regard to giving people who have money an
 opportunity for help.
 in the early years of the tuskegee school i walked the streets or
 travelled country roads in the north for days and days without receiving a
 dollar. often as it happened, when during the week i had been disappointed
 in not getting a cent from the very individuals from whom i most expected
 help, and when i was almost broken down and discouraged, that generous
 help has come from some one who i had had little idea would give at all.
 i recall that on one occasion i obtained information that led me to
 believe that a gentleman who lived about two miles out in the country from
 stamford, conn., might become interested in our efforts at tuskegee if our
 conditions and needs were presented to him. on an unusually cold and
 stormy day i walked the two miles to see him. after some difficulty i
 succeeded in securing an interview with him. he listened with some degree
 of interest to what i had to say, but did not give me anything. i could
 not help having the feeling that, in a measure, the three hours that i had
 spent in seeing him had been thrown away. still, i had followed my usual
 rule of doing my duty. if i had not seen him, i should have felt unhappy
 over neglect of duty.
 two years after this visit a letter came to tuskegee from this man, which
 read like this: "enclosed i send you a new york draft for ten thousand
 dollars, to be used in furtherance of your work. i had placed this sum in
 my will for your school, but deem it wiser to give it to you while i live.
 i recall with pleasure your visit to me two years ago."
 i can hardly imagine any occurrence which could have given me more genuine
 satisfaction than the receipt of this draft. it was by far the largest
 single donation which up to that time the school had ever received. it
 came at a time when an unusually long period had passed since we had
 received any money. we were in great distress because of lack of funds,
 and the nervous strain was tremendous. it is difficult for me to think of
 any situation that is more trying on the nerves than that of conducting a
 large institution, with heavy obligations to meet, without knowing where
 the money is to come from to meet these obligations from month to month.
 in our case i felt a double responsibility, and this made the anxiety all
 the more intense. if the institution had been officered by white persons,
 and had failed, it would have injured the cause of negro education; but i
 knew that the failure of our institution, officered by negroes, would not
 only mean the loss of a school, but would cause people, in a large degree,
 to lose faith in the ability of the entire race. the receipt of this draft
 for ten thousand dollars, under all these circumstances, partially lifted
 a burden that had been pressing down upon me for days.
 from the beginning of our work to the present i have always had the
 feeling, and lose no opportunity to impress our teachers with the same
 idea, that the school will always be supported in proportion as the inside
 of the institution is kept clean and pure and wholesome.
 the first time i ever saw the late collis p. huntington, the great
 railroad man, he gave me two dollars for our school. the last time i saw
 him, which was a few months before he died, he gave me fifty thousand
 dollars toward our endowment fund. between these two gifts there were
 others of generous proportions which came every year from both mr. and
 mrs. huntington.
 some people may say that it was tuskegee's good luck that brought to us
 this gift of fifty thousand dollars. no, it was not luck. it was hard
 work. nothing ever comes to me, that is worth having, except as the result
 of hard work. when mr. huntington gave me the first two dollars, i did not
 blame him for not giving me more, but made up my mind that i was going to
 convince him by tangible results that we were worthy of larger gifts. for
 a dozen years i made a strong effort to convince mr. huntington of the
 value of our work. i noted that just in proportion as the usefulness of
 the school grew, his donations increased. never did i meet an individual
 who took a more kindly and sympathetic interest in our school than did mr.
 huntington. he not only gave money to us, but took time in which to advise
 me, as a father would a son, about the general conduct of the school.
 more than once i have found myself in some pretty tight places while
 collecting money in the north. the following incident i have never related
 but once before, for the reason that i feared that people would not
 believe it. one morning i found myself in providence, rhode island,
 without a cent of money with which to buy breakfast. in crossing the
 street to see a lady from whom i hoped to get some money, i found a bright
 new twenty-five-cent piece in the middle of the street track. i not only
 had this twenty-five cents for my breakfast, but within a few minutes i
 had a donation from the lady on whom i had started to call.
 at one of our commencements i was bold enough to invite the rev. e.
 winchester donald, d.d., rector of trinity church, boston, to preach the
 commencement sermon. as we then had no room large enough to accommodate
 all who would be present, the place of meeting was under a large
 improvised arbour, built partly of brush and partly of rough boards. soon
 after dr. donald had begun speaking, the rain came down in torrents, and
 he had to stop, while someone held an umbrella over him.
 the boldness of what i had done never dawned upon me until i saw the
 picture made by the rector of trinity church standing before that large
 audience under an old umbrella, waiting for the rain to cease so that he
 could go on with his address.
 it was not very long before the rain ceased and dr. donald finished his
 sermon; and an excellent sermon it was, too, in spite of the weather.
 after he had gone to his room, and had gotten the wet threads of his
 clothes dry, dr. donald ventured the remark that a large chapel at
 tuskegee would not be out of place. the next day a letter came from two
 ladies who were then travelling in italy, saying that they had decided to
 give us the money for such a chapel as we needed.
 a short time ago we received twenty thousand dollars from mr. andrew
 carnegie, to be used for the purpose of erecting a new library building.
 our first library and reading-room were in a corner of a shanty, and the
 whole thing occupied a space about five by twelve feet. it required ten
 years of work before i was able to secure mr. carnegie's interest and
 help. the first time i saw him, ten years ago, he seemed to take but
 little interest in our school, but i was determined to show him that we
 were worthy of his help. after ten years of hard work i wrote him a letter
 reading as follows:
 december , .
 mr. andrew carnegie,  w. fifty-first st., new york.
 dear sir: complying with the request which you made of me when i saw you
 at your residence a few days ago, i now submit in writing an appeal for a
 library building for our institution.
 we have  students,  officers and instructors, together with their
 families, and about  coloured people living near the school, all of
 whom would make use of the library building.
 we have over , books, periodicals, etc., gifts from our friends, but
 we have no suitable place for them, and we have no suitable reading-room.
 our graduates go to work in every section of the south, and whatever
 knowledge might be obtained in the library would serve to assist in the
 elevation of the whole negro race.
 such a building as we need could be erected for about $,. all of the
 work for the building, such as brickmaking, brick-masonry, carpentry,
 blacksmithing, etc., would be done by the students. the money which you
 would give would not only supply the building, but the erection of the
 building would give a large number of students an opportunity to learn the
 building trades, and the students would use the money paid to them to keep
 themselves in school. i do not believe that a similar amount of money
 often could be made go so far in uplifting a whole race.
 if you wish further information, i shall be glad to furnish it.
 yours truly,
 booker t. washington, principal.
 the next mail brought back the following reply: "i will be very glad to
 pay the bills for the library building as they are incurred, to the extent
 of twenty thousand dollars, and i am glad of this opportunity to show the
 interest i have in your noble work."
 i have found that strict business methods go a long way in securing the
 interest of rich people. it has been my constant aim at tuskegee to carry
 out, in our financial and other operations, such business methods as would
 be approved of by any new york banking house.
 i have spoken of several large gifts to the school; but by far the greater
 proportion of the money that has built up the institution has come in the
 form of small donations from persons of moderate means. it is upon these
 small gifts, which carry with them the interest of hundreds of donors,
 that any philanthropic work must depend largely for its support. in my
 efforts to get money i have often been surprised at the patience and deep
 interest of the ministers, who are besieged on every hand and at all hours
 of the day for help. if no other consideration had convinced me of the
 value of the christian life, the christlike work which the church of all
 denominations in america has done during the last thirty-five years for
 the elevation of the black man would have made me a christian. in a large
 degree it has been the pennies, the nickels, and the dimes which have come
 from the sunday-schools, the christian endeavour societies, and the
 missionary societies, as well as from the church proper, that have helped
 to elevate the negro at so rapid a rate.
 this speaking of small gifts reminds me to say that very few tuskegee
 graduates fail to send us an annual contribution. these contributions
 range from twenty-five cents up to ten dollars.
 soon after beginning our third year's work we were surprised to receive
 money from three special sources, and up to the present time we have
 continued to receive help from them. first, the state legislature of
 alabama increased its annual appropriation from two thousand dollars to
 three thousand dollars; i might add that still later it increased this sum
 to four thousand five hundred dollars a year. the effort to secure this
 increase was led by the hon. m.f. foster, the member of the legislature
 from tuskegee. second, we received one thousand dollars from the john f.
 slater fund. our work seemed to please the trustees of this fund, as they
 soon began increasing their annual grant. this has been added to from time
 to time until at present we receive eleven thousand dollars annually from
 the fund. the other help to which i have referred came in the shape of an
 allowance from the peabody fund. this was at first five hundred dollars,
 but it has since been increased to fifteen hundred dollars.
 the effort to secure help from the slater and peabody funds brought me
 into contact with two rare men—men who have had much to do in
 shaping the policy for the education of the negro. i refer to the hon.
 j.l.m. curry, of washington, who is the general agent for these two funds,
 and mr. morris k. jessup, of new york. dr. curry is a native of the south,
 an ex-confederate soldier, yet i do not believe there is any man in the
 country who is more deeply interested in the highest welfare of the negro
 than dr. curry, or one who is more free from race prejudice. he enjoys the
 unique distinction of possessing to an equal degree the confidence of the
 black man and the southern white man. i shall never forget the first time
 i met him. it was in richmond, va., where he was then living. i had heard
 much about him. when i first went into his presence, trembling because of
 my youth and inexperience, he took me by the hand so cordially, and spoke
 such encouraging words, and gave me such helpful advice regarding the
 proper course to pursue, that i came to know him then, as i have known him
 ever since, as a high example of one who is constantly and unselfishly at
 work for the betterment of humanity.
 mr. morris k. jessup, the treasurer of the slater fund, i refer to because
 i know of no man of wealth and large and complicated business
 responsibilities who gives not only money but his time and thought to the
 subject of the proper method of elevating the negro to the extent that is
 true of mr. jessup. it is very largely through this effort and influence
 that during the last few years the subject of industrial education has
 assumed the importance that it has, and been placed on its present
 footing.
 chapter xiii. two thousand miles for a five-minute speech
 soon after the opening of our boarding department, quite a number of
 students who evidently were worthy, but who were so poor that they did not
 have any money to pay even the small charges at the school, began applying
 for admission. this class was composed of both men and women. it was a
 great trial to refuse admission to these applicants, and in  we
 established a night-school to accommodate a few of them.
 the night-school was organized on a plan similar to the one which i had
 helped to establish at hampton. at first it was composed of about a dozen
 students. they were admitted to the night-school only when they had no
 money with which to pay any part of their board in the regular day-school.
 it was further required that they must work for ten hours during the day
 at some trade or industry, and study academic branches for two hours
 during the evening. this was the requirement for the first one or two
 years of their stay. they were to be paid something above the cost of
 their board, with the understanding that all of their earnings, except a
 very small part, were to be reserved in the school's treasury, to be used
 for paying their board in the regular day-school after they had entered
 that department. the night-school, started in this manner, has grown until
 there are at present four hundred and fifty-seven students enrolled in it
 alone.
 there could hardly be a more severe test of a student's worth than this
 branch of the institute's work. it is largely because it furnishes such a
 good opportunity to test the backbone of a student that i place such high
 value upon our night-school. any one who is willing to work ten hours a
 day at the brick-yard, or in the laundry, through one or two years, in
 order that he or she may have the privilege of studying academic branches
 for two hours in the evening, has enough bottom to warrant being further
 educated.
 after the student has left the night-school he enters the day-school,
 where he takes academic branches four days in a week, and works at his
 trade two days. besides this he usually works at his trade during the
 three summer months. as a rule, after a student has succeeded in going
 through the night-school test, he finds a way to finish the regular course
 in industrial and academic training. no student, no matter how much money
 he may be able to command, is permitted to go through school without doing
 manual labour. in fact, the industrial work is now as popular as the
 academic branches. some of the most successful men and women who have
 graduated from the institution obtained their start in the night-school.
 while a great deal of stress is laid upon the industrial side of the work
 at tuskegee, we do not neglect or overlook in any degree the religious and
 spiritual side. the school is strictly undenominational, but it is
 thoroughly christian, and the spiritual training of the students is not
 neglected. our preaching service, prayer-meetings, sunday-school,
 christian endeavour society, young men's christian association, and
 various missionary organizations, testify to this.
 in , miss olivia davidson, to whom i have already referred as being
 largely responsible for the success of the school during its early
 history, and i were married. during our married life she continued to
 divide her time and strength between our home and the work for the school.
 she not only continued to work in the school at tuskegee, but also kept up
 her habit of going north to secure funds. in  she died, after four
 years of happy married life and eight years of hard and happy work for the
 school. she literally wore herself out in her never ceasing efforts in
 behalf of the work that she so dearly loved. during our married life there
 were born to us two bright, beautiful boys, booker taliaferro and ernest
 davidson. the older of these, booker, has already mastered the
 brick-maker's trade at tuskegee.
 i have often been asked how i began the practice of public speaking. in
 answer i would say that i never planned to give any large part of my life
 to speaking in public. i have always had more of an ambition to do
 things than merely to talk about doing them. it seems that when i
 went north with general armstrong to speak at the series of public
 meetings to which i have referred, the president of the national
 educational association, the hon. thomas w. bicknell, was present at one
 of those meetings and heard me speak. a few days afterward he sent me an
 invitation to deliver an address at the next meeting of the educational
 association. this meeting was to be held in madison, wis. i accepted the
 invitation. this was, in a sense, the beginning of my public-speaking
 career.
 on the evening that i spoke before the association there must have been
 not far from four thousand persons present. without my knowing it, there
 were a large number of people present from alabama, and some from the town
 of tuskegee. these white people afterward frankly told me that they went
 to this meeting expecting to hear the south roundly abused, but were
 pleasantly surprised to find that there was no word of abuse in my
 address. on the contrary, the south was given credit for all the
 praiseworthy things that it had done. a white lady who was teacher in a
 college in tuskegee wrote back to the local paper that she was gratified,
 as well as surprised, to note the credit which i gave the white people of
 tuskegee for their help in getting the school started. this address at
 madison was the first that i had delivered that in any large measure dealt
 with the general problem of the races. those who heard it seemed to be
 pleased with what i said and with the general position that i took.
 when i first came to tuskegee, i determined that i would make it my home,
 that i would take as much pride in the right actions of the people of the
 town as any white man could do, and that i would, at the same time,
 deplore the wrong-doing of the people as much as any white man. i
 determined never to say anything in a public address in the north that i
 would not be willing to say in the south. i early learned that it is a
 hard matter to convert an individual by abusing him, and that this is more
 often accomplished by giving credit for all the praiseworthy actions
 performed than by calling attention alone to all the evil done.
 while pursuing this policy i have not failed, at the proper time and in
 the proper manner, to call attention, in no uncertain terms, to the wrongs
 which any part of the south has been guilty of. i have found that there is
 a large element in the south that is quick to respond to straightforward,
 honest criticism of any wrong policy. as a rule, the place to criticise
 the south, when criticism is necessary, is in the south—not in
 boston. a boston man who came to alabama to criticise boston would not
 effect so much good, i think, as one who had his word of criticism to say
 in boston.
 in this address at madison i took the ground that the policy to be pursued
 with references to the races was, by every honourable means, to bring them
 together and to encourage the cultivation of friendly relations, instead
 of doing that which would embitter. i further contended that, in relation
 to his vote, the negro should more and more consider the interests of the
 community in which he lived, rather than seek alone to please some one who
 lived a thousand miles away from him and from his interests.
 in this address i said that the whole future of the negro rested largely
 upon the question as to whether or not he should make himself, through his
 skill, intelligence, and character, of such undeniable value to the
 community in which he lived that the community could not dispense with his
 presence. i said that any individual who learned to do something better
 than anybody else—learned to do a common thing in an uncommon manner—had
 solved his problem, regardless of the colour of his skin, and that in
 proportion as the negro learned to produce what other people wanted and
 must have, in the same proportion would he be respected.
 i spoke of an instance where one of our graduates had produced two hundred
 and sixty-six bushels of sweet potatoes from an acre of ground, in a
 community where the average production had been only forty-nine bushels to
 the acre. he had been able to do this by reason of his knowledge of the
 chemistry of the soil and by his knowledge of improved methods of
 agriculture. the white farmers in the neighbourhood respected him, and
 came to him for ideas regarding the raising of sweet potatoes. these white
 farmers honoured and respected him because he, by his skill and knowledge,
 had added something to the wealth and the comfort of the community in
 which he lived. i explained that my theory of education for the negro
 would not, for example, confine him for all time to farm life—to the
 production of the best and the most sweet potatoes—but that, if he
 succeeded in this line of industry, he could lay the foundations upon
 which his children and grand-children could grow to higher and more
 important things in life.
 such, in brief, were some of the views i advocated in this first address
 dealing with the broad question of the relations of the two races, and
 since that time i have not found any reason for changing my views on any
 important point.
 in my early life i used to cherish a feeling of ill will toward any one
 who spoke in bitter terms against the negro, or who advocated measures
 that tended to oppress the black man or take from him opportunities for
 growth in the most complete manner. now, whenever i hear any one
 advocating measures that are meant to curtail the development of another,
 i pity the individual who would do this. i know that the one who makes
 this mistake does so because of his own lack of opportunity for the
 highest kind of growth. i pity him because i know that he is trying to
 stop the progress of the world, and because i know that in time the
 development and the ceaseless advance of humanity will make him ashamed of
 his weak and narrow position. one might as well try to stop the progress
 of a mighty railroad train by throwing his body across the track, as to
 try to stop the growth of the world in the direction of giving mankind
 more intelligence, more culture, more skill, more liberty, and in the
 direction of extending more sympathy and more brotherly kindness.
 the address which i delivered at madison, before the national educational
 association, gave me a rather wide introduction in the north, and soon
 after that opportunities began offering themselves for me to address
 audiences there.
 i was anxious, however, that the way might also be opened for me to speak
 directly to a representative southern white audience. a partial
 opportunity of this kind, one that seemed to me might serve as an entering
 wedge, presented itself in , when the international meeting of
 christian workers was held at atlanta, ga. when this invitation came to
 me, i had engagements in boston that seemed to make it impossible for me
 to speak in atlanta. still, after looking over my list of dates and places
 carefully, i found that i could take a train from boston that would get me
 into atlanta about thirty minutes before my address was to be delivered,
 and that i could remain in that city before taking another train for
 boston. my invitation to speak in atlanta stipulated that i was to confine
 my address to five minutes. the question, then, was whether or not i could
 put enough into a five-minute address to make it worth while for me to
 make such a trip.
 i knew that the audience would be largely composed of the most influential
 class of white men and women, and that it would be a rare opportunity for
 me to let them know what we were trying to do at tuskegee, as well as to
 speak to them about the relations of the races. so i decided to make the
 trip. i spoke for five minutes to an audience of two thousand people,
 composed mostly of southern and northern whites. what i said seemed to be
 received with favour and enthusiasm. the atlanta papers of the next day
 commented in friendly terms on my address, and a good deal was said about
 it in different parts of the country. i felt that i had in some degree
 accomplished my object—that of getting a hearing from the dominant
 class of the south.
 the demands made upon me for public addresses continued to increase,
 coming in about equal numbers from my own people and from northern whites.
 i gave as much time to these addresses as i could spare from the immediate
 work at tuskegee. most of the addresses in the north were made for the
 direct purpose of getting funds with which to support the school. those
 delivered before the coloured people had for their main object the
 impressing upon them the importance of industrial and technical education
 in addition to academic and religious training.
 i now come to that one of the incidents in my life which seems to have
 excited the greatest amount of interest, and which perhaps went further
 than anything else in giving me a reputation that in a sense might be
 called national. i refer to the address which i delivered at the opening
 of the atlanta cotton states and international exposition, at atlanta,
 ga., september , .
 so much has been said and written about this incident, and so many
 questions have been asked me concerning the address, that perhaps i may be
 excused for taking up the matter with some detail. the five-minute address
 in atlanta, which i came from boston to deliver, was possibly the prime
 cause for an opportunity being given me to make the second address there.
 in the spring of  i received a telegram from prominent citizens in
 atlanta asking me to accompany a committee from that city to washington
 for the purpose of appearing before a committee of congress in the
 interest of securing government help for the exposition. the committee was
 composed of about twenty-five of the most prominent and most influential
 white men of georgia. all the members of this committee were white men
 except bishop grant, bishop gaines, and myself. the mayor and several
 other city and state officials spoke before the committee. they were
 followed by the two coloured bishops. my name was the last on the list of
 speakers. i had never before appeared before such a committee, nor had i
 ever delivered any address in the capital of the nation. i had many
 misgivings as to what i ought to say, and as to the impression that my
 address would make. while i cannot recall in detail what i said, i
 remember that i tried to impress upon the committee, with all the
 earnestness and plainness of any language that i could command, that if
 congress wanted to do something which would assist in ridding the south of
 the race question and making friends between the two races, it should, in
 every proper way, encourage the material and intellectual growth of both
 races. i said that the atlanta exposition would present an opportunity for
 both races to show what advance they had made since freedom, and would at
 the same time afford encouragement to them to make still greater progress.
 i tried to emphasize the fact that while the negro should not be deprived
 by unfair means of the franchise, political agitation alone would not save
 him, and that back of the ballot he must have property, industry, skill,
 economy, intelligence, and character, and that no race without these
 elements could permanently succeed. i said that in granting the
 appropriation congress could do something that would prove to be of real
 and lasting value to both races, and that it was the first great
 opportunity of the kind that had been presented since the close of the
 civil war.
 i spoke for fifteen or twenty minutes, and was surprised at the close of
 my address to receive the hearty congratulations of the georgia committee
 and of the members of congress who were present. the committee was
 unanimous in making a favourable report, and in a few days the bill passed
 congress. with the passing of this bill the success of the atlanta
 exposition was assured.
 soon after this trip to washington the directors of the exposition decided
 that it would be a fitting recognition of the coloured race to erect a
 large and attractive building which should be devoted wholly to showing
 the progress of the negro since freedom. it was further decided to have
 the building designed and erected wholly by negro mechanics. this plan was
 carried out. in design, beauty, and general finish the negro building was
 equal to the others on the grounds.
 after it was decided to have a separate negro exhibit, the question arose
 as to who should take care of it. the officials of the exposition were
 anxious that i should assume this responsibility, but i declined to do so,
 on the plea that the work at tuskegee at that time demanded my time and
 strength. largely at my suggestion, mr. i. garland penn, of lynchburg,
 va., was selected to be at the head of the negro department. i gave him
 all the aid that i could. the negro exhibit, as a whole, was large and
 creditable. the two exhibits in this department which attracted the
 greatest amount of attention were those from the hampton institute and the
 tuskegee institute. the people who seemed to be the most surprised, as
 well as pleased, at what they saw in the negro building were the southern
 white people.
 as the day for the opening of the exposition drew near, the board of
 directors began preparing the programme for the opening exercises. in the
 discussion from day to day of the various features of this programme, the
 question came up as to the advisability of putting a member of the negro
 race on for one of the opening addresses, since the negroes had been asked
 to take such a prominent part in the exposition. it was argued, further,
 that such recognition would mark the good feeling prevailing between the
 two races. of course there were those who were opposed to any such
 recognition of the rights of the negro, but the board of directors,
 composed of men who represented the best and most progressive element in
 the south, had their way, and voted to invite a black man to speak on the
 opening day. the next thing was to decide upon the person who was thus to
 represent the negro race. after the question had been canvassed for
 several days, the directors voted unanimously to ask me to deliver one of
 the opening-day addresses, and in a few days after that i received the
 official invitation.
 the receiving of this invitation brought to me a sense of responsibility
 that it would be hard for any one not placed in my position to appreciate.
 what were my feelings when this invitation came to me? i remembered that i
 had been a slave; that my early years had been spent in the lowest depths
 of poverty and ignorance, and that i had had little opportunity to prepare
 me for such a responsibility as this. it was only a few years before that
 time that any white man in the audience might have claimed me as his
 slave; and it was easily possible that some of my former owners might be
 present to hear me speak.
 i knew, too, that this was the first time in the entire history of the
 negro that a member of my race had been asked to speak from the same
 platform with white southern men and women on any important national
 occasion. i was asked now to speak to an audience composed of the wealth
 and culture of the white south, the representatives of my former masters.
 i knew, too, that while the greater part of my audience would be composed
 of southern people, yet there would be present a large number of northern
 whites, as well as a great many men and women of my own race.
 i was determined to say nothing that i did not feel from the bottom of my
 heart to be true and right. when the invitation came to me, there was not
 one word of intimation as to what i should say or as to what i should
 omit. in this i felt that the board of directors had paid a tribute to me.
 they knew that by one sentence i could have blasted, in a large degree,
 the success of the exposition. i was also painfully conscious of the fact
 that, while i must be true to my own race in my utterances, i had it in my
 power to make such an ill-timed address as would result in preventing any
 similar invitation being extended to a black man again for years to come.
 i was equally determined to be true to the north, as well as to the best
 element of the white south, in what i had to say.
 the papers, north and south, had taken up the discussion of my coming
 speech, and as the time for it drew near this discussion became more and
 more widespread. not a few of the southern white papers were unfriendly to
 the idea of my speaking. from my own race i received many suggestions as
 to what i ought to say. i prepared myself as best i could for the address,
 but as the eighteenth of september drew nearer, the heavier my heart
 became, and the more i feared that my effort would prove a failure and a
 disappointment.
 the invitation had come at a time when i was very busy with my school
 work, as it was the beginning of our school year. after preparing my
 address, i went through it, as i usually do with those utterances which i
 consider particularly important, with mrs. washington, and she approved of
 what i intended to say. on the sixteenth of september, the day before i
 was to start for atlanta, so many of the tuskegee teachers expressed a
 desire to hear my address that i consented to read it to them in a body.
 when i had done so, and had heard their criticisms and comments, i felt
 somewhat relieved, since they seemed to think well of what i had to say.
 on the morning of september , together with mrs. washington and my three
 children, i started for atlanta. i felt a good deal as i suppose a man
 feels when he is on his way to the gallows. in passing through the town of
 tuskegee i met a white farmer who lived some distance out in the country.
 in a jesting manner this man said: "washington, you have spoken before the
 northern white people, the negroes in the south, and to us country white
 people in the south; but atlanta, to-morrow, you will have before you the
 northern whites, the southern whites, and the negroes all together. i am
 afraid that you have got yourself in a tight place." this farmer diagnosed
 the situation correctly, but his frank words did not add anything to my
 comfort.
 in the course of the journey from tuskegee to atlanta both coloured and
 white people came to the train to point me out, and discussed with perfect
 freedom, in my hearings, what was going to take place the next day. we
 were met by a committee in atlanta. almost the first thing that i heard
 when i got off the train in that city was an expression something like
 this, from an old coloured man near by: "dat's de man of my race what's
 gwine to make a speech at de exposition to-morrow. i'se sho' gwine to hear
 him."
 atlanta was literally packed, at the time, with people from all parts of
 the country, and with representatives of foreign governments, as well as
 with military and civic organizations. the afternoon papers had forecasts
 of the next day's proceedings in flaring headlines. all this tended to add
 to my burden. i did not sleep much that night. the next morning, before
 day, i went carefully over what i planned to say. i also kneeled down and
 asked god's blessing upon my effort. right here, perhaps, i ought to add
 that i make it a rule never to go before an audience, on any occasion,
 without asking the blessing of god upon what i want to say.
 i always make it a rule to make especial preparation for each separate
 address. no two audiences are exactly alike. it is my aim to reach and
 talk to the heart of each individual audience, taking it into my
 confidence very much as i would a person. when i am speaking to an
 audience, i care little for how what i am saying is going to sound in the
 newspapers, or to another audience, or to an individual. at the time, the
 audience before me absorbs all my sympathy, thought, and energy.
 early in the morning a committee called to escort me to my place in the
 procession which was to march to the exposition grounds. in this
 procession were prominent coloured citizens in carriages, as well as
 several negro military organizations. i noted that the exposition
 officials seemed to go out of their way to see that all of the coloured
 people in the procession were properly placed and properly treated. the
 procession was about three hours in reaching the exposition grounds, and
 during all of this time the sun was shining down upon us disagreeably hot.
 when we reached the grounds, the heat, together with my nervous anxiety,
 made me feel as if i were about ready to collapse, and to feel that my
 address was not going to be a success. when i entered the audience-room, i
 found it packed with humanity from bottom to top, and there were thousands
 outside who could not get in.
 the room was very large, and well suited to public speaking. when i
 entered the room, there were vigorous cheers from the coloured portion of
 the audience, and faint cheers from some of the white people. i had been
 told, while i had been in atlanta, that while many white people were going
 to be present to hear me speak, simply out of curiosity, and that others
 who would be present would be in full sympathy with me, there was a still
 larger element of the audience which would consist of those who were going
 to be present for the purpose of hearing me make a fool of myself, or, at
 least, of hearing me say some foolish thing so that they could say to the
 officials who had invited me to speak, "i told you so!"
 one of the trustees of the tuskegee institute, as well as my personal
 friend, mr. william h. baldwin, jr. was at the time general manager of the
 southern railroad, and happened to be in atlanta on that day. he was so
 nervous about the kind of reception that i would have, and the effect that
 my speech would produce, that he could not persuade himself to go into the
 building, but walked back and forth in the grounds outside until the
 opening exercises were over.
 chapter xiv. the atlanta exposition address
 the atlanta exposition, at which i had been asked to make an address as a
 representative of the negro race, as stated in the last chapter, was
 opened with a short address from governor bullock. after other interesting
 exercises, including an invocation from bishop nelson, of georgia, a
 dedicatory ode by albert howell, jr., and addresses by the president of
 the exposition and mrs. joseph thompson, the president of the woman's
 board, governor bullock introduce me with the words, "we have with us
 to-day a representative of negro enterprise and negro civilization."
 when i arose to speak, there was considerable cheering, especially from
 the coloured people. as i remember it now, the thing that was uppermost in
 my mind was the desire to say something that would cement the friendship
 of the races and bring about hearty cooperation between them. so far as my
 outward surroundings were concerned, the only thing that i recall
 distinctly now is that when i got up, i saw thousands of eyes looking
 intently into my face. the following is the address which i delivered:—
 mr. president and gentlemen of the board of directors and citizens.
 one-third of the population of the south is of the negro race. no
 enterprise seeking the material, civil, or moral welfare of this section
 can disregard this element of our population and reach the highest
 success. i but convey to you, mr. president and directors, the sentiment
 of the masses of my race when i say that in no way have the value and
 manhood of the american negro been more fittingly and generously
 recognized than by the managers of this magnificent exposition at every
 stage of its progress. it is a recognition that will do more to cement the
 friendship of the two races than any occurrence since the dawn of our
 freedom.
 not only this, but the opportunity here afforded will awaken among us a
 new era of industrial progress. ignorant and inexperienced, it is not
 strange that in the first years of our new life we began at the top
 instead of at the bottom; that a seat in congress or the state legislature
 was more sought than real estate or industrial skill; that the political
 convention or stump speaking had more attractions than starting a dairy
 farm or truck garden.
 a ship lost at sea for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vessel. from
 the mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal, "water, water; we
 die of thirst!" the answer from the friendly vessel at once came back,
 "cast down your bucket where you are." a second time the signal, "water,
 water; send us water!" ran up from the distressed vessel, and was
 answered, "cast down your bucket where you are." and a third and fourth
 signal for water was answered, "cast down your bucket where you are." the
 captain of the distressed vessel, at last heading the injunction, cast
 down his bucket, and it came up full of fresh, sparkling water from the
 mouth of the amazon river. to those of my race who depend on bettering
 their condition in a foreign land or who underestimate the importance of
 cultivating friendly relations with the southern white man, who is their
 next-door neighbour, i would say: "cast down your bucket where you are"—cast
 it down in making friends in every manly way of the people of all races by
 whom we are surrounded.
 cast it down in agriculture, mechanics, in commerce, in domestic service,
 and in the professions. and in this connection it is well to bear in mind
 that whatever other sins the south may be called to bear, when it comes to
 business, pure and simple, it is in the south that the negro is given a
 man's chance in the commercial world, and in nothing is this exposition
 more eloquent than in emphasizing this chance. our greatest danger is that
 in the great leap from slavery to freedom we may overlook the fact that
 the masses of us are to live by the productions of our hands, and fail to
 keep in mind that we shall prosper in proportion as we learn to dignify
 and glorify common labour and put brains and skill into the common
 occupations of life; shall prosper in proportion as we learn to draw the
 line between the superficial and the substantial, the ornamental gewgaws
 of life and the useful. no race can prosper till it learns that there is
 as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. it is at the
 bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top. nor should we permit our
 grievances to overshadow our opportunities.
 to those of the white race who look to the incoming of those of foreign
 birth and strange tongue and habits of the prosperity of the south, were i
 permitted i would repeat what i say to my own race: "cast down your bucket
 where you are." cast it down among the eight millions of negroes whose
 habits you know, whose fidelity and love you have tested in days when to
 have proved treacherous meant the ruin of your firesides. cast down your
 bucket among these people who have, without strikes and labour wars,
 tilled your fields, cleared your forests, builded your railroads and
 cities, and brought forth treasures from the bowels of the earth, and
 helped make possible this magnificent representation of the progress of
 the south. casting down your bucket among my people, helping and
 encouraging them as you are doing on these grounds, and to education of
 head, hand, and heart, you will find that they will buy your surplus land,
 make blossom the waste places in your fields, and run your factories.
 while doing this, you can be sure in the future, as in the past, that you
 and your families will be surrounded by the most patient, faithful,
 law-abiding, and unresentful people that the world has seen. as we have
 proved our loyalty to you in the past, nursing your children, watching by
 the sick-bed of your mothers and fathers, and often following them with
 tear-dimmed eyes to their graves, so in the future, in our humble way, we
 shall stand by you with a devotion that no foreigner can approach, ready
 to lay down our lives, if need be, in defence of yours, interlacing our
 industrial, commercial, civil, and religious life with yours in a way that
 shall make the interests of both races one. in all things that are purely
 social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all
 things essential to mutual progress.
 there is no defence or security for any of us except in the highest
 intelligence and development of all. if anywhere there are efforts tending
 to curtail the fullest growth of the negro, let these efforts be turned
 into stimulating, encouraging, and making him the most useful and
 intelligent citizen. effort or means so invested will pay a thousand per
 cent interest. these efforts will be twice blessed—"blessing him
 that gives and him that takes."
 there is no escape through law of man or god from the inevitable:—
 the laws of changeless justice bind
 oppressor with oppressed;
 and close as sin and suffering joined
 we march to fate abreast.
 nearly sixteen millions of hands will aid you in pulling the load upward,
 or they will pull against you the load downward. we shall constitute
 one-third and more of the ignorance and crime of the south, or one-third
 its intelligence and progress; we shall contribute one-third to the
 business and industrial prosperity of the south, or we shall prove a
 veritable body of death, stagnating, depressing, retarding every effort to
 advance the body politic.
 gentlemen of the exposition, as we present to you our humble effort at an
 exhibition of our progress, you must not expect overmuch. starting thirty
 years ago with ownership here and there in a few quilts and pumpkins and
 chickens (gathered from miscellaneous sources), remember the path that has
 led from these to the inventions and production of agricultural
 implements, buggies, steam-engines, newspapers, books, statuary, carving,
 paintings, the management of drug-stores and banks, has not been trodden
 without contact with thorns and thistles. while we take pride in what we
 exhibit as a result of our independent efforts, we do not for a moment
 forget that our part in this exhibition would fall far short of your
 expectations but for the constant help that has come to our education
 life, not only from the southern states, but especially from northern
 philanthropists, who have made their gifts a constant stream of blessing
 and encouragement.
 the wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of
 social equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the enjoyment
 of all the privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe
 and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing. no race that has
 anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree
 ostracized. it is important and right that all privileges of the law be
 ours, but it is vastly more important that we be prepared for the
 exercises of these privileges. the opportunity to earn a dollar in a
 factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a
 dollar in an opera-house.
 in conclusion, may i repeat that nothing in thirty years has given us more
 hope and encouragement, and drawn us so near to you of the white race, as
 this opportunity offered by the exposition; and here bending, as it were,
 over the altar that represents the results of the struggles of your race
 and mine, both starting practically empty-handed three decades ago, i
 pledge that in your effort to work out the great and intricate problem
 which god has laid at the doors of the south, you shall have at all times
 the patient, sympathetic help of my race; only let this be constantly in
 mind, that, while from representations in these buildings of the product
 of field, of forest, of mine, of factory, letters, and art, much good will
 come, yet far above and beyond material benefits will be that higher good,
 that, let us pray god, will come, in a blotting out of sectional
 differences and racial animosities and suspicions, in a determination to
 administer absolute justice, in a willing obedience among all classes to
 the mandates of law. this, this, coupled with our material prosperity,
 will bring into our beloved south a new heaven and a new earth.
 the first thing that i remember, after i had finished speaking, was that
 governor bullock rushed across the platform and took me by the hand, and
 that others did the same. i received so many and such hearty
 congratulations that i found it difficult to get out of the building. i
 did not appreciate to any degree, however, the impression which my address
 seemed to have made, until the next morning, when i went into the business
 part of the city. as soon as i was recognized, i was surprised to find
 myself pointed out and surrounded by a crowd of men who wished to shake
 hands with me. this was kept up on every street on to which i went, to an
 extent which embarrassed me so much that i went back to my boarding-place.
 the next morning i returned to tuskegee. at the station in atlanta, and at
 almost all of the stations at which the train stopped between that city
 and tuskegee, i found a crowd of people anxious to shake hands with me.
 the papers in all parts of the united states published the address in
 full, and for months afterward there were complimentary editorial
 references to it. mr. clark howell, the editor of the atlanta
 constitution, telegraphed to a new york paper, among other words, the
 following, "i do not exaggerate when i say that professor booker t.
 washington's address yesterday was one of the most notable speeches, both
 as to character and as to the warmth of its reception, ever delivered to a
 southern audience. the address was a revelation. the whole speech is a
 platform upon which blacks and whites can stand with full justice to each
 other."
 the boston transcript said editorially: "the speech of booker t.
 washington at the atlanta exposition, this week, seems to have dwarfed all
 the other proceedings and the exposition itself. the sensation that it has
 caused in the press has never been equalled."
 i very soon began receiving all kinds of propositions from lecture
 bureaus, and editors of magazines and papers, to take the lecture
 platform, and to write articles. one lecture bureau offered me fifty
 thousand dollars, or two hundred dollars a night and expenses, if i would
 place my services at its disposal for a given period. to all these
 communications i replied that my life-work was at tuskegee; and that
 whenever i spoke it must be in the interests of tuskegee school and my
 race, and that i would enter into no arrangements that seemed to place a
 mere commercial value upon my services.
 some days after its delivery i sent a copy of my address to the president
 of the united states, the hon. grover cleveland. i received from him the
 following autograph reply:—
 gray gables, buzzard's bay, mass.,
 october , .
 booker t. washington, esq.:
 my dear sir: i thank you for sending me a copy of your address delivered
 at the atlanta exposition.
 i thank you with much enthusiasm for making the address. i have read it
 with intense interest, and i think the exposition would be fully justified
 if it did not do more than furnish the opportunity for its delivery. your
 words cannot fail to delight and encourage all who wish well for your
 race; and if our coloured fellow-citizens do not from your utterances
 gather new hope and form new determinations to gain every valuable
 advantage offered them by their citizenship, it will be strange indeed.
 yours very truly,
 grover cleveland.
 later i met mr. cleveland, for the first time, when, as president, he
 visited the atlanta exposition. at the request of myself and others he
 consented to spend an hour in the negro building, for the purpose of
 inspecting the negro exhibit and of giving the coloured people in
 attendance an opportunity to shake hands with him. as soon as i met mr.
 cleveland i became impressed with his simplicity, greatness, and rugged
 honesty. i have met him many times since then, both at public functions
 and at his private residence in princeton, and the more i see of him the
 more i admire him. when he visited the negro building in atlanta he seemed
 to give himself up wholly, for that hour, to the coloured people. he
 seemed to be as careful to shake hands with some old coloured "auntie"
 clad partially in rags, and to take as much pleasure in doing so, as if he
 were greeting some millionaire. many of the coloured people took advantage
 of the occasion to get him to write his name in a book or on a slip of
 paper. he was as careful and patient in doing this as if he were putting
 his signature to some great state document.
 mr. cleveland has not only shown his friendship for me in many personal
 ways, but has always consented to do anything i have asked of him for our
 school. this he has done, whether it was to make a personal donation or to
 use his influence in securing the donations of others. judging from my
 personal acquaintance with mr. cleveland, i do not believe that he is
 conscious of possessing any colour prejudice. he is too great for that. in
 my contact with people i find that, as a rule, it is only the little,
 narrow people who live for themselves, who never read good books, who do
 not travel, who never open up their souls in a way to permit them to come
 into contact with other souls—with the great outside world. no man
 whose vision is bounded by colour can come into contact with what is
 highest and best in the world. in meeting men, in many places, i have
 found that the happiest people are those who do the most for others; the
 most miserable are those who do the least. i have also found that few
 things, if any, are capable of making one so blind and narrow as race
 prejudice. i often say to our students, in the course of my talks to them
 on sunday evenings in the chapel, that the longer i live and the more
 experience i have of the world, the more i am convinced that, after all,
 the one thing that is most worth living for—and dying for, if need
 be—is the opportunity of making some one else more happy and more
 useful.
 the coloured people and the coloured newspapers at first seemed to be
 greatly pleased with the character of my atlanta address, as well as with
 its reception. but after the first burst of enthusiasm began to die away,
 and the coloured people began reading the speech in cold type, some of
 them seemed to feel that they had been hypnotized. they seemed to feel
 that i had been too liberal in my remarks toward the southern whites, and
 that i had not spoken out strongly enough for what they termed the
 "rights" of my race. for a while there was a reaction, so far as a certain
 element of my own race was concerned, but later these reactionary ones
 seemed to have been won over to my way of believing and acting.
 while speaking of changes in public sentiment, i recall that about ten
 years after the school at tuskegee was established, i had an experience
 that i shall never forget. dr. lyman abbott, then the pastor of plymouth
 church, and also editor of the outlook (then the christian union), asked
 me to write a letter for his paper giving my opinion of the exact
 condition, mental and moral, of the coloured ministers in the south, as
 based upon my observations. i wrote the letter, giving the exact facts as
 i conceived them to be. the picture painted was a rather black one—or,
 since i am black, shall i say "white"? it could not be otherwise with a
 race but a few years out of slavery, a race which had not had time or
 opportunity to produce a competent ministry.
 what i said soon reached every negro minister in the country, i think, and
 the letters of condemnation which i received from them were not few. i
 think that for a year after the publication of this article every
 association and every conference or religious body of any kind, of my
 race, that met, did not fail before adjourning to pass a resolution
 condemning me, or calling upon me to retract or modify what i had said.
 many of these organizations went so far in their resolutions as to advise
 parents to cease sending their children to tuskegee. one association even
 appointed a "missionary" whose duty it was to warn the people against
 sending their children to tuskegee. this missionary had a son in the
 school, and i noticed that, whatever the "missionary" might have said or
 done with regard to others, he was careful not to take his son away from
 the institution. many of the coloured papers, especially those that were
 the organs of religious bodies, joined in the general chorus of
 condemnation or demands for retraction.
 during the whole time of the excitement, and through all the criticism, i
 did not utter a word of explanation or retraction. i knew that i was
 right, and that time and the sober second thought of the people would
 vindicate me. it was not long before the bishops and other church leaders
 began to make careful investigation of the conditions of the ministry, and
 they found out that i was right. in fact, the oldest and most influential
 bishop in one branch of the methodist church said that my words were far
 too mild. very soon public sentiment began making itself felt, in
 demanding a purifying of the ministry. while this is not yet complete by
 any means, i think i may say, without egotism, and i have been told by
 many of our most influential ministers, that my words had much to do with
 starting a demand for the placing of a higher type of men in the pulpit. i
 have had the satisfaction of having many who once condemned me thank me
 heartily for my frank words.
 the change of the attitude of the negro ministry, so far as regards
 myself, is so complete that at the present time i have no warmer friends
 among any class than i have among the clergymen. the improvement in the
 character and life of the negro ministers is one of the most gratifying
 evidences of the progress of the race. my experience with them, as well as
 other events in my life, convince me that the thing to do, when one feels
 sure that he has said or done the right thing, and is condemned, is to
 stand still and keep quiet. if he is right, time will show it.
 in the midst of the discussion which was going on concerning my atlanta
 speech, i received the letter which i give below, from dr. gilman, the
 president of johns hopkins university, who had been made chairman of the
 judges of award in connection with the atlanta exposition:—
 johns hopkins university, baltimore,
 president's office, september , .
 dear mr. washington: would it be agreeable to you to be one of the judges
 of award in the department of education at atlanta? if so, i shall be glad
 to place your name upon the list. a line by telegraph will be welcomed.
 yours very truly,
 d.c. gilman
 i think i was even more surprised to receive this invitation than i had
 been to receive the invitation to speak at the opening of the exposition.
 it was to be a part of my duty, as one of the jurors, to pass not only
 upon the exhibits of the coloured schools, but also upon those of the
 white schools. i accepted the position, and spent a month in atlanta in
 performance of the duties which it entailed. the board of jurors was a
 large one, containing in all of sixty members. it was about equally
 divided between southern white people and northern white people. among
 them were college presidents, leading scientists and men of letters, and
 specialists in many subjects. when the group of jurors to which i was
 assigned met for organization, mr. thomas nelson page, who was one of the
 number, moved that i be made secretary of that division, and the motion
 was unanimously adopted. nearly half of our division were southern people.
 in performing my duties in the inspection of the exhibits of white schools
 i was in every case treated with respect, and at the close of our labours
 i parted from my associates with regret.
 i am often asked to express myself more freely than i do upon the
 political condition and the political future of my race. these
 recollections of my experience in atlanta give me the opportunity to do so
 briefly. my own belief is, although i have never before said so in so many
 words, that the time will come when the negro in the south will be
 accorded all the political rights which his ability, character, and
 material possessions entitle him to. i think, though, that the opportunity
 to freely exercise such political rights will not come in any large degree
 through outside or artificial forcing, but will be accorded to the negro
 by the southern white people themselves, and that they will protect him in
 the exercise of those rights. just as soon as the south gets over the old
 feeling that it is being forced by "foreigners," or "aliens," to do
 something which it does not want to do, i believe that the change in the
 direction that i have indicated is going to begin. in fact, there are
 indications that it is already beginning in a slight degree.
 let me illustrate my meaning. suppose that some months before the opening
 of the atlanta exposition there had been a general demand from the press
 and public platform outside the south that a negro be given a place on the
 opening programme, and that a negro be placed upon the board of jurors of
 award. would any such recognition of the race have taken place? i do not
 think so. the atlanta officials went as far as they did because they felt
 it to be a pleasure, as well as a duty, to reward what they considered
 merit in the negro race. say what we will, there is something in human
 nature which we cannot blot out, which makes one man, in the end,
 recognize and reward merit in another, regardless of colour or race.
 i believe it is the duty of the negro—as the greater part of the
 race is already doing—to deport himself modestly in regard to
 political claims, depending upon the slow but sure influences that proceed
 from the possession of property, intelligence, and high character for the
 full recognition of his political rights. i think that the according of
 the full exercise of political rights is going to be a matter of natural,
 slow growth, not an over-night, gourd-vine affair. i do not believe that
 the negro should cease voting, for a man cannot learn the exercise of
 self-government by ceasing to vote, any more than a boy can learn to swim
 by keeping out of the water, but i do believe that in his voting he should
 more and more be influenced by those of intelligence and character who are
 his next-door neighbours.
 i know coloured men who, through the encouragement, help, and advice of
 southern white people, have accumulated thousands of dollars' worth of
 property, but who, at the same time, would never think of going to those
 same persons for advice concerning the casting of their ballots. this, it
 seems to me, is unwise and unreasonable, and should cease. in saying this
 i do not mean that the negro should truckle, or not vote from principle,
 for the instant he ceases to vote from principle he loses the confidence
 and respect of the southern white man even.
 i do not believe that any state should make a law that permits an ignorant
 and poverty-stricken white man to vote, and prevents a black man in the
 same condition from voting. such a law is not only unjust, but it will
 react, as all unjust laws do, in time; for the effect of such a law is to
 encourage the negro to secure education and property, and at the same time
 it encourages the white man to remain in ignorance and poverty. i believe
 that in time, through the operation of intelligence and friendly race
 relations, all cheating at the ballot-box in the south will cease. it will
 become apparent that the white man who begins by cheating a negro out of
 his ballot soon learns to cheat a white man out of his, and that the man
 who does this ends his career of dishonesty by the theft of property or by
 some equally serious crime. in my opinion, the time will come when the
 south will encourage all of its citizens to vote. it will see that it pays
 better, from every standpoint, to have healthy, vigorous life than to have
 that political stagnation which always results when one-half of the
 population has no share and no interest in the government.
 as a rule, i believe in universal, free suffrage, but i believe that in
 the south we are confronted with peculiar conditions that justify the
 protection of the ballot in many of the states, for a while at least,
 either by an education test, a property test, or by both combined; but
 whatever tests are required, they should be made to apply with equal and
 exact justice to both races.
 chapter xv. the secret of success in public speaking
 as to how my address at atlanta was received by the audience in the
 exposition building, i think i prefer to let mr. james creelman, the noted
 war correspondent, tell. mr. creelman was present, and telegraphed the
 following account to the new york world:—
 atlanta, september .
 while president cleveland was waiting at gray gables to-day, to send the
 electric spark that started the machinery of the atlanta exposition, a
 negro moses stood before a great audience of white people and delivered an
 oration that marks a new epoch in the history of the south; and a body of
 negro troops marched in a procession with the citizen soldiery of georgia
 and louisiana. the whole city is thrilling to-night with a realization of
 the extraordinary significance of these two unprecedented events. nothing
 has happened since henry grady's immortal speech before the new england
 society in new york that indicates so profoundly the spirit of the new
 south, except, perhaps, the opening of the exposition itself.
 when professor booker t. washington, principal of an industrial school for
 coloured people in tuskegee, ala. stood on the platform of the auditorium,
 with the sun shining over the heads of his auditors into his eyes, and
 with his whole face lit up with the fire of prophecy, clark howell, the
 successor of henry grady, said to me, "that man's speech is the beginning
 of a moral revolution in america."
 it is the first time that a negro has made a speech in the south on any
 important occasion before an audience composed of white men and women. it
 electrified the audience, and the response was as if it had come from the
 throat of a whirlwind.
 mrs. thompson had hardly taken her seat when all eyes were turned on a
 tall tawny negro sitting in the front row of the platform. it was
 professor booker t. washington, president of the tuskegee (alabama) normal
 and industrial institute, who must rank from this time forth as the
 foremost man of his race in america. gilmore's band played the
 "star-spangled banner," and the audience cheered. the tune changed to
 "dixie" and the audience roared with shrill "hi-yis." again the music
 changed, this time to "yankee doodle," and the clamour lessened.
 all this time the eyes of the thousands present looked straight at the
 negro orator. a strange thing was to happen. a black man was to speak for
 his people, with none to interrupt him. as professor washington strode to
 the edge of the stage, the low, descending sun shot fiery rays through the
 windows into his face. a great shout greeted him. he turned his head to
 avoid the blinding light, and moved about the platform for relief. then he
 turned his wonderful countenance to the sun without a blink of the
 eyelids, and began to talk.
 there was a remarkable figure; tall, bony, straight as a sioux chief, high
 forehead, straight nose, heavy jaws, and strong, determined mouth, with
 big white teeth, piercing eyes, and a commanding manner. the sinews stood
 out on his bronzed neck, and his muscular right arm swung high in the air,
 with a lead-pencil grasped in the clinched brown fist. his big feet were
 planted squarely, with the heels together and the toes turned out. his
 voice range out clear and true, and he paused impressively as he made each
 point. within ten minutes the multitude was in an uproar of enthusiasm—handkerchiefs
 were waved, canes were flourished, hats were tossed in the air. the
 fairest women of georgia stood up and cheered. it was as if the orator had
 bewitched them.
 and when he held his dusky hand high above his head, with the fingers
 stretched wide apart, and said to the white people of the south on behalf
 of his race, "in all things that are purely social we can be as separate
 as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual
 progress," the great wave of sound dashed itself against the walls, and
 the whole audience was on its feet in a delirium of applause, and i
 thought at that moment of the night when henry grady stood among the
 curling wreaths of tobacco-smoke in delmonico's banquet-hall and said, "i
 am a cavalier among roundheads."
 i have heard the great orators of many countries, but not even gladstone
 himself could have pleased a cause with most consummate power than did
 this angular negro, standing in a nimbus of sunshine, surrounded by the
 men who once fought to keep his race in bondage. the roar might swell ever
 so high, but the expression of his earnest face never changed.
 a ragged, ebony giant, squatted on the floor in one of the aisles, watched
 the orator with burning eyes and tremulous face until the supreme burst of
 applause came, and then the tears ran down his face. most of the negroes
 in the audience were crying, perhaps without knowing just why.
 at the close of the speech governor bullock rushed across the stage and
 seized the orator's hand. another shout greeted this demonstration, and
 for a few minutes the two men stood facing each other, hand in hand.
 so far as i could spare the time from the immediate work at tuskegee,
 after my atlanta address, i accepted some of the invitations to speak in
 public which came to me, especially those that would take me into
 territory where i thought it would pay to plead the cause of my race, but
 i always did this with the understanding that i was to be free to talk
 about my life-work and the needs of my people. i also had it understood
 that i was not to speak in the capacity of a professional lecturer, or for
 mere commercial gain.
 in my efforts on the public platform i never have been able to understand
 why people come to hear me speak. this question i never can rid myself of.
 time and time again, as i have stood in the street in front of a building
 and have seen men and women passing in large numbers into the audience
 room where i was to speak, i have felt ashamed that i should be the cause
 of people—as it seemed to me—wasting a valuable hour of their
 time. some years ago i was to deliver an address before a literary society
 in madison, wis. an hour before the time set for me to speak, a fierce
 snow-storm began, and continued for several hours. i made up my mind that
 there would be no audience, and that i should not have to speak, but, as a
 matter of duty, i went to the church, and found it packed with people. the
 surprise gave me a shock that i did not recover from during the whole
 evening.
 people often ask me if i feel nervous before speaking, or else they
 suggest that, since i speak often, they suppose that i get used to it. in
 answer to this question i have to say that i always suffer intensely from
 nervousness before speaking. more than once, just before i was to make an
 important address, this nervous strain has been so great that i have
 resolved never again to speak in public. i not only feel nervous before
 speaking, but after i have finished i usually feel a sense of regret,
 because it seems to me as if i had left out of my address the main thing
 and the best thing that i had meant to say.
 there is a great compensation, though, for this preliminary nervous
 suffering, that comes to me after i have been speaking for about ten
 minutes, and have come to feel that i have really mastered my audience,
 and that we have gotten into full and complete sympathy with each other.
 it seems to me that there is rarely such a combination of mental and
 physical delight in any effort as that which comes to a public speaker
 when he feels that he has a great audience completely within his control.
 there is a thread of sympathy and oneness that connects a public speaker
 with his audience, that is just as strong as though it was something
 tangible and visible. if in an audience of a thousand people there is one
 person who is not in sympathy with my views, or is inclined to be
 doubtful, cold, or critical, i can pick him out. when i have found him i
 usually go straight at him, and it is a great satisfaction to watch the
 process of his thawing out. i find that the most effective medicine for
 such individuals is administered at first in the form of a story, although
 i never tell an anecdote simply for the sake of telling one. that kind of
 thing, i think, is empty and hollow, and an audience soon finds it out.
 i believe that one always does himself and his audience an injustice when
 he speaks merely for the sake of speaking. i do not believe that one
 should speak unless, deep down in his heart, he feels convinced that he
 has a message to deliver. when one feels, from the bottom of his feet to
 the top of his head, that he has something to say that is going to help
 some individual or some cause, then let him say it; and in delivering his
 message i do not believe that many of the artificial rules of elocution
 can, under such circumstances, help him very much. although there are
 certain things, such as pauses, breathing, and pitch of voice, that are
 very important, none of these can take the place of soul in an address.
 when i have an address to deliver, i like to forget all about the rules
 for the proper use of the english language, and all about rhetoric and
 that sort of thing, and i like to make the audience forget all about these
 things, too.
 nothing tends to throw me off my balance so quickly, when i am speaking,
 as to have some one leave the room. to prevent this, i make up my mind, as
 a rule, that i will try to make my address so interesting, will try to
 state so many interesting facts one after another, that no one can leave.
 the average audience, i have come to believe, wants facts rather than
 generalities or sermonizing. most people, i think, are able to draw proper
 conclusions if they are given the facts in an interesting form on which to
 base them.
 as to the kind of audience that i like best to talk to, i would put at the
 top of the list an organization of strong, wide-awake, business men, such,
 for example, as is found in boston, new york, chicago, and buffalo. i have
 found no other audience so quick to see a point, and so responsive. within
 the last few years i have had the privilege of speaking before most of the
 leading organizations of this kind in the large cities of the united
 states. the best time to get hold of an organization of business men is
 after a good dinner, although i think that one of the worst instruments of
 torture that was ever invented is the custom which makes it necessary for
 a speaker to sit through a fourteen-course dinner, every minute of the
 time feeling sure that his speech is going to prove a dismal failure and
 disappointment.
 i rarely take part in one of these long dinners that i do not wish that i
 could put myself back in the little cabin where i was a slave boy, and
 again go through the experience there—one that i shall never forget—of
 getting molasses to eat once a week from the "big house." our usual diet
 on the plantation was corn bread and pork, but on sunday morning my mother
 was permitted to bring down a little molasses from the "big house" for her
 three children, and when it was received how i did wish that every day was
 sunday! i would get my tin plate and hold it up for the sweet morsel, but
 i would always shut my eyes while the molasses was being poured out into
 the plate, with the hope that when i opened them i would be surprised to
 see how much i had got. when i opened my eyes i would tip the plate in one
 direction and another, so as to make the molasses spread all over it, in
 the full belief that there would be more of it and that it would last
 longer if spread out in this way. so strong are my childish impressions of
 those sunday morning feasts that it would be pretty hard for any one to
 convince me that there is not more molasses on a plate when it is spread
 all over the plate than when it occupies a little corner—if there is
 a corner in a plate. at any rate, i have never believed in "cornering"
 syrup. my share of the syrup was usually about two tablespoonfuls, and
 those two spoonfuls of molasses were much more enjoyable to me than is a
 fourteen-course dinner after which i am to speak.
 next to a company of business men, i prefer to speak to an audience of
 southern people, of either race, together or taken separately. their
 enthusiasm and responsiveness are a constant delight. the "amens" and
 "dat's de truf" that come spontaneously from the coloured individuals are
 calculated to spur any speaker on to his best efforts. i think that next
 in order of preference i would place a college audience. it has been my
 privilege to deliver addresses at many of our leading colleges including
 harvard, yale, williams, amherst, fisk university, the university of
 pennsylvania, wellesley, the university of michigan, trinity college in
 north carolina, and many others.
 it has been a matter of deep interest to me to note the number of people
 who have come to shake hands with me after an address, who say that this
 is the first time they have ever called a negro "mister."
 when speaking directly in the interests of the tuskegee institute, i
 usually arrange, some time in advance, a series of meetings in important
 centres. this takes me before churches, sunday-schools, christian
 endeavour societies, and men's and women's clubs. when doing this i
 sometimes speak before as many as four organizations in a single day.
 three years ago, at the suggestion of mr. morris k. jessup, of new york,
 and dr. j.l.m. curry, the general agent of the fund, the trustees of the
 john f. slater fund voted a sum of money to be used in paying the expenses
 of mrs. washington and myself while holding a series of meetings among the
 coloured people in the large centres of negro population, especially in
 the large cities of the ex-slaveholding states. each year during the last
 three years we have devoted some weeks to this work. the plan that we have
 followed has been for me to speak in the morning to the ministers,
 teachers, and professional men. in the afternoon mrs. washington would
 speak to the women alone, and in the evening i spoke to a large
 mass-meeting. in almost every case the meetings have been attended not
 only by the coloured people in large numbers, but by the white people. in
 chattanooga, tenn., for example, there was present at the mass-meeting an
 audience of not less than three thousand persons, and i was informed that
 eight hundred of these were white. i have done no work that i really
 enjoyed more than this, or that i think has accomplished more good.
 these meetings have given mrs. washington and myself an opportunity to get
 first-hand, accurate information as to the real condition of the race, by
 seeing the people in their homes, their churches, their sunday-schools,
 and their places of work, as well as in the prisons and dens of crime.
 these meetings also gave us an opportunity to see the relations that exist
 between the races. i never feel so hopeful about the race as i do after
 being engaged in a series of these meetings. i know that on such occasions
 there is much that comes to the surface that is superficial and deceptive,
 but i have had experience enough not to be deceived by mere signs and
 fleeting enthusiasms. i have taken pains to go to the bottom of things and
 get facts, in a cold, business-like manner.
 i have seen the statement made lately, by one who claims to know what he
 is talking about, that, taking the whole negro race into account, ninety
 per cent of the negro women are not virtuous. there never was a baser
 falsehood uttered concerning a race, or a statement made that was less
 capable of being proved by actual facts.
 no one can come into contact with the race for twenty years, as i have
 done in the heart of the south, without being convinced that the race is
 constantly making slow but sure progress materially, educationally, and
 morally. one might take up the life of the worst element in new york city,
 for example, and prove almost anything he wanted to prove concerning the
 white man, but all will agree that this is not a fair test.
 early in the year  i received a letter inviting me to deliver an
 address at the dedication of the robert gould shaw monument in boston. i
 accepted the invitation. it is not necessary for me, i am sure, to explain
 who robert gould shaw was, and what he did. the monument to his memory
 stands near the head of the boston common, facing the state house. it is
 counted to be the most perfect piece of art of the kind to be found in the
 country.
 the exercises connected with the dedication were held in music hall, in
 boston, and the great hall was packed from top to bottom with one of the
 most distinguished audiences that ever assembled in the city. among those
 present were more persons representing the famous old anti-slavery element
 that it is likely will ever be brought together in the country again. the
 late hon. roger wolcott, then governor of massachusetts, was the presiding
 officer, and on the platform with him were many other officials and
 hundreds of distinguished men. a report of the meeting which appeared in
 the boston transcript will describe it better than any words of mine could
 do:—
 the core and kernel of yesterday's great noon meeting, in honour of the
 brotherhood of man, in music hall, was the superb address of the negro
 president of tuskegee. "booker t. washington received his harvard a.m.
 last june, the first of his race," said governor wolcott, "to receive an
 honorary degree from the oldest university in the land, and this for the
 wise leadership of his people." when mr. washington rose in the
 flag-filled, enthusiasm-warmed, patriotic, and glowing atmosphere of music
 hall, people felt keenly that here was the civic justification of the old
 abolition spirit of massachusetts; in his person the proof of her ancient
 and indomitable faith; in his strong thought and rich oratory, the crown
 and glory of the old war days of suffering and strife. the scene was full
 of historic beauty and deep significance. "cold" boston was alive with the
 fire that is always hot in her heart for righteousness and truth. rows and
 rows of people who are seldom seen at any public function, whole families
 of those who are certain to be out of town on a holiday, crowded the place
 to overflowing. the city was at her birthright fte in the persons
 of hundreds of her best citizens, men and women whose names and lives
 stand for the virtues that make for honourable civic pride.
 battle-music had filled the air. ovation after ovation, applause warm and
 prolonged, had greeted the officers and friends of colonel shaw, the
 sculptor, st. gaudens, the memorial committee, the governor and his staff,
 and the negro soldiers of the fifty-fourth massachusetts as they came upon
 the platform or entered the hall. colonel henry lee, of governor andrew's
 old staff, had made a noble, simple presentation speech for the committee,
 paying tribute to mr. john m. forbes, in whose stead he served. governor
 wolcott had made his short, memorable speech, saying, "fort wagner marked
 an epoch in the history of a race, and called it into manhood." mayor
 quincy had received the monument for the city of boston. the story of
 colonel shaw and his black regiment had been told in gallant words, and
 then, after the singing of
 mine eyes have seen the glory
 of the coming of the lord,
 booker washington arose. it was, of course, just the moment for him. the
 multitude, shaken out of its usual symphony-concert calm, quivered with an
 excitement that was not suppressed. a dozen times it had sprung to its
 feet to cheer and wave and hurrah, as one person. when this man of culture
 and voice and power, as well as a dark skin, began, and uttered the names
 of stearns and of andrew, feeling began to mount. you could see tears
 glisten in the eyes of soldiers and civilians. when the orator turned to
 the coloured soldiers on the platform, to the colour-bearer of fort
 wagner, who smilingly bore still the flag he had never lowered even when
 wounded, and said, "to you, to the scarred and scattered remnants of the
 fifty-fourth, who, with empty sleeve and wanting leg, have honoured this
 occasion with your presence, to you, your commander is not dead. though
 boston erected no monument and history recorded no story, in you and in
 the loyal race which you represent, robert gould shaw would have a
 monument which time could not wear away," then came the climax of the
 emotion of the day and the hour. it was roger wolcott, as well as the
 governor of massachusetts, the individual representative of the people's
 sympathy as well as the chief magistrate, who had sprung first to his feet
 and cried, "three cheers to booker t. washington!"
 among those on the platform was sergeant william h. carney, of new
 bedford, mass., the brave coloured officer who was the colour-bearer at
 fort wagner and held the american flag. in spite of the fact that a large
 part of his regiment was killed, he escaped, and exclaimed, after the
 battle was over, "the old flag never touched the ground."
 this flag sergeant carney held in his hands as he sat on the platform, and
 when i turned to address the survivors of the coloured regiment who were
 present, and referred to sergeant carney, he rose, as if by instinct, and
 raised the flag. it has been my privilege to witness a good many
 satisfactory and rather sensational demonstrations in connection with some
 of my public addresses, but in dramatic effect i have never seen or
 experienced anything which equalled this. for a number of minutes the
 audience seemed to entirely lose control of itself.
 in the general rejoicing throughout the country which followed the close
 of the spanish-american war, peace celebrations were arranged in several
 of the large cities. i was asked by president william r. harper, of the
 university of chicago, who was chairman of the committee of invitations
 for the celebration to be held in the city of chicago, to deliver one of
 the addresses at the celebration there. i accepted the invitation, and
 delivered two addresses there during the jubilee week. the first of these,
 and the principal one, was given in the auditorium, on the evening of
 sunday, october . this was the largest audience that i have ever
 addressed, in any part of the country; and besides speaking in the main
 auditorium, i also addressed, that same evening, two overflow audiences in
 other parts of the city.
 it was said that there were sixteen thousand persons in the auditorium,
 and it seemed to me as if there were as many more on the outside trying to
 get in. it was impossible for any one to get near the entrance without the
 aid of a policeman. president william mckinley attended this meeting, as
 did also the members of his cabinet, many foreign ministers, and a large
 number of army and navy officers, many of whom had distinguished
 themselves in the war which had just closed. the speakers, besides myself,
 on sunday evening, were rabbi emil g. hirsch, father thomas p. hodnett,
 and dr. john h. barrows.
 the chicago times-herald, in describing the meeting, said of my address:—
 he pictured the negro choosing slavery rather than extinction; recalled
 crispus attucks shedding his blood at the beginning of the american
 revolution, that white americans might be free, while black americans
 remained in slavery; rehearsed the conduct of the negroes with jackson at
 new orleans; drew a vivid and pathetic picture of the southern slaves
 protecting and supporting the families of their masters while the latter
 were fighting to perpetuate black slavery; recounted the bravery of
 coloured troops at port hudson and forts wagner and pillow, and praised
 the heroism of the black regiments that stormed el caney and santiago to
 give freedom to the enslaved people of cuba, forgetting, for the time
 being, the unjust discrimination that law and custom make against them in
 their own country.
 in all of these things, the speaker declared, his race had chosen the
 better part. and then he made his eloquent appeal to the consciences of
 the white americans: "when you have gotten the full story of the heroic
 conduct of the negro in the spanish-american war, have heard it from the
 lips of northern soldier and southern soldier, from ex-abolitionist and
 ex-masters, then decide within yourselves whether a race that is thus
 willing to die for its country should not be given the highest opportunity
 to live for its country."
 the part of the speech which seems to arouse the wildest and most
 sensational enthusiasm was that in which i thanked the president for his
 recognition of the negro in his appointments during the spanish-american
 war. the president was sitting in a box at the right of the stage. when i
 addressed him i turned toward the box, and as i finished the sentence
 thanking him for his generosity, the whole audience rose and cheered again
 and again, waving handkerchiefs and hats and canes, until the president
 arose in the box and bowed his acknowledgements. at that the enthusiasm
 broke out again, and the demonstration was almost indescribable.
 one portion of my address at chicago seemed to have been misunderstood by
 the southern press, and some of the southern papers took occasion to
 criticise me rather strongly. these criticisms continued for several
 weeks, until i finally received a letter from the editor of the
 age-herald, published in birmingham, ala., asking me if i would say just
 what i meant by this part of the address. i replied to him in a letter
 which seemed to satisfy my critics. in this letter i said that i had made
 it a rule never to say before a northern audience anything that i would
 not say before an audience in the south. i said that i did not think it
 was necessary for me to go into extended explanations; if my seventeen
 years of work in the heart of the south had not been explanation enough, i
 did not see how words could explain. i said that i made the same plea that
 i had made in my address at atlanta, for the blotting out of race
 prejudice in "commercial and civil relations." i said that what is termed
 social recognition was a question which i never discussed, and then i
 quoted from my atlanta address what i had said there in regard to that
 subject.
 in meeting crowds of people at public gatherings, there is one type of
 individual that i dread. i mean the crank. i have become so accustomed to
 these people now that i can pick them out at a distance when i see them
 elbowing their way up to me. the average crank has a long beard, poorly
 cared for, a lean, narrow face, and wears a black coat. the front of his
 vest and coat are slick with grease, and his trousers bag at the knees.
 in chicago, after i had spoken at a meeting, i met one of these fellows.
 they usually have some process for curing all of the ills of the world at
 once. this chicago specimen had a patent process by which he said indian
 corn could be kept through a period of three or four years, and he felt
 sure that if the negro race in the south would, as a whole, adopt his
 process, it would settle the whole race question. it mattered nothing that
 i tried to convince him that our present problem was to teach the negroes
 how to produce enough corn to last them through one year. another chicago
 crank had a scheme by which he wanted me to join him in an effort to close
 up all the national banks in the country. if that was done, he felt sure
 it would put the negro on his feet.
 the number of people who stand ready to consume one's time, to no purpose,
 is almost countless. at one time i spoke before a large audience in boston
 in the evening. the next morning i was awakened by having a card brought
 to my room, and with it a message that some one was anxious to see me.
 thinking that it must be something very important, i dressed hastily and
 went down. when i reached the hotel office i found a blank and
 innocent-looking individual waiting for me, who coolly remarked: "i heard
 you talk at a meeting last night. i rather liked your talk, and so i came
 in this morning to hear you talk some more."
 i am often asked how it is possible for me to superintend the work at
 tuskegee and at the same time be so much away from the school. in partial
 answer to this i would say that i think i have learned, in some degree at
 least, to disregard the old maxim which says, "do not get others to do
 that which you can do yourself." my motto, on the other hand, is, "do not
 do that which others can do as well."
 one of the most encouraging signs in connection with the tuskegee school
 is found in the fact that the organization is so thorough that the daily
 work of the school is not dependent upon the presence of any one
 individual. the whole executive force, including instructors and clerks,
 now numbers eighty-six. this force is so organized and subdivided that the
 machinery of the school goes on day by day like clockwork. most of our
 teachers have been connected with the institutions for a number of years,
 and are as much interested in it as i am. in my absence, mr. warren logan,
 the treasurer, who has been at the school seventeen years, is the
 executive. he is efficiently supported by mrs. washington, and by my
 faithful secretary, mr. emmett j. scott, who handles the bulk of my
 correspondence and keeps me in daily touch with the life of the school,
 and who also keeps me informed of whatever takes place in the south that
 concerns the race. i owe more to his tact, wisdom, and hard work than i
 can describe.
 the main executive work of the school, whether i am at tuskegee or not,
 centres in what we call the executive council. this council meets twice a
 week, and is composed of the nine persons who are at the head of the nine
 departments of the school. for example: mrs. b.k. bruce, the lady
 principal, the widow of the late ex-senator bruce, is a member of the
 council, and represents in it all that pertains to the life of the girls
 at the school. in addition to the executive council there is a financial
 committee of six, that meets every week and decides upon the expenditures
 for the week. once a month, and sometimes oftener, there is a general
 meeting of all the instructors. aside from these there are innumerable
 smaller meetings, such as that of the instructors in the phelps hall bible
 training school, or of the instructors in the agricultural department.
 in order that i may keep in constant touch with the life of the
 institution, i have a system of reports so arranged that a record of the
 school's work reaches me every day of the year, no matter in what part of
 the country i am. i know by these reports even what students are excused
 from school, and why they are excused—whether for reasons of ill
 health or otherwise. through the medium of these reports i know each day
 what the income of the school in money is; i know how many gallons of milk
 and how many pounds of butter come from the dairy; what the bill of fare
 for the teachers and students is; whether a certain kind of meat was
 boiled or baked, and whether certain vegetables served in the dining room
 were bought from a store or procured from our own farm. human nature i
 find to be very much the same the world over, and it is sometimes not hard
 to yield to the temptation to go to a barrel of rice that has come from
 the store—with the grain all prepared to go in the pot—rather
 than to take the time and trouble to go to the field and dig and wash
 one's own sweet potatoes, which might be prepared in a manner to take the
 place of the rice.
 i am often asked how, in the midst of so much work, a large part of which
 is for the public, i can find time for any rest or recreation, and what
 kind of recreation or sports i am fond of. this is rather a difficult
 question to answer. i have a strong feeling that every individual owes it
 to himself, and to the cause which he is serving, to keep a vigorous,
 healthy body, with the nerves steady and strong, prepared for great
 efforts and prepared for disappointments and trying positions. as far as i
 can, i make it a rule to plan for each day's work—not merely to go
 through with the same routine of daily duties, but to get rid of the
 routine work as early in the day as possible, and then to enter upon some
 new or advance work. i make it a rule to clear my desk every day, before
 leaving my office, of all correspondence and memoranda, so that on the
 morrow i can begin a new day of work. i make it a rule never to let
 my work drive me, but to so master it, and keep it in such complete
 control, and to keep so far ahead of it, that i will be the master instead
 of the servant. there is a physical and mental and spiritual enjoyment
 that comes from a consciousness of being the absolute master of one's
 work, in all its details, that is very satisfactory and inspiring. my
 experience teaches me that, if one learns to follow this plan, he gets a
 freshness of body and vigour of mind out of work that goes a long way
 toward keeping him strong and healthy. i believe that when one can grow to
 the point where he loves his work, this gives him a kind of strength that
 is most valuable.
 when i begin my work in the morning, i expect to have a successful and
 pleasant day of it, but at the same time i prepare myself for unpleasant
 and unexpected hard places. i prepared myself to hear that one of our
 school buildings is on fire, or has burned, or that some disagreeable
 accident has occurred, or that some one has abused me in a public address
 or printed article, for something that i have done or omitted to do, or
 for something that he had heard that i had said—probably something
 that i had never thought of saying.
 in nineteen years of continuous work i have taken but one vacation. that
 was two years ago, when some of my friends put the money into my hands and
 forced mrs. washington and myself to spend three months in europe. i have
 said that i believe it is the duty of every one to keep his body in good
 condition. i try to look after the little ills, with the idea that if i
 take care of the little ills the big ones will not come. when i find
 myself unable to sleep well, i know that something is wrong. if i find any
 part of my system the least weak, and not performing its duty, i consult a
 good physician. the ability to sleep well, at any time and in any place, i
 find of great advantage. i have so trained myself that i can lie down for
 a nap of fifteen or twenty minutes, and get up refreshed in body and mind.
 i have said that i make it a rule to finish up each day's work before
 leaving it. there is, perhaps, one exception to this. when i have an
 unusually difficult question to decide—one that appeals strongly to
 the emotions—i find it a safe rule to sleep over it for a night, or
 to wait until i have had an opportunity to talk it over with my wife and
 friends.
 as to my reading; the most time i get for solid reading is when i am on
 the cars. newspapers are to me a constant source of delight and
 recreation. the only trouble is that i read too many of them. fiction i
 care little for. frequently i have to almost force myself to read a novel
 that is on every one's lips. the kind of reading that i have the greatest
 fondness for is biography. i like to be sure that i am reading about a
 real man or a real thing. i think i do not go too far when i say that i
 have read nearly every book and magazine article that has been written
 about abraham lincoln. in literature he is my patron saint.
 out of the twelve months in a year i suppose that, on an average, i spend
 six months away from tuskegee. while my being absent from the school so
 much unquestionably has its disadvantages, yet there are at the same time
 some compensations. the change of work brings a certain kind of rest. i
 enjoy a ride of a long distance on the cars, when i am permitted to ride
 where i can be comfortable. i get rest on the cars, except when the
 inevitable individual who seems to be on every train approaches me with
 the now familiar phrase: "isn't this booker washington? i want to
 introduce myself to you." absence from the school enables me to lose sight
 of the unimportant details of the work, and study it in a broader and more
 comprehensive manner than i could do on the grounds. this absence also
 brings me into contact with the best work being done in educational lines,
 and into contact with the best educators in the land.
 but, after all this is said, the time when i get the most solid rest and
 recreation is when i can be at tuskegee, and, after our evening meal is
 over, can sit down, as is our custom, with my wife and portia and baker
 and davidson, my three children, and read a story, or each take turns in
 telling a story. to me there is nothing on earth equal to that, although
 what is nearly equal to it is to go with them for an hour or more, as we
 like to do on sunday afternoons, into the woods, where we can live for a
 while near the heart of nature, where no one can disturb or vex us,
 surrounded by pure air, the trees, the shrubbery, the flowers, and the
 sweet fragrance that springs from a hundred plants, enjoying the chirp of
 the crickets and the songs of the birds. this is solid rest.
 my garden, also, what little time i can be at tuskegee, is another source
 of rest and enjoyment. somehow i like, as often as possible, to touch
 nature, not something that is artificial or an imitation, but the real
 thing. when i can leave my office in time so that i can spend thirty or
 forty minutes in spading the ground, in planting seeds, in digging about
 the plants, i feel that i am coming into contact with something that is
 giving me strength for the many duties and hard places that await me out
 in the big world. i pity the man or woman who has never learned to enjoy
 nature and to get strength and inspiration out of it.
 aside from the large number of fowls and animals kept by the school, i
 keep individually a number of pigs and fowls of the best grades, and in
 raising these i take a great deal of pleasure. i think the pig is my
 favourite animal. few things are more satisfactory to me than a high-grade
 berkshire or poland china pig.
 games i care little for. i have never seen a game of football. in cards i
 do not know one card from another. a game of old-fashioned marbles with my
 two boys, once in a while, is all i care for in this direction. i suppose
 i would care for games now if i had had any time in my youth to give to
 them, but that was not possible.
 chapter xvi. europe
 in  i was married to miss margaret james murray, a native of
 mississippi, and a graduate of fisk university, in nashville, tenn., who
 had come to tuskegee as a teacher several years before, and at the time we
 were married was filling the position of lady principal. not only is mrs.
 washington completely one with me in the work directly connected with the
 school, relieving me of many burdens and perplexities, but aside from her
 work on the school grounds, she carries on a mothers' meeting in the town
 of tuskegee, and a plantation work among the women, children, and men who
 live in a settlement connected with a large plantation about eight miles
 from tuskegee. both the mothers' meeting and the plantation work are
 carried on, not only with a view to helping those who are directly
 reached, but also for the purpose of furnishing object-lessons in these
 two kinds of work that may be followed by our students when they go out
 into the world for their own life-work.
 aside from these two enterprises, mrs. washington is also largely
 responsible for a woman's club at the school which brings together, twice
 a month, the women who live on the school grounds and those who live near,
 for the discussion of some important topic. she is also the president of
 what is known as the federation of southern coloured women's clubs, and is
 chairman of the executive committee of the national federation of coloured
 women's clubs.
 portia, the oldest of my three children, has learned dressmaking. she has
 unusual ability in instrumental music. aside from her studies at tuskegee,
 she has already begun to teach there.
 booker taliaferro is my next oldest child. young as he is, he has already
 nearly mastered the brickmason's trade. he began working at this trade
 when he was quite small, dividing his time between this and class work;
 and he has developed great skill in the trade and a fondness for it. he
 says that he is going to be an architect and brickmason. one of the most
 satisfactory letters that i have ever received from any one came to me
 from booker last summer. when i left home for the summer, i told him that
 he must work at his trade half of each day, and that the other half of the
 day he could spend as he pleased. when i had been away from home two
 weeks, i received the following letter from him:
 tuskegee, alabama.
 my dear papa: before you left home you told me to work at my trade half of
 each day. i like my work so much that i want to work at my trade all day.
 besides, i want to earn all the money i can, so that when i go to another
 school i shall have money to pay my expenses.
 your son,
 booker.
 my youngest child, ernest davidson washington, says that he is going to be
 a physician. in addition to going to school, where he studies books and
 has manual training, he regularly spends a portion of his time in the
 office of our resident physician, and has already learned to do many of
 the duties which pertain to a doctor's office.
 the thing in my life which brings me the keenest regret is that my work in
 connection with public affairs keeps me for so much of the time away from
 my family, where, of all places in the world, i delight to be. i always
 envy the individual whose life-work is so laid that he can spend his
 evenings at home. i have sometimes thought that people who have this rare
 privilege do not appreciate it as they should. it is such a rest and
 relief to get away from crowds of people, and handshaking, and travelling,
 to get home, even if it be for but a very brief while.
 another thing at tuskegee out of which i get a great deal of pleasure and
 satisfaction is in the meeting with our students, and teachers, and their
 families, in the chapel for devotional exercises every evening at
 half-past eight, the last thing before retiring for the night. it is an
 inspiring sight when one stands on the platform there and sees before him
 eleven or twelve hundred earnest young men and women; and one cannot but
 feel that it is a privilege to help to guide them to a higher and more
 useful life.
 in the spring of  there came to me what i might describe as almost the
 greatest surprise of my life. some good ladies in boston arranged a public
 meeting in the interests of tuskegee, to be held in the hollis street
 theatre. this meeting was attended by large numbers of the best people of
 boston, of both races. bishop lawrence presided. in addition to an address
 made by myself, mr. paul lawrence dunbar read from his poems, and dr.
 w.e.b. du bois read an original sketch.
 some of those who attended this meeting noticed that i seemed unusually
 tired, and some little time after the close of the meeting, one of the
 ladies who had been interested in it asked me in a casual way if i had
 ever been to europe. i replied that i never had. she asked me if i had
 ever thought of going, and i told her no; that it was something entirely
 beyond me. this conversation soon passed out of my mind, but a few days
 afterward i was informed that some friends in boston, including mr.
 francis j. garrison, had raised a sum of money sufficient to pay all the
 expenses of mrs. washington and myself during a three or four months' trip
 to europe. it was added with emphasis that we must go. a year
 previous to this mr. garrison had attempted to get me to promise to go to
 europe for a summer's rest, with the understanding that he would be
 responsible for raising the money among his friends for the expenses of
 the trip. at that time such a journey seemed so entirely foreign to
 anything that i should ever be able to undertake that i did confess i did
 not give the matter very serious attention; but later mr. garrison joined
 his efforts to those of the ladies whom i have mentioned, and when their
 plans were made known to me mr. garrison not only had the route mapped
 out, but had, i believe, selected the steamer upon which we were to sail.
 the whole thing was so sudden and so unexpected that i was completely
 taken off my feet. i had been at work steadily for eighteen years in
 connection with tuskegee, and i had never thought of anything else but
 ending my life in that way. each day the school seemed to depend upon me
 more largely for its daily expenses, and i told these boston friends that,
 while i thanked them sincerely for their thoughtfulness and generosity, i
 could not go to europe, for the reason that the school could not live
 financially while i was absent. they then informed me that mr. henry l.
 higginson, and some other good friends who i know do not want their names
 made public, were then raising a sum of money which would be sufficient to
 keep the school in operation while i was away. at this point i was
 compelled to surrender. every avenue of escape had been closed.
 deep down in my heart the whole thing seemed more like a dream than like
 reality, and for a long time it was difficult for me to make myself
 believe that i was actually going to europe. i had been born and largely
 reared in the lowest depths of slavery, ignorance, and poverty. in my
 childhood i had suffered for want of a place to sleep, for lack of food,
 clothing, and shelter. i had not had the privilege of sitting down to a
 dining-table until i was quite well grown. luxuries had always seemed to
 me to be something meant for white people, not for my race. i had always
 regarded europe, and london, and paris, much as i regarded heaven. and now
 could it be that i was actually going to europe? such thoughts as these
 were constantly with me.
 two other thoughts troubled me a good deal. i feared that people who heard
 that mrs. washington and i were going to europe might not know all the
 circumstances, and might get the idea that we had become, as some might
 say, "stuck up," and were trying to "show off." i recalled that from my
 youth i had heard it said that too often, when people of my race reached
 any degree of success, they were inclined to unduly exalt themselves; to
 try and ape the wealthy, and in so doing to lose their heads. the fear
 that people might think this of us haunted me a good deal. then, too, i
 could not see how my conscience would permit me to spare the time from my
 work and be happy. it seemed mean and selfish in me to be taking a
 vacation while others were at work, and while there was so much that
 needed to be done. from the time i could remember, i had always been at
 work, and i did not see how i could spend three or four months in doing
 nothing. the fact was that i did not know how to take a vacation.
 mrs. washington had much the same difficulty in getting away, but she was
 anxious to go because she thought that i needed the rest. there were many
 important national questions bearing upon the life of the race which were
 being agitated at that time, and this made it all the harder for us to
 decide to go. we finally gave our boston friends our promise that we would
 go, and then they insisted that the date of our departure be set as soon
 as possible. so we decided upon may . my good friend mr. garrison kindly
 took charge of all the details necessary for the success of the trip, and
 he, as well as other friends, gave us a great number of letters of
 introduction to people in france and england, and made other arrangements
 for our comfort and convenience abroad. good-bys were said at tuskegee,
 and we were in new york may , ready to sail the next day. our daughter
 portia, who was then studying in south framingham, mass., came to new york
 to see us off. mr. scott, my secretary, came with me to new york, in order
 that i might clear up the last bit of business before i left. other
 friends also came to new york to see us off. just before we went on board
 the steamer another pleasant surprise came to us in the form of a letter
 from two generous ladies, stating that they had decided to give us the
 money with which to erect a new building to be used in properly housing
 all our industries for girls at tuskegee.
 we were to sail on the friesland, of the red star line, and a beautiful
 vessel she was. we went on board just before noon, the hour of sailing. i
 had never before been on board a large ocean steamer, and the feeling
 which took possession of me when i found myself there is rather hard to
 describe. it was a feeling, i think, of awe mingled with delight. we were
 agreeably surprised to find that the captain, as well as several of the
 other officers, not only knew who we were, but was expecting us and gave
 us a pleasant greeting. there were several passengers whom we knew,
 including senator sewell, of new jersey, and edward marshall, the
 newspaper correspondent. i had just a little fear that we would not be
 treated civilly by some of the passengers. this fear was based upon what i
 had heard other people of my race, who had crossed the ocean, say about
 unpleasant experiences in crossing the ocean in american vessels. but in
 our case, from the captain down to the most humble servant, we were
 treated with the greatest kindness. nor was this kindness confined to
 those who were connected with the steamer; it was shown by all the
 passengers also. there were not a few southern men and women on board, and
 they were as cordial as those from other parts of the country.
 as soon as the last good-bys were said, and the steamer had cut loose from
 the wharf, the load of care, anxiety, and responsibility which i had
 carried for eighteen years began to lift itself from my shoulders at the
 rate, it seemed to me, of a pound a minute. it was the first time in all
 those years that i had felt, even in a measure, free from care; and my
 feeling of relief it is hard to describe on paper. added to this was the
 delightful anticipation of being in europe soon. it all seemed more like a
 dream than like a reality.
 mr. garrison had thoughtfully arranged to have us have one of the most
 comfortable rooms on the ship. the second or third day out i began to
 sleep, and i think that i slept at the rate of fifteen hours a day during
 the remainder of the ten days' passage. then it was that i began to
 understand how tired i really was. these long sleeps i kept up for a month
 after we landed on the other side. it was such an unusual feeling to wake
 up in the morning and realize that i had no engagements; did not have to
 take a train at a certain hour; did not have an appointment to meet some
 one, or to make an address, at a certain hour. how different all this was
 from the experiences that i have been through when travelling, when i have
 sometimes slept in three different beds in a single night!
 when sunday came, the captain invited me to conduct the religious
 services, but, not being a minister, i declined. the passengers, however,
 began making requests that i deliver an address to them in the
 dining-saloon some time during the voyage, and this i consented to do.
 senator sewell presided at this meeting. after ten days of delightful
 weather, during which i was not seasick for a day, we landed at the
 interesting old city of antwerp, in belgium.
 the next day after we landed happened to be one of those numberless
 holidays which the people of those countries are in the habit of
 observing. it was a bright, beautiful day. our room in the hotel faced the
 main public square, and the sights there—the people coming in from
 the country with all kinds of beautiful flowers to sell, the women coming
 in with their dogs drawing large, brightly polished cans filled with milk,
 the people streaming into the cathedral—filled me with a sense of
 newness that i had never before experienced.
 after spending some time in antwerp, we were invited to go with a part of
 a half-dozen persons on a trip through holland. this party included edward
 marshall and some american artists who had come over on the same steamer
 with us. we accepted the invitation, and enjoyed the trip greatly. i think
 it was all the more interesting and instructive because we went for most
 of the way on one of the slow, old-fashioned canal-boats. this gave us an
 opportunity of seeing and studying the real life of the people in the
 country districts. we went in this way as far as rotterdam, and later went
 to the hague, where the peace conference was then in session, and where we
 were kindly received by the american representatives.
 the thing that impressed itself most on me in holland was the thoroughness
 of the agriculture and the excellence of the holstein cattle. i never
 knew, before visiting holland, how much it was possible for people to get
 out of a small plot of ground. it seemed to me that absolutely no land was
 wasted. it was worth a trip to holland, too, just to get a sight of three
 or four hundred fine holstein cows grazing in one of those intensely green
 fields.
 from holland we went to belgium, and made a hasty trip through that
 country, stopping at brussels, where we visited the battlefield of
 waterloo. from belgium we went direct to paris, where we found that mr.
 theodore stanton, the son of mrs. elizabeth cady stanton, had kindly
 provided accommodations for us. we had barely got settled in paris before
 an invitation came to me from the university club of paris to be its guest
 at a banquet which was soon to be given. the other guests were
 ex-president benjamin harrison and archbishop ireland, who were in paris
 at the time. the american ambassador, general horace porter, presided at
 the banquet. my address on this occasion seemed to give satisfaction to
 those who heard it. general harrison kindly devoted a large portion of his
 remarks at dinner to myself and to the influence of the work at tuskegee
 on the american race question. after my address at this banquet other
 invitations came to me, but i declined the most of them, knowing that if i
 accepted them all, the object of my visit would be defeated. i did,
 however, consent to deliver an address in the american chapel the
 following sunday morning, and at this meeting general harrison, general
 porter, and other distinguished americans were present.
 later we received a formal call from the american ambassador, and were
 invited to attend a reception at his residence. at this reception we met
 many americans, among them justices fuller and harlan, of the united
 states supreme court. during our entire stay of a month in paris, both the
 american ambassador and his wife, as well as several other americans, were
 very kind to us.
 while in paris we saw a good deal of the now famous american negro
 painter, mr. henry o. tanner, whom we had formerly known in america. it
 was very satisfactory to find how well known mr. tanner was in the field
 of art, and to note the high standing which all classes accorded to him.
 when we told some americans that we were going to the luxembourg palace to
 see a painting by an american negro, it was hard to convince them that a
 negro had been thus honoured. i do not believe that they were really
 convinced of the fact until they saw the picture for themselves. my
 acquaintance with mr. tanner reenforced in my mind the truth which i am
 constantly trying to impress upon our students at tuskegee—and on
 our people throughout the country, as far as i can reach them with my
 voice—that any man, regardless of colour, will be recognized and
 rewarded just in proportion as he learns to do something well—learns
 to do it better than some one else—however humble the thing may be.
 as i have said, i believe that my race will succeed in proportion as it
 learns to do a common thing in an uncommon manner; learns to do a thing so
 thoroughly that no one can improve upon what it has done; learns to make
 its services of indispensable value. this was the spirit that inspired me
 in my first effort at hampton, when i was given the opportunity to sweep
 and dust that schoolroom. in a degree i felt that my whole future life
 depended upon the thoroughness with which i cleaned that room, and i was
 determined to do it so well that no one could find any fault with the job.
 few people ever stopped, i found, when looking at his pictures, to inquire
 whether mr. tanner was a negro painter, a french painter, or a german
 painter. they simply knew that he was able to produce something which the
 world wanted—a great painting—and the matter of his colour did
 not enter into their minds. when a negro girl learns to cook, to wash
 dishes, to sew, or write a book, or a negro boy learns to groom horses, or
 to grow sweet potatoes, or to produce butter, or to build a house, or to
 be able to practise medicine, as well or better than some one else, they
 will be rewarded regardless of race or colour. in the long run, the world
 is going to have the best, and any difference in race, religion, or
 previous history will not long keep the world from what it wants.
 i think that the whole future of my race hinges on the question as to
 whether or not it can make itself of such indispensable value that the
 people in the town and the state where we reside will feel that our
 presence is necessary to the happiness and well-being of the community. no
 man who continues to add something to the material, intellectual, and
 moral well-being of the place in which he lives is long left without
 proper reward. this is a great human law which cannot be permanently
 nullified.
 the love of pleasure and excitement which seems in a large measure to
 possess the french people impressed itself upon me. i think they are more
 noted in this respect than is true of the people of my own race. in point
 of morality and moral earnestness i do not believe that the french are
 ahead of my own race in america. severe competition and the great stress
 of life have led them to learn to do things more thoroughly and to
 exercise greater economy; but time, i think, will bring my race to the
 same point. in the matter of truth and high honour i do not believe that
 the average frenchman is ahead of the american negro; while so far as
 mercy and kindness to dumb animals go, i believe that my race is far
 ahead. in fact, when i left france, i had more faith in the future of the
 black man in america than i had ever possessed.
 from paris we went to london, and reached there early in july, just about
 the height of the london social season. parliament was in session, and
 there was a great deal of gaiety. mr. garrison and other friends had
 provided us with a large number of letters of introduction, and they had
 also sent letters to other persons in different parts of the united
 kingdom, apprising these people of our coming. very soon after reaching
 london we were flooded with invitations to attend all manner of social
 functions, and a great many invitations came to me asking that i deliver
 public addresses. the most of these invitations i declined, for the reason
 that i wanted to rest. neither were we able to accept more than a small
 proportion of the other invitations. the rev. dr. brooke herford and mrs.
 herford, whom i had known in boston, consulted with the american
 ambassador, the hon. joseph choate, and arranged for me to speak at a
 public meeting to be held in essex hall. mr. choate kindly consented to
 preside. the meeting was largely attended. there were many distinguished
 persons present, among them several members of parliament, including mr.
 james bryce, who spoke at the meeting. what the american ambassador said
 in introducing me, as well as a synopsis of what i said, was widely
 published in england and in the american papers at the time. dr. and mrs.
 herford gave mrs. washington and myself a reception, at which we had the
 privilege of meeting some of the best people in england. throughout our
 stay in london ambassador choate was most kind and attentive to us. at the
 ambassador's reception i met, for the first time, mark twain.
 we were the guests several times of mrs. t. fisher unwin, the daughter of
 the english statesman, richard cobden. it seemed as if both mr. and mrs.
 unwin could not do enough for our comfort and happiness. later, for nearly
 a week, we were the guests of the daughter of john bright, now mrs. clark,
 of street, england. both mr. and mrs. clark, with their daughter, visited
 us at tuskegee the next year. in birmingham, england, we were the guests
 for several days of mr. joseph sturge, whose father was a great
 abolitionist and friend of whittier and garrison. it was a great privilege
 to meet throughout england those who had known and honoured the late
 william lloyd garrison, the hon. frederick douglass, and other
 abolitionists. the english abolitionists with whom we came in contact
 never seemed to tire of talking about these two americans. before going to
 england i had had no proper conception of the deep interest displayed by
 the abolitionists of england in the cause of freedom, nor did i realize
 the amount of substantial help given by them.
 in bristol, england, both mrs. washington and i spoke at the women's
 liberal club. i was also the principal speaker at the commencement
 exercises of the royal college for the blind. these exercises were held in
 the crystal palace, and the presiding officer was the late duke of
 westminster, who was said to be, i believe, the richest man in england, if
 not in the world. the duke, as well as his wife and their daughter, seemed
 to be pleased with what i said, and thanked me heartily. through the
 kindness of lady aberdeen, my wife and i were enabled to go with a party
 of those who were attending the international congress of women, then in
 session in london, to see queen victoria, at windsor castle, where,
 afterward, we were all the guests of her majesty at tea. in our party was
 miss susan b. anthony, and i was deeply impressed with the fact that one
 did not often get an opportunity to see, during the same hour, two women
 so remarkable in different ways as susan b. anthony and queen victoria.
 in the house of commons, which we visited several times, we met sir henry
 m. stanley. i talked with him about africa and its relation to the
 american negro, and after my interview with him i became more convinced
 than ever that there was no hope of the american negro's improving his
 condition by emigrating to africa.
 on various occasions mrs. washington and i were the guests of englishmen
 in their country homes, where, i think, one sees the englishman at his
 best. in one thing, at least, i feel sure that the english are ahead of
 americans, and that is, that they have learned how to get more out of
 life. the home life of the english seems to me to be about as perfect as
 anything can be. everything moves like clockwork. i was impressed, too,
 with the deference that the servants show to their "masters" and
 "mistresses,"—terms which i suppose would not be tolerated in
 america. the english servant expects, as a rule, to be nothing but a
 servant, and so he perfects himself in the art to a degree that no class
 of servants in america has yet reached. in our country the servant expects
 to become, in a few years, a "master" himself. which system is preferable?
 i will not venture an answer.
 another thing that impressed itself upon me throughout england was the
 high regard that all classes have for law and order, and the ease and
 thoroughness with which everything is done. the englishmen, i found, took
 plenty of time for eating, as for everything else. i am not sure if, in
 the long run, they do not accomplish as much or more than rushing, nervous
 americans do.
 my visit to england gave me a higher regard for the nobility than i had
 had. i had no idea that they were so generally loved and respected by the
 classes, nor had i any correct conception of how much time and money they
 spent in works of philanthropy, and how much real heart they put into this
 work. my impression had been that they merely spent money freely and had a
 "good time."
 it was hard for me to get accustomed to speaking to english audiences. the
 average englishman is so serious, and is so tremendously in earnest about
 everything, that when i told a story that would have made an american
 audience roar with laughter, the englishmen simply looked me straight in
 the face without even cracking a smile.
 when the englishman takes you into his heart and friendship, he binds you
 there as with cords of steel, and i do not believe that there are many
 other friendships that are so lasting or so satisfactory. perhaps i can
 illustrate this point in no better way than by relating the following
 incident. mrs. washington and i were invited to attend a reception given
 by the duke and duchess of sutherland, at stafford house—said to be
 the finest house in london; i may add that i believe the duchess of
 sutherland is said to be the most beautiful woman in england. there must
 have been at least three hundred persons at this reception. twice during
 the evening the duchess sought us out for a conversation, and she asked me
 to write her when we got home, and tell her more about the work at
 tuskegee. this i did. when christmas came we were surprised and delighted
 to receive her photograph with her autograph on it. the correspondence has
 continued, and we now feel that in the duchess of sutherland we have one
 of our warmest friends.
 after three months in europe we sailed from southampton in the steamship
 st. louis. on this steamer there was a fine library that had been
 presented to the ship by the citizens of st. louis, mo. in this library i
 found a life of frederick douglass, which i began reading. i became
 especially interested in mr. douglass's description of the way he was
 treated on shipboard during his first or second visit to england. in this
 description he told how he was not permitted to enter the cabin, but had
 to confine himself to the deck of the ship. a few minutes after i had
 finished reading this description i was waited on by a committee of ladies
 and gentlemen with the request that i deliver an address at a concert
 which was to begin the following evening. and yet there are people who are
 bold enough to say that race feeling in america is not growing less
 intense! at this concert the hon. benjamin b. odell, jr., the present
 governor of new york, presided. i was never given a more cordial hearing
 anywhere. a large proportion of the passengers were southern people. after
 the concert some of the passengers proposed that a subscription be raised
 to help the work at tuskegee, and the money to support several
 scholarships was the result.
 while we were in paris i was very pleasantly surprised to receive the
 following invitation from the citizens of west virginia and of the city
 near which i had spent my boyhood days:—
 charleston, w. va., may , .
 professor booker t. washington, paris, france:
 dear sir: many of the best citizens of west virginia have united in
 liberal expressions of admiration and praise of your worth and work, and
 desire that on your return from europe you should favour them with your
 presence and with the inspiration of your words. we must sincerely indorse
 this move, and on behalf of the citizens of charleston extend to your our
 most cordial invitation to have you come to us, that we may honour you who
 have done so much by your life and work to honour us.
 we are,
 very truly yours,
 the common council of the city of charleston,
 by w. herman smith, mayor.
 this invitation from the city council of charleston was accompanied by the
 following:—
 professor booker t. washington, paris, france:
 dear sir: we, the citizens of charleston and west virginia, desire to
 express our pride in you and the splendid career that you have thus far
 accomplished, and ask that we be permitted to show our pride and interest
 in a substantial way.
 your recent visit to your old home in our midst awoke within us the
 keenest regret that we were not permitted to hear you and render some
 substantial aid to your work, before you left for europe.
 in view of the foregoing, we earnestly invite you to share the hospitality
 of our city upon your return from europe, and give us the opportunity to
 hear you and put ourselves in touch with your work in a way that will be
 most gratifying to yourself, and that we may receive the inspiration of
 your words and presence.
 an early reply to this invitation, with an indication of the time you may
 reach our city, will greatly oblige,
 yours very respectfully,
 the charleston daily gazette, the daily mail-tribune; g.w. atkinson,
 governor; e.l. boggs, secretary to governor; wm. m.o. dawson, secretary of
 state; l.m. la follette, auditor; j.r. trotter, superintendent of schools;
 e.w. wilson, ex-governor; w.a. maccorkle, ex-governor; john q. dickinson,
 president kanawha valley bank; l. prichard, president charleston national
 bank; geo. s. couch, president kanawha national bank; ed. reid, cashier
 kanawha national bank; geo. s. laidley, superintended city schools; l.e.
 mcwhorter, president board of education; chas. k. payne, wholesale
 merchant; and many others.
 this invitation, coming as it did from the city council, the state
 officers, and all the substantial citizens of both races of the community
 where i had spent my boyhood, and from which i had gone a few years
 before, unknown, in poverty and ignorance, in quest of an education, not
 only surprised me, but almost unmanned me. i could not understand what i
 had done to deserve it all.
 i accepted the invitation, and at the appointed day was met at the railway
 station at charleston by a committee headed by ex-governor w.a. maccorkle,
 and composed of men of both races. the public reception was held in the
 opera-house at charleston. the governor of the state, the hon. george w.
 atkinson, presided, and an address of welcome was made by ex-governor
 maccorkle. a prominent part in the reception was taken by the coloured
 citizens. the opera-house was filled with citizens of both races, and
 among the white people were many for whom i had worked when i was a boy.
 the next day governor and mrs. atkinson gave me a public reception at the
 state house, which was attended by all classes.
 not long after this the coloured people in atlanta, georgia, gave me a
 reception at which the governor of the state presided, and a similar
 reception was given me in new orleans, which was presided over by the
 mayor of the city. invitations came from many other places which i was not
 able to accept.
 chapter xvii. last words
 before going to europe some events came into my life which were great
 surprises to me. in fact, my whole life has largely been one of surprises.
 i believe that any man's life will be filled with constant, unexpected
 encouragements of this kind if he makes up his mind to do his level best
 each day of his life—that is, tries to make each day reach as nearly
 as possible the high-water mark of pure, unselfish, useful living. i pity
 the man, black or white, who has never experienced the joy and
 satisfaction that come to one by reason of an effort to assist in making
 some one else more useful and more happy.
 six months before he died, and nearly a year after he had been stricken
 with paralysis, general armstrong expressed a wish to visit tuskegee again
 before he passed away. notwithstanding the fact that he had lost the use
 of his limbs to such an extent that he was practically helpless, his wish
 was gratified, and he was brought to tuskegee. the owners of the tuskegee
 railroad, white men living in the town, offered to run a special train,
 without cost, out of the main station—chehaw, five miles away—to
 meet him. he arrived on the school grounds about nine o'clock in the
 evening. some one had suggested that we give the general a "pine-knot
 torchlight reception." this plan was carried out, and the moment that his
 carriage entered the school grounds he began passing between two lines of
 lighted and waving "fat pine" wood knots held by over a thousand students
 and teachers. the whole thing was so novel and surprising that the general
 was completely overcome with happiness. he remained a guest in my home for
 nearly two months, and, although almost wholly without the use of voice or
 limb, he spent nearly every hour in devising ways and means to help the
 south. time and time again he said to me, during this visit, that it was
 not only the duty of the country to assist in elevating the negro of the
 south, but the poor white man as well. at the end of his visit i resolved
 anew to devote myself more earnestly than ever to the cause which was so
 near his heart. i said that if a man in his condition was willing to
 think, work, and act, i should not be wanting in furthering in every
 possible way the wish of his heart.
 the death of general armstrong, a few weeks later, gave me the privilege
 of getting acquainted with one of the finest, most unselfish, and most
 attractive men that i have ever come in contact with. i refer to the rev.
 dr. hollis b. frissell, now the principal of the hampton institute, and
 general armstrong's successor. under the clear, strong, and almost perfect
 leadership of dr. frissell, hampton has had a career of prosperity and
 usefulness that is all that the general could have wished for. it seems to
 be the constant effort of dr. frissell to hide his own great personality
 behind that of general armstrong—to make himself of "no reputation"
 for the sake of the cause.
 more than once i have been asked what was the greatest surprise that ever
 came to me. i have little hesitation in answering that question. it was
 the following letter, which came to me one sunday morning when i was
 sitting on the veranda of my home at tuskegee, surrounded by my wife and
 three children:—
 harvard university, cambridge, may , .
 president booker t. washington,
 my dear sir: harvard university desired to confer on you at the
 approaching commencement an honorary degree; but it is our custom to
 confer degrees only on gentlemen who are present. our commencement occurs
 this year on june , and your presence would be desirable from about noon
 till about five o'clock in the afternoon. would it be possible for you to
 be in cambridge on that day?
 believe me, with great regard,
 very truly yours,
 charles w. eliot.
 this was a recognition that had never in the slightest manner entered into
 my mind, and it was hard for me to realize that i was to be honoured by a
 degree from the oldest and most renowned university in america. as i sat
 upon my veranda, with this letter in my hand, tears came into my eyes. my
 whole former life—my life as a slave on the plantation, my work in
 the coal-mine, the times when i was without food and clothing, when i made
 my bed under a sidewalk, my struggles for an education, the trying days i
 had had at tuskegee, days when i did not know where to turn for a dollar
 to continue the work there, the ostracism and sometimes oppression of my
 race,—all this passed before me and nearly overcame me.
 i had never sought or cared for what the world calls fame. i have always
 looked upon fame as something to be used in accomplishing good. i have
 often said to my friends that if i can use whatever prominence may have
 come to me as an instrument with which to do good, i am content to have
 it. i care for it only as a means to be used for doing good, just as
 wealth may be used. the more i come into contact with wealthy people, the
 more i believe that they are growing in the direction of looking upon
 their money simply as an instrument which god has placed in their hand for
 doing good with. i never go to the office of mr. john d. rockefeller, who
 more than once has been generous to tuskegee, without being reminded of
 this. the close, careful, and minute investigation that he always makes in
 order to be sure that every dollar that he gives will do the most good—an
 investigation that is just as searching as if he were investing money in a
 business enterprise—convinces me that the growth in this direction
 is most encouraging.
 at nine o'clock, on the morning of june , i met president eliot, the
 board of overseers of harvard university, and the other guests, at the
 designated place on the university grounds, for the purpose of being
 escorted to sanders theatre, where the commencement exercises were to be
 held and degrees conferred. among others invited to be present for the
 purpose of receiving a degree at this time were general nelson a. miles,
 dr. bell, the inventor of the bell telephone, bishop vincent, and the rev.
 minot j. savage. we were placed in line immediately behind the president
 and the board of overseers, and directly afterward the governor of
 massachusetts, escorted by the lancers, arrived and took his place in the
 line of march by the side of president eliot. in the line there were also
 various other officers and professors, clad in cap and gown. in this order
 we marched to sanders theatre, where, after the usual commencement
 exercises, came the conferring of the honorary degrees. this, it seems, is
 always considered the most interesting feature at harvard. it is not
 known, until the individuals appear, upon whom the honorary degrees are to
 be conferred, and those receiving these honours are cheered by the
 students and others in proportion to their popularity. during the
 conferring of the degrees excitement and enthusiasm are at the highest
 pitch.
 when my name was called, i rose, and president eliot, in beautiful and
 strong english, conferred upon me the degree of master of arts. after
 these exercises were over, those who had received honorary degrees were
 invited to lunch with the president. after the lunch we were formed in
 line again, and were escorted by the marshal of the day, who that year
 happened to be bishop william lawrence, through the grounds, where, at
 different points, those who had been honoured were called by name and
 received the harvard yell. this march ended at memorial hall, where the
 alumni dinner was served. to see over a thousand strong men, representing
 all that is best in state, church, business, and education, with the glow
 and enthusiasm of college loyalty and college pride,—which has, i
 think, a peculiar harvard flavour,—is a sight that does not easily
 fade from memory.
 among the speakers after dinner were president eliot, governor roger
 wolcott, general miles, dr. minot j. savage, the hon. henry cabot lodge,
 and myself. when i was called upon, i said, among other things:—
 it would in some measure relieve my embarrassment if i could, even in a
 slight degree, feel myself worthy of the great honour which you do me
 to-day. why you have called me from the black belt of the south, from
 among my humble people, to share in the honours of this occasion, is not
 for me to explain; and yet it may not be inappropriate for me to suggest
 that it seems to me that one of the most vital questions that touch our
 american life is how to bring the strong, wealthy, and learned into
 helpful touch with the poorest, most ignorant, and humblest, and at the
 same time make one appreciate the vitalizing, strengthening influence of
 the other. how shall we make the mansion on yon beacon street feel and see
 the need of the spirits in the lowliest cabin in alabama cotton-fields or
 louisiana sugar-bottoms? this problem harvard university is solving, not
 by bringing itself down, but by bringing the masses up.
 if my life in the past has meant anything in the lifting up of my people
 and the bringing about of better relations between your race and mine, i
 assure you from this day it will mean doubly more. in the economy of god
 there is but one standard by which an individual can succeed—there
 is but one for a race. this country demands that every race shall measure
 itself by the american standard. by it a race must rise or fall, succeed
 or fail, and in the last analysis mere sentiment counts for little.
 during the next half-century and more, my race must continue passing
 through the severe american crucible. we are to be tested in our patience,
 our forbearance, our perseverance, our power to endure wrong, to withstand
 temptations, to economize, to acquire and use skill; in our ability to
 compete, to succeed in commerce, to disregard the superficial for the
 real, the appearance for the substance, to be great and yet small, learned
 and yet simple, high and yet the servant of all.
 as this was the first time that a new england university had conferred an
 honorary degree upon a negro, it was the occasion of much newspaper
 comment throughout the country. a correspondent of a new york paper said:—
 when the name of booker t. washington was called, and he arose to
 acknowledge and accept, there was such an outburst of applause as greeted
 no other name except that of the popular soldier patriot, general miles.
 the applause was not studied and stiff, sympathetic and condoling; it was
 enthusiasm and admiration. every part of the audience from pit to gallery
 joined in, and a glow covered the cheeks of those around me, proving
 sincere appreciation of the rising struggle of an ex-slave and the work he
 has accomplished for his race.
 a boston paper said, editorially:—
 in conferring the honorary degree of master of arts upon the principal of
 tuskegee institute, harvard university has honoured itself as well as the
 object of this distinction. the work which professor booker t. washington
 has accomplished for the education, good citizenship, and popular
 enlightenment in his chosen field of labour in the south entitles him to
 rank with our national benefactors. the university which can claim him on
 its list of sons, whether in regular course or honoris causa, may be
 proud.
 it has been mentioned that mr. washington is the first of his race to
 receive an honorary degree from a new england university. this, in itself,
 is a distinction. but the degree was not conferred because mr. washington
 is a coloured man, or because he was born in slavery, but because he has
 shown, by his work for the elevation of the people of the black belt of
