 malignant being whose plans they thwarted abandoned his designs upon the
 heroic clergyman and directed his attention elsewhere, as i must now
 proceed to relate.
 dusk always brought with it a cloud of apprehensions, for darkness must
 ever be the ally of crime; and it was one night, long after the clocks had
 struck the mystic hour “when churchyards yawn,” that the hand of dr.
 fu-manchu again stretched out to grasp a victim. i was dismissing a chance
 patient.
 “good night, dr. petrie,” he said.
 “good night, mr. forsyth,” i replied; and, having conducted my late
 visitor to the door, i closed and bolted it, switched off the light and
 went upstairs.
 my patient was chief officer of one of the p. and o. boats. he had cut his
 hand rather badly on the homeward run, and signs of poisoning having
 developed, had called to have the wound treated, apologizing for troubling
 me at so late an hour, but explaining that he had only just come from the
 docks. the hall clock announced the hour of one as i ascended the stairs.
 i found myself wondering what there was in mr. forsyth’s appearance which
 excited some vague and elusive memory. coming to the top floor, i opened
 the door of a front bedroom and was surprised to find the interior in
 darkness.
 “smith!” i called.
 “come here and watch!” was the terse response. nayland smith was sitting
 in the dark at the open window and peering out across the common. even as
 i saw him, a dim silhouette, i could detect that tensity in his attitude
 which told of high-strung nerves.
 i joined him.
 “what is it?” i said, curiously.
 “i don’t know. watch that clump of elms.”
 his masterful voice had the dry tone in it betokening excitement. i leaned
 on the ledge beside him and looked out. the blaze of stars almost
 compensated for the absence of the moon and the night had a quality of
 stillness that made for awe. this was a tropical summer, and the common,
 with its dancing lights dotted irregularly about it, had an unfamiliar
 look to-night. the clump of nine elms showed as a dense and irregular
 mass, lacking detail.
 such moods as that which now claimed my friend are magnetic. i had no
 thought of the night’s beauty, for it only served to remind me that
 somewhere amid london’s millions was lurking an uncanny being, whose life
 was a mystery, whose very existence was a scientific miracle.
 “where’s your patient?” rapped smith.
 his abrupt query diverted my thoughts into a new channel. no footstep
 disturbed the silence of the highroad; where was my patient?
 i craned from the window. smith grabbed my arm.
 “don’t lean out,” he said.
 i drew back, glancing at him surprisedly.
 “for heaven’s sake, why not?”
 “i’ll tell you presently, petrie. did you see him?”
 “i did, and i can’t make out what he is doing. he seems to have remained
 standing at the gate for some reason.”
 “he has seen it!” snapped smith. “watch those elms.”
 his hand remained upon my arm, gripping it nervously. shall i say that i
 was surprised? i can say it with truth. but i shall add that i was
 thrilled, eerily; for this subdued excitement and alert watching of smith
 could only mean one thing:
 fu-manchu!
 and that was enough to set me watching as keenly as he; to set me
 listening; not only for sounds outside the house but for sounds within.
 doubts, suspicions, dreads, heaped themselves up in my mind. why was
 forsyth standing there at the gate? i had never seen him before, to my
 knowledge, yet there was something oddly reminiscent about the man. could
 it be that his visit formed part of a plot? yet his wound had been genuine
 enough. thus my mind worked, feverishly; such was the effect of an
 unspoken thought—fu-manchu.
 nayland smith’s grip tightened on my arm.
 “there it is again, petrie!” he whispered.
 “look, look!”
 his words were wholly unnecessary. i, too, had seen it; a wonderful and
 uncanny sight. out of the darkness under the elms, low down upon the
 ground, grew a vaporous blue light. it flared up, elfinish, then began to
 ascend. like an igneous phantom, a witch flame, it rose, high—higher—higher,
 to what i adjudged to be some twelve feet or more from the ground. then,
 high in the air, it died away again as it had come!
 “for god’s sake, smith, what was it?”
 “don’t ask me, petrie. i have seen it twice. we—”
 he paused. rapid footsteps sounded below. over smith’s shoulder i saw
 forsyth cross the road, climb the low rail, and set out across the common.
 smith sprang impetuously to his feet.
 “we must stop him!” he said hoarsely; then, clapping a hand to my mouth as
 i was about to call out—“not a sound, petrie!”
 he ran out of the room and went blundering downstairs in the dark, crying:
 “out through the garden—the side entrance!”
 i overtook him as he threw wide the door of my dispensing room. through it
 he ran and opened the door at the other end. i followed him out, closing
 it behind me. the smell from some tobacco plants in a neighboring
 flower-bed was faintly perceptible; no breeze stirred; and in the great
 silence i could hear smith, in front of me, tugging at the bolt of the
 gate.
 then he had it open, and i stepped out, close on his heels, and left the
 door ajar.
 “we must not appear to have come from your house,” explained smith
 rapidly. “i will go along the highroad and cross to the common a hundred
 yards up, where there is a pathway, as though homeward bound to the north
 side. give me half a minute’s start, then you proceed in an opposite
 direction and cross from the corner of the next road. directly you are out
 of the light of the street lamps, get over the rails and run for the
 elms!”
 he thrust a pistol into my hand and was off.
 while he had been with me, speaking in that incisive, impetuous way of
 his, with his dark face close to mine, and his eyes gleaming like steel, i
 had been at one with him in his feverish mood, but now, when i stood
 alone, in that staid and respectable byway, holding a loaded pistol in my
 hand, the whole thing became utterly unreal.
 it was in an odd frame of mind that i walked to the next corner, as
 directed; for i was thinking, not of dr. fu-manchu, the great and evil man
 who dreamed of europe and america under chinese rule, not of nayland
 smith, who alone stood between the chinaman and the realization of his
 monstrous schemes, not even of karamaneh the slave girl, whose glorious
 beauty was a weapon of might in fu-manchu’s hand, but of what impression i
 must have made upon a patient had i encountered one then.
 such were my ideas up to the moment that i crossed to the common and
 vaulted into the field on my right. as i began to run toward the elms i
 found myself wondering what it was all about, and for what we were come.
 fifty yards west of the trees it occurred to me that if smith had counted
 on cutting forsyth off we were too late, for it appeared to me that he
 must already be in the coppice.
 i was right. twenty paces more i ran, and ahead of me, from the elms, came
 a sound. clearly it came through the still air—the eerie hoot of a
 nighthawk. i could not recall ever to have heard the cry of that bird on
 the common before, but oddly enough i attached little significance to it
 until, in the ensuing instant, a most dreadful scream—a scream in
 which fear, and loathing, and anger were hideously blended—thrilled
 me with horror.
 after that i have no recollection of anything until i found myself
 standing by the southernmost elm.
 “smith!” i cried breathlessly. “smith! my god! where are you?”
 as if in answer to my cry came an indescribable sound, a mingled sobbing
 and choking. out from the shadows staggered a ghastly figure—that of
 a man whose face appeared to be streaked. his eyes glared at me madly and
 he mowed the air with his hands like one blind and insane with fear.
 i started back; words died upon my tongue. the figure reeled and the man
 fell babbling and sobbing at my very feet.
 inert i stood, looking down at him. he writhed a moment—and was
 still. the silence again became perfect. then, from somewhere beyond the
 elms, nayland smith appeared. i did not move. even when he stood beside
 me, i merely stared at him fatuously.
 “i let him walk to his death, petrie,” i heard dimly. “god forgive me—god
 forgive me!”
 the words aroused me.
 “smith”—my voice came as a whisper—“for one awful moment i
 thought—”
 “so did some one else,” he rapped. “our poor sailor has met the end
 designed for me, petrie!”
 at that i realized two things: i knew why forsyth’s face had struck me as
 being familiar in some puzzling way, and i knew why forsyth now lay dead
 upon the grass. save that he was a fair man and wore a slight mustache, he
 was, in features and build, the double of nayland smith!
 we raised the poor victim and turned him over on his back. i dropped upon
 my knees, and with unsteady fingers began to strike a match. a slight
 breeze was arising and sighing gently through the elms, but, screened by
 my hands, the flame of the match took life. it illuminated wanly the
 sun-baked face of nayland smith, his eyes gleaming with unnatural
 brightness. i bent forward, and the dying light of the match touched that
 other face.
 “oh, god!” whispered smith.
 a faint puff of wind extinguished the match.
 in all my surgical experience i had never met with anything quite so
 horrible. forsyth’s livid face was streaked with tiny streams of blood,
 which proceeded from a series of irregular wounds. one group of these
 clustered upon his left temple, another beneath his right eye, and others
 extended from the chin down to the throat. they were black, almost like
 tattoo marks, and the entire injured surface was bloated indescribably.
 his fists were clenched; he was quite rigid.
 smith’s piercing eyes were set upon me eloquently as i knelt on the path
 and made my examination—an examination which that first glimpse when
 forsyth came staggering out from the trees had rendered useless—a
 mere matter of form.
 “he’s quite dead, smith,” i said huskily. “it’s—unnatural—it—”
 smith began beating his fist into his left palm and taking little, short,
 nervous strides up and down beside the dead man. i could hear a car
 humming along the highroad, but i remained there on my knees staring dully
 at the disfigured bloody face which but a matter of minutes since had been
 that of a clean looking british seaman. i found myself contrasting his
 neat, squarely trimmed mustache with the bloated face above it, and
 counting the little drops of blood which trembled upon its edge. there
 were footsteps approaching. i stood up. the footsteps quickened; and i
 turned as a constable ran up.
 “what’s this?” he demanded gruffly, and stood with his fists clenched,
 looking from smith to me and down at that which lay between us. then his
 hand flew to his breast; there was a silvern gleam and—
 “drop that whistle!” snapped smith—and struck it from the man’s
 hand. “where’s your lantern? don’t ask questions!”
 the constable started back and was evidently debating upon his chances
 with the two of us, when my friend pulled a letter from his pocket and
 thrust it under the man’s nose.
 “read that!” he directed harshly, “and then listen to my orders.”
 there was something in his voice which changed the officer’s opinion of
 the situation. he directed the light of his lantern upon the open letter
 and seemed to be stricken with wonder.
 “if you have any doubts,” continued smith—“you may not be familiar
 with the commissioner’s signature—you have only to ring up scotland
 yard from dr. petrie’s house, to which we shall now return, to disperse
 them.” he pointed to forsyth. “help us to carry him there. we must not be
 seen; this must be hushed up. you understand? it must not get into the
 press—”
 the man saluted respectfully; and the three of us addressed ourselves to
 the mournful task. by slow stages we bore the dead man to the edge of the
 common, carried him across the road and into my house, without exciting
 attention even on the part of those vagrants who nightly slept out in the
 neighborhood.
 we laid our burden upon the surgery table.
 “you will want to make an examination, petrie,” said smith in his decisive
 way, “and the officer here might ‘phone for the ambulance. i have some
 investigations to make also. i must have the pocket lamp.”
 he raced upstairs to his room, and an instant later came running down
 again. the front door banged.
 “the telephone is in the hall,” i said to the constable.
 “thank you, sir.”
 he went out of the surgery as i switched on the lamp over the table and
 began to examine the marks upon forsyth’s skin. these, as i have said,
 were in groups and nearly all in the form of elongated punctures; a fairly
 deep incision with a pear-shaped and superficial scratch beneath it. one
 of the tiny wounds had penetrated the right eye.
 the symptoms, or those which i had been enabled to observe as forsyth had
 first staggered into view from among the elms, were most puzzling. clearly
 enough, the muscles of articulation and the respiratory muscles had been
 affected; and now the livid face, dotted over with tiny wounds (they were
 also on the throat), set me mentally groping for a clue to the manner of
 his death.
 no clue presented itself; and my detailed examination of the body availed
 me nothing. the gray herald of dawn was come when the police arrived with
 the ambulance and took forsyth away.
 i was just taking my cap from the rack when nayland smith returned.
 “smith!” i cried—“have you found anything?”
 he stood there in the gray light of the hallway, tugging at the lobe of
 his left ear, an old trick of his.
 the bronzed face looked very gaunt, i thought, and his eyes were bright
 with that febrile glitter which once i had disliked, but which i had
 learned from experience were due to tremendous nervous excitement. at such
 times he could act with icy coolness and his mental faculties seemed
 temporarily to acquire an abnormal keenness. he made no direct reply; but—
 “have you any milk?” he jerked abruptly.
 so wholly unexpected was the question, that for a moment i failed to grasp
 it. then—
 “milk!” i began.
 “exactly, petrie! if you can find me some milk, i shall be obliged.”
 i turned to descend to the kitchen, when—
 “the remains of the turbot from dinner, petrie, would also be welcome, and
 i think i should like a trowel.”
 i stopped at the stairhead and faced him.
 “i cannot suppose that you are joking, smith,” i said, “but—”
 he laughed dryly.
 “forgive me, old man,” he replied. “i was so preoccupied with my own train
 of thought that it never occurred to me how absurd my request must have
 sounded. i will explain my singular tastes later; at the moment, hustle is
 the watchword.”
 evidently he was in earnest, and i ran downstairs accordingly, returning
 with a garden trowel, a plate of cold fish and a glass of milk.
 “thanks, petrie,” said smith—“if you would put the milk in a jug—”
 i was past wondering, so i simply went and fetched a jug, into which he
 poured the milk. then, with the trowel in his pocket, the plate of cold
 turbot in one hand and the milk jug in the other, he made for the door. he
 had it open when another idea evidently occurred to him.
 “i’ll trouble you for the pistol, petrie.”
 i handed him the pistol without a word.
 “don’t assume that i want to mystify you,” he added, “but the presence of
 any one else might jeopardize my plan. i don’t expect to be long.”
 the cold light of dawn flooded the hallway momentarily; then the door
 closed again and i went upstairs to my study, watching nayland smith as he
 strode across the common in the early morning mist. he was making for the
 nine elms, but i lost sight of him before he reached them.
 i sat there for some time, watching for the first glow of sunrise. a
 policeman tramped past the house, and, a while later, a belated reveler in
 evening clothes. that sense of unreality assailed me again. out there in
 the gray mists a man who was vested with powers which rendered him a law
 unto himself, who had the british government behind him in all that he
 might choose to do, who had been summoned from rangoon to london on
 singular and dangerous business, was employing himself with a plate of
 cold turbot, a jug of milk, and a trowel!
 away to the right, and just barely visible, a tramcar stopped by the
 common; then proceeded on its way, coming in a westerly direction. its
 lights twinkled yellowly through the grayness, but i was less concerned
 with the approaching car than with the solitary traveler who had descended
 from it.
 as the car went rocking by below me, i strained my eyes in an endeavor
 more clearly to discern the figure, which, leaving the highroad, had
 struck out across the common. it was that of a woman, who seemingly
 carried a bulky bag or parcel.
 one must be a gross materialist to doubt that there are latent powers in
 man which man, in modern times, neglects, or knows not how to develop. i
 became suddenly conscious of a burning curiosity respecting this lonely
 traveler who traveled at an hour so strange. with no definite plan in
 mind, i went downstairs, took a cap from the rack, and walked briskly out
 of the house and across the common in a direction which i thought would
 enable me to head off the woman.
 i had slightly miscalculated the distance, as fate would have it, and with
 a patch of gorse effectually screening my approach, i came upon her,
 kneeling on the damp grass and unfastening the bundle which had attracted
 my attention. i stopped and watched her.
 she was dressed in bedraggled fashion in rusty black, wore a common black
 straw hat and a thick veil; but it seemed to me that the dexterous hands
 at work untying the bundle were slim and white; and i perceived a pair of
 hideous cotton gloves lying on the turf beside her. as she threw open the
 wrappings and lifted out something that looked like a small shrimping net,
 i stepped around the bush, crossed silently the intervening patch of
 grass, and stood beside her.
 a faint breath of perfume reached me—of a perfume which, like the
 secret incense of ancient egypt, seemed to assail my soul. the glamour of
 the orient was in that subtle essence; and i only knew one woman who used
 it. i bent over the kneeling figure.
 “good morning,” i said; “can i assist you in any way?”
 she came to her feet like a startled deer, and flung away from me with the
 lithe movement of some eastern dancing girl.
 now came the sun, and its heralding rays struck sparks from the jewels
 upon the white fingers of this woman who wore the garments of a mendicant.
 my heart gave a great leap. it was with difficulty that i controlled my
 voice.
 “there is no cause for alarm,” i added.
 she stood watching me; even through the coarse veil i could see how her
 eyes glittered. i stooped and picked up the net.
 “oh!” the whispered word was scarcely audible, but it was enough; i
 doubted no longer.
 “this is a net for bird snaring,” i said. “what strange bird are you
 seeking—karamaneh?”
 with a passionate gesture karamaneh snatched off the veil, and with it the
 ugly black hat. the cloud of wonderful, intractable hair came rumpling
 about her face, and her glorious eyes blazed out upon me. how beautiful
 they were, with the dark beauty of an egyptian night; how often had they
 looked into mine in dreams!
 to labor against a ceaseless yearning for a woman whom one knows, upon
 evidence that none but a fool might reject, to be worthless—evil; is
 there any torture to which the soul of man is subject, more pitiless? yet
 this was my lot, for what past sins assigned to me i was unable to
 conjecture; and this was the woman, this lovely slave of a monster, this
 creature of dr. fu-manchu.
 “i suppose you will declare that you do not know me!” i said harshly.
 her lips trembled, but she made no reply.
 “it is very convenient to forget, sometimes,” i ran on bitterly, then
 checked myself; for i knew that my words were prompted by a feckless
 desire to hear her defense, by a fool’s hope that it might be an
 acceptable one.
 i looked again at the net contrivance in my hand; it had a strong spring
 fitted to it and a line attached. quite obviously it was intended for
 snaring.
 “what were you about to do?” i demanded sharply—but in my heart,
 poor fool that i was, i found admiration for the exquisite arch of
 karamaneh’s lips, and reproach because they were so tremulous.
 she spoke then.
 “dr. petrie—”
 “well?”
 “you seem to be—angry with me, not so much because of what i do, as
 because i do not remember you. yet—”
 “kindly do not revert to the matter,” i interrupted. “you have chosen,
 very conveniently, to forget that once we were friends. please yourself.
 but answer my question.”
 she clasped her hands with a sort of wild abandon.
 “why do you treat me so!” she cried; she had the most fascinating accent
 imaginable. “throw me into prison, kill me if you like, for what i have
 done!” she stamped her foot. “for what i have done! but do not torture me,
 try to drive me mad with your reproaches—that i forget you! i tell
 you—again i tell you—that until you came one night, last week,
 to rescue some one from—” there was the old trick of hesitating
 before the name of fu-manchu—“from him, i had never, never seen
 you!”
 the dark eyes looked into mine, afire with a positive hunger for belief—or
 so i was sorely tempted to suppose. but the facts were against her.
 “such a declaration is worthless,” i said, as coldly as i could. “you are
 a traitress; you betray those who are mad enough to trust you—”
 “i am no traitress!” she blazed at me; her eyes were magnificent.
 “this is mere nonsense. you think that it will pay you better to serve
 fu-manchu than to remain true to your friends. your ‘slavery’—for i
 take it you are posing as a slave again—is evidently not very harsh.
 you serve fu-manchu, lure men to their destruction, and in return he loads
 you with jewels, lavishes gifts—”
 “ah! so!”
 she sprang forward, raising flaming eyes to mine; her lips were slightly
 parted. with that wild abandon which betrayed the desert blood in her
 veins, she wrenched open the neck of her bodice and slipped a soft
 shoulder free of the garment. she twisted around, so that the white skin
 was but inches removed from me.
 “these are some of the gifts that he lavishes upon me!”
 i clenched my teeth. insane thoughts flooded my mind. for that creamy skin
 was red with the marks of the lash!
 she turned, quickly rearranging her dress, and watching me the while. i
 could not trust myself to speak for a moment, then:
 “if i am a stranger to you, as you claim, why do you give me your
 confidence?” i asked.
 “i have known you long enough to trust you!” she said simply, and turned
 her head aside.
 “then why do you serve this inhuman monster?”
 she snapped her fingers oddly, and looked up at me from under her lashes.
 “why do you question me if you think that everything i say is a lie?”
 it was a lesson in logic—from a woman! i changed the subject.
 “tell me what you came here to do,” i demanded.
 she pointed to the net in my hands.
 “to catch birds; you have said so yourself.”
 “what bird?”
 she shrugged her shoulders.
 and now a memory was born within my brain; it was that of the cry of the
 nighthawk which had harbingered the death of forsyth! the net was a large
 and strong one; could it be that some horrible fowl of the air—some
 creature unknown to western naturalists—had been released upon the
 common last night? i thought of the marks upon forsyth’s face and throat;
 i thought of the profound knowledge of obscure and dreadful things
 possessed by the chinaman.
 the wrapping, in which the net had been, lay at my feet. i stooped and
 took out from it a wicker basket. karamaneh stood watching me and biting
 her lip, but she made no move to check me. i opened the basket. it
 contained a large phial, the contents of which possessed a pungent and
 peculiar smell.
 i was utterly mystified.
 “you will have to accompany me to my house,” i said sternly.
 karamaneh upturned her great eyes to mine. they were wide with fear. she
 was on the point of speaking when i extended my hand to grasp her. at
 that, the look of fear was gone and one of rebellion held its place. ere i
 had time to realize her purpose, she flung back from me with that wild
 grace which i had met with in no other woman, turned and ran!
 fatuously, net and basket in hand, i stood looking after her. the idea of
 pursuit came to me certainly; but i doubted if i could have outrun her.
 for karamaneh ran, not like a girl used to town or even country life, but
 with the lightness and swiftness of a gazelle; ran like the daughter of
 the desert that she was.
 some two hundred yards she went, stopped, and looked back. it would seem
 that the sheer joy of physical effort had aroused the devil in her, the
 devil that must lie latent in every woman with eyes like the eyes of
 karamaneh.
 in the ever brightening sunlight i could see the lithe figure swaying; no
 rags imaginable could mask its beauty. i could see the red lips and
 gleaming teeth. then—and it was music good to hear, despite its
 taunt—she laughed defiantly, turned, and ran again!
 i resigned myself to defeat; i blush to add, gladly! some evidences of a
 world awakening were perceptible about me now. feathered choirs hailed the
 new day joyously. carrying the mysterious contrivance which i had captured
 from the enemy, i set out in the direction of my house, my mind very busy
 with conjectures respecting the link between this bird snare and the cry
 like that of a nighthawk which we had heard at the moment of forsyth’s
 death.
 the path that i had chosen led me around the border of the mound pond—a
 small pool having an islet in the center. lying at the margin of the pond
 i was amazed to see the plate and jug which nayland smith had borrowed
 recently!
 dropping my burden, i walked down to the edge of the water. i was filled
 with a sudden apprehension. then, as i bent to pick up the now empty jug,
 came a hail:
 “all right, petrie! shall join you in a moment!”
 i started up, looked to right and left; but, although the voice had been
 that of nayland smith, no sign could i discern of his presence!
 “smith!” i cried—“smith!”
 “coming!”
 seriously doubting my senses, i looked in the direction from which the
 voice had seemed to proceed—and there was nayland smith.
 he stood on the islet in the center of the pond, and, as i perceived him,
 he walked down into the shallow water and waded across to me!
 “good heavens!” i began—
 one of his rare laughs interrupted me.
 “you must think me mad this morning, petrie!” he said. “but i have made
 several discoveries. do you know what that islet in the pond really is?”
 “merely an islet, i suppose—”
 “nothing of the kind; it is a burial mound, petrie! it marks the site of
 one of the plague pits where victims were buried during the great plague
 of london. you will observe that, although you have seen it every morning
 for some years, it remains for a british commissioner resident in burma to
 acquaint you with its history! hullo!”—the laughter was gone from
 his eyes, and they were steely hard again—“what the blazes have we
 here!”
 he picked up the net. “what! a bird trap!”
 “exactly!” i said.
 smith turned his searching gaze upon me. “where did you find it, petrie?”
 “i did not exactly find it,” i replied; and i related to him the
 circumstances of my meeting with karamaneh.
 he directed that cold stare upon me throughout the narrative, and when,
 with some embarrassment, i had told him of the girl’s escape—
 “petrie,” he said succinctly, “you are an imbecile!”
 i flushed with anger, for not even from nayland smith, whom i esteemed
 above all other men, could i accept such words uttered as he had uttered
 them. we glared at one another.
 “karamaneh,” he continued coldly, “is a beautiful toy, i grant you; but so
 is a cobra. neither is suitable for playful purposes.”
 “smith!” i cried hotly—“drop that! adopt another tone or i cannot
 listen to you!”
 “you must listen,” he said, squaring his lean jaw truculently. “you are
 playing, not only with a pretty girl who is the favorite of a chinese
 nero, but with my life! and i object, petrie, on purely personal grounds!”
 i felt my anger oozing from me; for this was strictly just. i had nothing
 to say, and smith continued:
 “you know that she is utterly false, yet a glance or two from those dark
 eyes of hers can make a fool of you! a woman made a fool of me, once; but
 i learned my lesson; you have failed to learn yours. if you are determined
 to go to pieces on the rock that broke up adam, do so! but don’t involve
 me in the wreck, petrie—for that might mean a yellow emperor of the
 world, and you know it!”
 “your words are unnecessarily brutal, smith,” i said, feeling very
 crestfallen, “but there—perhaps i fully deserve them all.”
 “you do!” he assured me, but he relaxed immediately. “a murderous attempt
 is made upon my life, resulting in the death of a perfectly innocent man
 in no way concerned. along you come and let an accomplice, perhaps a
 participant, escape, merely, because she has a red mouth, or black lashes,
 or whatever it is that fascinates you so hopelessly!”
 he opened the wicker basket, sniffing at the contents.
 “ah!” he snapped, “do you recognize this odor?”
 “certainly.”
 “then you have some idea respecting karamaneh’s quarry?”
 “nothing of the kind!”
 smith shrugged his shoulders.
 “come along, petrie,” he said, linking his arm in mine.
 we proceeded. many questions there were that i wanted to put to him, but
 one above all.
 “smith,” i said, “what, in heaven’s name, were you doing on the mound?
 digging something up?”
 “no,” he replied, smiling dryly; “burying something!”
 dusk found nayland smith and me at the top bedroom window. we knew, now
 that poor forsyth’s body had been properly examined, that he had died from
 poisoning. smith, declaring that i did not deserve his confidence, had
 refused to confide in me his theory of the origin of the peculiar marks
 upon the body.
 “on the soft ground under the trees,” he said, “i found his tracks right
 up to the point where something happened. there were no other fresh tracks
 for several yards around. he was attacked as he stood close to the trunk
 of one of the elms. six or seven feet away i found some other tracks, very
 much like this.”
 he marked a series of dots upon the blotting pad at his elbow.
 “claws!” i cried. “that eerie call! like the call of a nighthawk—is
 it some unknown species of—flying thing?”
 “we shall see, shortly; possibly to-night,” was his reply. “since,
 probably owing to the absence of any moon, a mistake was made,” his jaw
 hardened at the thoughts of poor forsyth—“another attempt along the
 same lines will almost certainly follow—you know fu-manchu’s
 system?”
 so in the darkness, expectant, we sat watching the group of nine elms.
 to-night the moon was come, raising her aladdin’s lamp up to the star
 world and summoning magic shadows into being. by midnight the highroad
 showed deserted, the common was a place of mystery; and save for the
 periodical passage of an electric car, in blazing modernity, this was a
 fit enough stage for an eerie drama.
 no notice of the tragedy had appeared in print; nayland smith was vested
 with powers to silence the press. no detectives, no special constables,
 were posted. my friend was of opinion that the publicity which had been
 given to the deeds of dr. fu-manchu in the past, together with the
 sometimes clumsy co-operation of the police, had contributed not a little
 to the chinaman’s success.
 “there is only one thing to fear,” he jerked suddenly; “he may not be
 ready for another attempt to-night.”
 “why?”
 “since he has only been in england for a short time, his menagerie of
 venomous things may be a limited one at present.”
 earlier in the evening there had been a brief but violent thunderstorm,
 with a tropical downpour of rain, and now clouds were scudding across the
 blue of the sky. through a temporary rift in the veiling the crescent of
 the moon looked down upon us. it had a greenish tint, and it set me
 thinking of the filmed, green eyes of fu-manchu.
 the cloud passed and a lake of silver spread out to the edge of the
 coppice, where it terminated at a shadow bank.
 “there it is, petrie!” hissed nayland smith.
 a lambent light was born in the darkness; it rose slowly, unsteadily, to a
 great height, and died.
 “it’s under the trees, smith!”
 but he was already making for the door. over his shoulder:
 “bring the pistol, petrie!” he cried; “i have another. give me at least
 twenty yards’ start or no attempt may be made. but the instant i’m under
 the trees, join me.”
 out of the house we ran, and over onto the common, which latterly had been
 a pageant ground for phantom warring. the light did not appear again; and
 as smith plunged off toward the trees, i wondered if he knew what uncanny
 thing was hidden there. i more than suspected that he had solved the
 mystery.
 his instructions to keep well in the rear i understood. fu-manchu, or the
 creature of fu-manchu, would attempt nothing in the presence of a witness.
 but we knew full well that the instrument of death which was hidden in the
 elm coppice could do its ghastly work and leave no clue, could slay and
 vanish. for had not forsyth come to a dreadful end while smith and i were
 within twenty yards of him?
 not a breeze stirred, as smith, ahead of me—for i had slowed my pace—came
 up level with the first tree. the moon sailed clear of the straggling
 cloud wisps which alone told of the recent storm; and i noted that an
 irregular patch of light lay silvern on the moist ground under the elms
 where otherwise lay shadow.
 he passed on, slowly. i began to run again. black against the silvern
 patch, i saw him emerge—and look up.
 “be careful, smith!” i cried—and i was racing under the trees to
 join him.
 uttering a loud cry, he leaped—away from the pool of light.
 “stand back, petrie!” he screamed—“back! further!”
 he charged into me, shoulder lowered, and sent me reeling!
 mixed up with his excited cry i had heard a loud splintering and sweeping
 of branches overhead; and now as we staggered into the shadows it seemed
 that one of the elms was reaching down to touch us! so, at least, the
 phenomenon presented itself to my mind in that fleeting moment while
 smith, uttering his warning cry, was hurling me back.
 then the truth became apparent.
 with an appalling crash, a huge bough fell from above. one piercing, awful
 shriek there was, a crackling of broken branches, and a choking groan...
 the crack of smith’s pistol close beside me completed my confusion of
 mind.
 “missed!” he yelled. “shoot it, petrie! on your left! for god’s sake don’t
 miss it!”
 i turned. a lithe black shape was streaking past me. i fired—once—twice.
 another frightful cry made yet more hideous the nocturne.
 nayland smith was directing the ray of a pocket torch upon the fallen
 bough.
 “have you killed it, petrie?” he cried.
 “yes, yes!”
 i stood beside him, looking down. from the tangle of leaves and twigs an
 evil yellow face looked up at us. the features were contorted with agony,
 but the malignant eyes, wherein light was dying, regarded us with
 inflexible hatred. the man was pinned beneath the heavy bough; his back
 was broken; and as we watched, he expired, frothing slightly at the mouth,
 and quitted his tenement of clay, leaving those glassy eyes set hideously
 upon us.
 “the pagan gods fight upon our side,” said smith strangely. “elms have a
 dangerous habit of shedding boughs in still weather—particularly
 after a storm. pan, god of the woods, with this one has performed
 justice’s work of retribution.”
 “i don’t understand. where was this man—”
 “up the tree, lying along the bough which fell, petrie! that is why he
 left no footmarks. last night no doubt he made his escape by swinging from
 bough to bough, ape fashion, and descending to the ground somewhere at the
 other side of the coppice.”
 he glanced at me.
 “you are wondering, perhaps,” he suggested, “what caused the mysterious
 light? i could have told you this morning, but i fear i was in a bad
 temper, petrie. it’s very simple: a length of tape soaked in spirit or
 something of the kind, and sheltered from the view of any one watching
 from your windows, behind the trunk of the tree; then, the end ignited,
 lowered, still behind the tree, to the ground. the operator swinging it
 around, the flame ascended, of course. i found the unburned fragment of
 the tape last night, a few yards from here.”
 i was peering down at fu-manchu’s servant, the hideous yellow man who lay
 dead in a bower of elm leaves.
 “he has some kind of leather bag beside him,” i began—
 “exactly!” rapped smith. “in that he carried his dangerous instrument of
 death; from that he released it!”
 “released what?”
 “what your fascinating friend came to recapture this morning.”
 “don’t taunt me, smith!” i said bitterly. “is it some species of bird?”
 “you saw the marks on forsyth’s body, and i told you of those which i had
 traced upon the ground here. they were caused by claws, petrie!”
 “claws! i thought so! but what claws?”
 “the claws of a poisonous thing. i recaptured the one used last night,
 killed it—against my will—and buried it on the mound. i was
 afraid to throw it in the pond, lest some juvenile fisherman should pull
 it out and sustain a scratch. i don’t know how long the claws would remain
 venomous.”
 “you are treating me like a child, smith,” i said slowly. “no doubt i am
 hopelessly obtuse, but perhaps you will tell me what this chinaman carried
 in a leather bag and released upon forsyth. it was something which you
 recaptured, apparently with the aid of a plate of cold turbot and a jug of
 milk! it was something, also, which karamaneh had been sent to recapture
 with the aid—”
 i stopped.
 “go on,” said nayland smith, turning the ray to the left, “what did she
 have in the basket?”
 “valerian,” i replied mechanically.
 the ray rested upon the lithe creature that i had shot down.
 it was a black cat!
 “a cat will go through fire and water for valerian,” said smith; “but i
 got first innings this morning with fish and milk! i had recognized the
 imprints under the trees for those of a cat, and i knew, that if a cat had
 been released here it would still be hiding in the neighborhood, probably
 in the bushes. i finally located a cat, sure enough, and came for bait! i
 laid my trap, for the animal was too frightened to be approachable, and
 then shot it; i had to. that yellow fiend used the light as a decoy. the
 branch which killed him jutted out over the path at a spot where an
 opening in the foliage above allowed some moon rays to penetrate. directly
 the victim stood beneath, the chinaman uttered his bird cry; the one below
 looked up, and the cat, previously held silent and helpless in the leather
 sack, was dropped accurately upon his head!”
 “but”—i was growing confused.
 smith stooped lower.
 “the cat’s claws are sheathed now,” he said; “but if you could examine
 them you would find that they are coated with a shining black substance.
 only fu-manchu knows what that substance is, petrie, but you and i know
 what it can do!”
 “i don’t blame you!” rapped nayland smith. “suppose we say, then, a
 thousand pounds if you show us the present hiding-place of fu-manchu, the
 payment to be in no way subject to whether we profit by your information
 or not?”
 abel slattin shrugged his shoulders, racially, and returned to the
 armchair which he had just quitted. he reseated himself, placing his hat
 and cane upon my writing-table.
 “a little agreement in black and white?” he suggested smoothly.
 smith raised himself up out of the white cane chair, and, bending forward
 over a corner of the table, scribbled busily upon a sheet of notepaper
 with my fountain-pen.
 the while he did so, i covertly studied our visitor. he lay back in the
 armchair, his heavy eyelids lowered deceptively. he was a thought
 overdressed—a big man, dark-haired and well groomed, who toyed with
 a monocle most unsuitable to his type. during the preceding conversation,
 i had been vaguely surprised to note mr. abel slattin’s marked american
 accent.
 sometimes, when slattin moved, a big diamond which he wore upon the third
 finger of his right hand glittered magnificently. there was a sort of
 bluish tint underlying the dusky skin, noticeable even in his hands but
 proclaiming itself significantly in his puffy face and especially under
 the eyes. i diagnosed a laboring valve somewhere in the heart system.
 nayland smith’s pen scratched on. my glance strayed from our semitic
 caller to his cane, lying upon the red leather before me. it was of most
 unusual workmanship, apparently indian, being made of some kind of dark
 brown, mottled wood, bearing a marked resemblance to a snake’s skin; and
 the top of the cane was carved in conformity, to represent the head of
 what i took to be a puff-adder, fragments of stone, or beads, being
 inserted to represent the eyes, and the whole thing being finished with an
 artistic realism almost startling.
 when smith had tossed the written page to slattin, and he, having read it
 with an appearance of carelessness, had folded it neatly and placed it in
 his pocket, i said:
 “you have a curio here?”
 our visitor, whose dark eyes revealed all the satisfaction which, by his
 manner, he sought to conceal, nodded and took up the cane in his hand.
 “it comes from australia, doctor,” he replied; “it’s aboriginal work, and
 was given to me by a client. you thought it was indian? everybody does.
 it’s my mascot.”
 “really?”
 “it is indeed. its former owner ascribed magical powers to it! in fact, i
 believe he thought that it was one of those staffs mentioned in biblical
 history—”
 “aaron’s rod?” suggested smith, glancing at the cane.
 “something of the sort,” said slattin, standing up and again preparing to
 depart.
 “you will ‘phone us, then?” asked my friend.
 “you will hear from me to-morrow,” was the reply.
 smith returned to the cane armchair, and slattin, bowing to both of us,
 made his way to the door as i rang for the girl to show him out.
 “considering the importance of his proposal,” i began, as the door closed,
 “you hardly received our visitor with cordiality.”
 “i hate to have any relations with him,” answered my friend; “but we must
 not be squeamish respecting our instruments in dealing with dr. fu-manchu.
 slattin has a rotten reputation—even for a private inquiry agent. he
 is little better than a blackmailer—”
 “how do you know?”
 “because i called on our friend weymouth at the yard yesterday and looked
 up the man’s record.”
 “whatever for?”
 “i knew that he was concerning himself, for some reason, in the case.
 beyond doubt he has established some sort of communication with the
 chinese group; i am only wondering—”
 “you don’t mean—”
 “yes—i do, petrie! i tell you he is unscrupulous enough to stoop
 even to that.”
 no doubt, slattin knew that this gaunt, eager-eyed burmese commissioner
 was vested with ultimate authority in his quest of the mighty chinaman who
 represented things unutterable, whose potentialities for evil were
 boundless as his genius, who personified a secret danger, the extent and
 nature of which none of us truly understood. and, learning of these
 things, with unerring semitic instinct he had sought an opening in this
 glittering rialto. but there were two bidders!
 “you think he may have sunk so low as to become a creature of fu-manchu?”
 i asked, aghast.
 “exactly! if it paid him well i do not doubt that he would serve that
 master as readily as any other. his record is about as black as it well
 could be. slattin is of course an assumed name; he was known as lieutenant
 pepley when he belonged to the new york police, and he was kicked out of
 the service for complicity in an unsavory chinatown case.”
 “chinatown!”
 “yes, petrie, it made me wonder, too; and we must not forget that he is
 undeniably a clever scoundrel.”
 “shall you keep any appointment which he may suggest?”
 “undoubtedly. but i shall not wait until tomorrow.”
 “what!”
 “i propose to pay a little informal visit to mr. abel slattin, to-night.”
 “at his office?”
 “no; at his private residence. if, as i more than suspect, his object is
 to draw us into some trap, he will probably report his favorable progress
 to his employer to-night!”
 “then we should have followed him!”
 nayland smith stood up and divested himself of the old shooting-jacket.
 “he has been followed, petrie,” he replied, with one of his rare smiles.
 “two c.i.d. men have been watching the house all night!”
 this was entirely characteristic of my friend’s farseeing methods.
 “by the way,” i said, “you saw eltham this morning. he will soon be
 convalescent. where, in heaven’s name, can he—”
 “don’t be alarmed on his behalf, petrie,” interrupted smith. “his life is
 no longer in danger.”
 i stared, stupidly.
 “no longer in danger!”
 “he received, some time yesterday, a letter, written in chinese, upon
 chinese paper, and enclosed in an ordinary business envelope, having a
 typewritten address and bearing a london postmark.”
 “well?”
 “as nearly as i can render the message in english, it reads: ‘although,
 because you are a brave man, you would not betray your correspondent in
 china, he has been discovered. he was a mandarin, and as i cannot write
 the name of a traitor, i may not name him. he was executed four days ago.
 i salute you and pray for your speedy recovery. fu-manchu.’”
 “fu-manchu! but it is almost certainly a trap.”
 “on the contrary, petrie—fu-manchu would not have written in chinese
 unless he were sincere; and, to clear all doubt, i received a cable this
 morning reporting that the mandarin yen-sun-yat was assassinated in his
 own garden, in nan-yang, one day last week.”
 together we marched down the slope of the quiet, suburban avenue; to take
 pause before a small, detached house displaying the hatchet boards of the
 estate agent. here we found unkempt laurel bushes and acacias run riot,
 from which arboreal tangle protruded the notice—“to be let or sold.”
 smith, with an alert glance to right and left, pushed open the wooden gate
 and drew me in upon the gravel path. darkness mantled all; for the nearest
 street lamp was fully twenty yards beyond.
 from the miniature jungle bordering the path, a soft whistle sounded.
 “is that carter?” called smith, sharply.
 a shadowy figure uprose, and vaguely i made it out for that of a man in
 the unobtrusive blue serge which is the undress uniform of the force.
 “well?” rapped my companion.
 “mr. slattin returned ten minutes ago, sir,” reported the constable. “he
 came in a cab which he dismissed—”
 “he has not left again?”
 “a few minutes after his return,” the man continued, “another cab came up,
 and a lady alighted.”
 “a lady!”
 “the same, sir, that has called upon him before.”
 “smith!” i whispered, plucking at his arm—“is it—”
 he half turned, nodding his head; and my heart began to throb foolishly.
 for now the manner of slattin’s campaign suddenly was revealed to me. in
 our operations against the chinese murder-group two years before, we had
 had an ally in the enemy’s camp—karamaneh the beautiful slave, whose
 presence in those happenings of the past had colored the sometimes sordid
 drama with the opulence of old arabia; who had seemed a fitting figure for
 the romances of bagdad during the caliphate—karamaneh, whom i had
 thought sincere, whose inscrutable eastern soul i had presumed, fatuously,
 to have laid bare and analyzed.
 now, once again she was plying her old trade of go-between; professing to
 reveal the secrets of dr. fu-manchu, and all the time—i could not
 doubt it—inveigling men into the net of this awful fisher.
 yesterday, i had been her dupe; yesterday, i had rejoiced in my captivity.
 to-day, i was not the favored one; to-day i had not been selected
 recipient of her confidences—confidences sweet, seductive, deadly:
 but abel slattin, a plausible rogue, who, in justice, should be immured in
 sing sing, was chosen out, was enslaved by those lovely mysterious eyes,
 was taking to his soul the lies which fell from those perfect lips,
 triumphant in a conquest that must end in his undoing; deeming, poor fool,
 that for love of him this pearl of the orient was about to betray her
 master, to resign herself a prize to the victor!
 companioned by these bitter reflections, i had lost the remainder of the
 conversation between nayland smith and the police officer; now, casting
 off the succubus memory which threatened to obsess me, i put forth a giant
 mental effort to purge my mind of this uncleanness, and became again an
 active participant in the campaign against the master—the director
 of all things noxious.
 our plans being evidently complete, smith seized my arm, and i found
 myself again out upon the avenue. he led me across the road and into the
 gate of a house almost opposite. from the fact that two upper windows were
 illuminated, i adduced that the servants were retiring; the other windows
 were in darkness, except for one on the ground floor to the extreme left
 of the building, through the lowered venetian blinds whereof streaks of
 light shone out.
 “slattin’s study!” whispered smith. “he does not anticipate surveillance,
 and you will note that the window is wide open!”
 with that my friend crossed the strip of lawn, and careless of the fact
 that his silhouette must have been visible to any one passing the gate,
 climbed carefully up the artificial rockery intervening, and crouched upon
 the window-ledge peering into the room.
 a moment i hesitated, fearful that if i followed, i should stumble or
 dislodge some of the larva blocks of which the rockery was composed.
 then i heard that which summoned me to the attempt, whatever the cost.
 through the open window came the sound of a musical voice—a voice
 possessing a haunting accent, possessing a quality which struck upon my
 heart and set it quivering as though it were a gong hung in my bosom.
 karamaneh was speaking.
 upon hands and knees, heedless of damage to my garments, i crawled up
 beside smith. one of the laths was slightly displaced and over this my
 friend was peering in. crouching close beside him, i peered in also.
 i saw the study of a business man, with its files, neatly arranged works
 of reference, roll-top desk, and milner safe. before the desk, in a
 revolving chair, sat slattin. he sat half turned toward the window,
 leaning back and smiling; so that i could note the gold crown which
 preserved the lower left molar. in an armchair by the window, close, very
 close, and sitting with her back to me, was karamaneh!
 she, who, in my dreams, i always saw, was ever seeing, in an eastern
 dress, with gold bands about her white ankles, with jewel-laden fingers,
 with jewels in her hair, wore now a fashionable costume and a hat that
 could only have been produced in paris. karamaneh was the one oriental
 woman i had ever known who could wear european clothes; and as i watched
 that exquisite profile, i thought that delilah must have been just such
 another as this, that, excepting the empress poppaea, history has record
 of no woman, who, looking so innocent, was yet so utterly vile.
 “yes, my dear,” slattin was saying, and through his monocle ogling his
 beautiful visitor, “i shall be ready for you to-morrow night.”
 i felt smith start at the words.
 “there will be a sufficient number of men?”
 karamaneh put the question in a strangely listless way.
 “my dear little girl,” replied slattin, rising and standing looking down
 at her, with his gold tooth twinkling in the lamplight, “there will be a
 whole division, if a whole division is necessary.”
 he sought to take her white gloved hand, which rested upon the chair arm;
 but she evaded the attempt with seeming artlessness, and stood up. slattin
 fixed his bold gaze upon her.
 “so now, give me my orders,” he said.
 “i am not prepared to do so, yet,” replied the girl, composedly; “but now
 that i know you are ready, i can make my plans.”
 she glided past him to the door, avoiding his outstretched arm with an
 artless art which made me writhe; for once i had been the willing victim
 of all these wiles.
 “but—” began slattin.
 “i will ring you up in less than half an hour,” said karamaneh and without
 further ceremony, she opened the door.
 i still had my eyes glued to the aperture in the blind, when smith began
 tugging at my arm.
 “down! you fool!” he hissed harshly—“if she sees us, all is lost!”
 realizing this, and none too soon, i turned, and rather clumsily followed
 my friend. i dislodged a piece of granite in my descent; but, fortunately,
 slattin had gone out into the hall and could not well have heard it.
 we were crouching around an angle of the house, when a flood of light
 poured down the steps, and karamaneh rapidly descended. i had a glimpse of
 a dark-faced man who evidently had opened the door for her, then all my
 thoughts were centered upon that graceful figure receding from me in the
 direction of the avenue. she wore a loose cloak, and i saw this fluttering
 for a moment against the white gate posts; then she was gone.
 yet smith did not move. detaining me with his hand he crouched there
 against a quick-set hedge; until, from a spot lower down the hill, we
 heard the start of the cab which had been waiting. twenty seconds elapsed,
 and from some other distant spot a second cab started.
 “that’s weymouth!” snapped smith. “with decent luck, we should know
 fu-manchu’s hiding-place before slattin tells us!”
 “but—”
 “oh! as it happens, he’s apparently playing the game.”—in the
 half-light, smith stared at me significantly—“which makes it all the
 more important,” he concluded, “that we should not rely upon his aid!”
 those grim words were prophetic.
 my companion made no attempt to communicate with the detective (or
 detectives) who shared our vigil; we took up a position close under the
 lighted study window and waited—waited.
 once, a taxi-cab labored hideously up the steep gradient of the avenue ...
 it was gone. the lights at the upper windows above us became extinguished.
 a policeman tramped past the gateway, casually flashing his lamp in at the
 opening. one by one the illuminated windows in other houses visible to us
 became dull; then lived again as mirrors for the pallid moon. in the
 silence, words spoken within the study were clearly audible; and we heard
 someone—presumably the man who had opened the door—inquire if
 his services would be wanted again that night.
 smith inclined his head and hung over me in a tense attitude, in order to
 catch slattin’s reply.
 “yes, burke,” it came—“i want you to sit up until i return; i shall
 be going out shortly.”
 evidently the man withdrew at that; for a complete silence followed which
 prevailed for fully half an hour. i sought cautiously to move my cramped
 limbs, unlike smith, who seeming to have sinews of piano-wire, crouched
 beside me immovable, untiringly. then loud upon the stillness, broke the
 strident note of the telephone bell.
 i started, nervously, clutching at smith’s arm. it felt hard as iron to my
 grip.
 “hullo!” i heard slattin call—“who is speaking?... yes, yes! this is
 mr. a. s.... i am to come at once?... i know where—yes i ... you
 will meet me there?... good!—i shall be with you in half an hour....
 good-by!”
 distinctly i heard the creak of the revolving office-chair as slattin
 rose; then smith had me by the arm, and we were flying swiftly away from
 the door to take up our former post around the angle of the building. this
 gained:
 “he’s going to his death!” rapped smith beside me; “but carter has a cab
 from the yard waiting in the nearest rank. we shall follow to see where he
 goes—for it is possible that weymouth may have been thrown off the
 scent; then, when we are sure of his destination, we can take a hand in
 the game! we...”
 the end of the sentence was lost to me—drowned in such a frightful
 wave of sound as i despair to describe. it began with a high, thin scream,
 which was choked off staccato fashion; upon it followed a loud and
 dreadful cry uttered with all the strength of slattin’s lungs—
 “oh, god!” he cried, and again—“oh, god!”
 this in turn merged into a sort of hysterical sobbing.
 i was on my feet now, and automatically making for the door. i had a vague
 impression of nayland smith’s face beside me, the eyes glassy with a
 fearful apprehension. then the door was flung open, and, in the bright
 light of the hall-way, i saw slattin standing—swaying and seemingly
 fighting with the empty air.
 “what is it? for god’s sake, what has happened!” reached my ears dimly—and
 the man burke showed behind his master. white-faced i saw him to be; for
 now smith and i were racing up the steps.
 ere we could reach him, slattin, uttering another choking cry, pitched
 forward and lay half across the threshold.
 we burst into the hall, where burke stood with both his hands raised
 dazedly to his head. i could hear the sound of running feet upon the
 gravel, and knew that carter was coming to join us.
 burke, a heavy man with a lowering, bull-dog type of face, collapsed onto
 his knees beside slattin, and began softly to laugh in little rising
 peals.
 “drop that!” snapped smith, and grasping him by the shoulders, he sent him
 spinning along the hallway, where he sank upon the bottom step of the
 stairs, to sit with his outstretched fingers extended before his face, and
 peering at us grotesquely through the crevices.
 there were rustlings and subdued cries from the upper part of the house.
 carter came in out of the darkness, carefully stepping over the recumbent
 figure; and the three of us stood there in the lighted hall looking down
 at slattin.
 “help us to move him back,” directed smith, tensely; “far enough to close
 the door.”
 between us we accomplished this, and carter fastened the door. we were
 alone with the shadow of fu-manchu’s vengeance; for as i knelt beside the
 body on the floor, a look and a touch sufficed to tell me that this was
 but clay from which the spirit had fled!
 smith met my glance as i raised my head, and his teeth came together with
 a loud snap; the jaw muscles stood out prominently beneath the dark skin;
 and his face was grimly set in that odd, half-despairful expression which
 i knew so well but which boded so ill for whomsoever occasioned it.
 “dead, petrie!—already?”
 “lightning could have done the work no better. can i turn him over?”
 smith nodded.
 together we stooped and rolled the heavy body on its back. a flood of
 whispers came sibilantly from the stairway. smith spun around rapidly, and
 glared upon the group of half-dressed servants.
 “return to your rooms!” he rapped, imperiously; “let no one come into the
 hall without my orders.”
 the masterful voice had its usual result; there was a hurried retreat to
 the upper landing. burke, shaking like a man with an ague, sat on the
 lower step, pathetically drumming his palms upon his uplifted knees.
 “i warned him, i warned him!” he mumbled monotonously, “i warned him, oh,
 i warned him!”
 “stand up!” shouted smith—“stand up and come here!”
 the man, with his frightened eyes turning to right and left, and seeming
 to search for something in the shadows about him, advanced obediently.
 “have you a flask?” demanded smith of carter.
 the detective silently administered to burke a stiff restorative.
 “now,” continued smith, “you, petrie, will want to examine him, i
 suppose?” he pointed to the body. “and in the meantime i have some
 questions to put to you, my man.”
 he clapped his hand upon burke’s shoulder.
 “my god!” burke broke out, “i was ten yards from him when it happened!”
 “no one is accusing you,” said smith, less harshly; “but since you were
 the only witness, it is by your aid that we hope to clear the matter up.”
 exerting a gigantic effort to regain control of himself, burke nodded,
 watching my friend with a childlike eagerness. during the ensuing
 conversation, i examined slattin for marks of violence; and of what i
 found, more anon.
 “in the first place,” said smith, “you say that you warned him. when did
 you warn him and of what?”
 “i warned him, sir, that it would come to this—”
 “that what would come to this?”’ 
 “his dealings with the chinaman!”
 “he had dealings with chinamen?”
 “he accidentally met a chinaman at an east end gaming-house, a man he had
 known in frisco—a man called singapore charlie—”
 “what! singapore charlie!”
 “yes, sir, the same man that had a dope-shop, two years ago, down
 ratcliffe way—”
 “there was a fire—”
 “but singapore charlie escaped, sir.”
 “and he is one of the gang?”
 “he is one of what we used to call in new york, the seven group.”
 smith began to tug at the lobe of his left ear, reflectively, as i saw out
 of the corner of my eye.
 “the seven group!” he mused. “that is significant. i always suspected that
 dr. fu-manchu and the notorious seven group were one and the same. go on,
 burke.”
 “well, sir,” the man continued, more calmly, “the lieutenant—”
 “the lieutenant!” began smith; then: “oh! of course; slattin used to be a
 police lieutenant!”
 “well, sir, he—mr. slattin—had a sort of hold on this
 singapore charlie, and two years ago, when he first met him, he thought
 that with his aid he was going to pull off the biggest thing of his life—”
 “forestall me, in fact?”
 “yes, sir; but you got in first, with the big raid and spoiled it.”
 smith nodded grimly, glancing at the scotland yard man, who returned his
 nod with equal grimness.
 “a couple of months ago,” resumed burke, “he met charlie again down east,
 and the chinaman introduced him to a girl—some sort of an egyptian
 girl.”
 “go on!” snapped smith—“i know her.”
 “he saw her a good many times—and she came here once or twice. she
 made out that she and singapore charlie were prepared to give away the
 boss of the yellow gang—”
 “for a price, of course?”
 “i suppose so,” said burke; “but i don’t know. i only know that i warned
 him.”
 “h’m!” muttered smith. “and now, what took place to-night?”
 “he had an appointment here with the girl,” began burke
 “i know all that,” interrupted smith. “i merely want to know, what took
 place after the telephone call?”
 “well, he told me to wait up, and i was dozing in the next room to the
 study—the dining-room—when the ‘phone bell aroused me. i heard
 the lieutenant—mr. slattin, coming out, and i ran out too, but only
 in time to see him taking his hat from the rack—”
 “but he wears no hat!”
 “he never got it off the peg! just as he reached up to take it, he gave a
 most frightful scream, and turned around like lightning as though some one
 had attacked him from behind!”
 “there was no one else in the hall?”
 “no one at all. i was standing down there outside the dining-room just by
 the stairs, but he didn’t turn in my direction, he turned and looked right
 behind him—where there was no one—nothing. his cries were
 frightful.” burke’s voice broke, and he shuddered feverishly. “then he
 made a rush for the front door. it seemed as though he had not seen me. he
 stood there screaming; but, before i could reach him, he fell....”
 nayland smith fixed a piercing gaze upon burke.
 “is that all you know?” he demanded slowly.
 “as god is my judge, sir, that’s all i know, and all i saw. there was no
 living thing near him when he met his death.”
 “we shall see,” muttered smith. he turned to me—“what killed him?”
 he asked, shortly.
 “apparently, a minute wound on the left wrist,” i replied, and, stooping,
 i raised the already cold hand in mine.
 a tiny, inflamed wound showed on the wrist; and a certain puffiness was
 becoming observable in the injured hand and arm. smith bent down and drew
 a quick, sibilant breath.
 “you know what this is, petrie?” he cried.
 “certainly. it was too late to employ a ligature and useless to inject
 ammonia. death was practically instantaneous. his heart...”
 there came a loud knocking and ringing.
 “carter!” cried smith, turning to the detective, “open that door to no one—no
 one. explain who i am—”
 “but if it is the inspector?—”
 “i said, open the door to no one!” snapped smith.
 “burke, stand exactly where you are! carter, you can speak to whoever
 knocks, through the letter-box. petrie, don’t move for your life! it may
 be here, in the hallway!—”
 our search of the house of abel slattin ceased only with the coming of the
 dawn, and yielded nothing but disappointment. failure followed upon
 failure; for, in the gray light of the morning, our own quest concluded,
 inspector weymouth returned to report that the girl, karamaneh, had thrown
 him off the scent.
 again he stood before me, the big, burly friend of old and dreadful days,
 a little grayer above the temples, which i set down for a record of former
 horrors, but deliberate, stoical, thorough, as ever. his blue eyes melted
 in the old generous way as he saw me, and he gripped my hand in greeting.
 “once again,” he said, “your dark-eyed friend has been too clever for me,
 doctor. but the track as far as i could follow, leads to the old spot. in
 fact,”—he turned to smith, who, grim-faced and haggard, looked
 thoroughly ill in that gray light—“i believe fu-manchu’s lair is
 somewhere near the former opium-den of shen-yan—‘singapore
 charlie.’”
 smith nodded.
 “we will turn our attention in that direction,” he replied, “at a very
 early date.”
 inspector weymouth looked down at the body of abel slattin.
 “how was it done?” he asked softly.
 “clumsily for fu-manchu,” i replied. “a snake was introduced into the
 house by some means—”
 “by karamaneh!” rapped smith.
 “very possibly by karamaneh,” i continued firmly. “the thing has escaped
 us.”
 “my own idea,” said smith, “is that it was concealed about his clothing.
 when he fell by the open door it glided out of the house. we must have the
 garden searched thoroughly by daylight.”
 “he”—weymouth glanced at that which lay upon the floor—“must
 be moved; but otherwise we can leave the place untouched, clear out the
 servants, and lock the house up.”
 “i have already given orders to that effect,” answered smith. he spoke
 wearily and with a note of conscious defeat in his voice. “nothing has
 been disturbed;”—he swept his arm around comprehensively—“papers
 and so forth you can examine at leisure.”
 presently we quitted that house upon which the fateful chinaman had set
 his seal, as the suburb was awakening to a new day. the clank of milk-cans
 was my final impression of the avenue to which a dreadful minister of
 death had come at the bidding of the death lord. we left inspector
 weymouth in charge and returned to my rooms, scarcely exchanging a word
 upon the way.
 nayland smith, ignoring my entreaties, composed himself for slumber in the
 white cane chair in my study. about noon he retired to the bathroom, and
 returning, made a pretense of breakfast; then resumed his seat in the cane
 armchair. carter reported in the afternoon, but his report was merely
 formal. returning from my round of professional visits at half past five,
 i found nayland smith in the same position; and so the day waned into
 evening, and dusk fell uneventfully.
 in the corner of the big room by the empty fireplace, nayland smith lay,
 with his long, lean frame extended in the white cane chair. a tumbler,
 from which two straws protruded, stood by his right elbow, and a perfect
 continent of tobacco smoke lay between us, wafted toward the door by the
 draught from an open window. he had littered the hearth with matches and
 tobacco ash, being the most untidy smoker i have ever met; and save for
 his frequent rapping-out of his pipe bowl and perpetual striking of
 matches, he had shown no sign of activity for the past hour. collarless
 and wearing an old tweed jacket, he had spent the evening, as he had spent
 the day, in the cane chair, only quitting it for some ten minutes, or
 less, to toy with dinner.
 my several attempts at conversation had elicited nothing but growls;
 therefore, as dusk descended, having dismissed my few patients, i busied
 myself collating my notes upon the renewed activity of the yellow doctor,
 and was thus engaged when the ‘phone bell disturbed me. it was smith who
 was wanted, however; and he went out eagerly, leaving me to my task.
 at the end of a lengthy conversation, he returned from the ‘phone and
 began, restlessly, to pace the room. i made a pretense of continuing my
 labors, but covertly i was watching him. he was twitching at the lobe of
 his left ear, and his face was a study in perplexity. abruptly he burst
 out:
 “i shall throw the thing up, petrie! either i am growing too old to cope
 with such an adversary as fu-manchu, or else my intellect has become dull.
 i cannot seem to think clearly or consistently. for the doctor, this
 crime, this removal of slattin, is clumsy—unfinished. there are two
 explanations. either he, too, is losing his old cunning or he has been
 interrupted!”
 “interrupted!”
 “take the facts, petrie,”—smith clapped his hands upon my table and
 bent down, peering into my eyes—“is it characteristic of fu-manchu
 to kill a man by the direct agency of a snake and to implicate one of his
 own damnable servants in this way?”
 “but we have found no snake!”
 “karamaneh introduced one in some way. do you doubt it?”
 “certainly karamaneh visited him on the evening of his death, but you must
 be perfectly well aware that even if she had been arrested, no jury could
 convict her.”
 smith resumed his restless pacings up and down.
 “you are very useful to me, petrie,” he replied; “as a counsel for the
 defense you constantly rectify my errors of prejudice. yet i am convinced
 that our presence at slattin’s house last night prevented fu-manchu from
 finishing off this little matter as he had designed to do.”
 “what has given you this idea?”
 “weymouth is responsible. he has rung me up from the yard. the constable
 on duty at the house where the murder was committed, reports that some
 one, less than an hour ago, attempted to break in.”
 “break in!”
 “ah! you are interested? i thought the circumstance illuminating, also!”
 “did the officer see this person?”
 “no; he only heard him. it was some one who endeavored to enter by the
 bathroom window, which, i am told, may be reached fairly easily by an
 agile climber.”
 “the attempt did not succeed?”
 “no; the constable interrupted, but failed to make a capture or even to
 secure a glimpse of the man.”
 we were both silent for some moments; then:
 “what do you propose to do?” i asked.
 “we must not let fu-manchu’s servants know,” replied smith, “but to-night
 i shall conceal myself in slattin’s house and remain there for a week or a
 day—it matters not how long—until that attempt is repeated.
 quite obviously, petrie, we have overlooked something which implicates the
 murderer with the murder! in short, either by accident, by reason of our
 superior vigilance, or by the clumsiness of his plans, fu-manchu for once
 in an otherwise blameless career, has left a clue!”
 in utter darkness we groped our way through into the hallway of slattin’s
 house, having entered, stealthily, from the rear; for smith had selected
 the study as a suitable base of operations. we reached it without mishap,
 and presently i found myself seated in the very chair which karamaneh had
 occupied; my companion took up a post just within the widely opened door.
 so we commenced our ghostly business in the house of the murdered man—a
 house from which, but a few hours since, his body had been removed. this
 was such a vigil as i had endured once before, when, with nayland smith
 and another, i had waited for the coming of one of fu-manchu’s death
 agents.
 of all the sounds which, one by one, now began to detach themselves from
 the silence, there was a particular sound, homely enough at another time,
 which spoke to me more dreadfully than the rest. it was the ticking of the
 clock upon the mantelpiece; and i thought how this sound must have been
 familiar to abel slattin, how it must have formed part and parcel of his
 life, as it were, and how it went on now—tick-tick-tick-tick—whilst
 he, for whom it had ticked, lay unheeding—would never heed it more.
 as i grew more accustomed to the gloom, i found myself staring at his
 office chair; once i found myself expecting abel slattin to enter the room
 and occupy it. there was a little china buddha upon the bureau in one
 corner, with a gilded cap upon its head, and as some reflection of the
 moonlight sought out this little cap, my thoughts grotesquely turned upon
 the murdered man’s gold tooth.
 vague creakings from within the house, sounds as though of stealthy
 footsteps upon the stair, set my nerves tingling; but nayland smith gave
 no sign, and i knew that my imagination was magnifying these ordinary
 night sounds out of all proportion to their actual significance. leaves
 rustled faintly outside the window at my back: i construed their sibilant
 whispers into the dreaded name—fu-manchu-fu-manchu—fu-manchu!
 so wore on the night; and, when the ticking clock hollowly boomed the hour
 of one, i almost leaped out of my chair, so highly strung were my nerves,
 and so appallingly did the sudden clangor beat upon them. smith, like a
 man of stone, showed no sign. he was capable of so subduing his
 constitutionally high-strung temperament, at times, that temporarily he
 became immune from human dreads. on such occasions he would be icily cool
 amid universal panic; but, his object accomplished, i have seen him in
 such a state of collapse, that utter nervous exhaustion is the only term
 by which i can describe it.
 tick-tick-tick-tick went the clock, and, with my heart still thumping
 noisily in my breast, i began to count the tickings; one, two, three,
 four, five, and so on to a hundred, and from one hundred to many hundreds.
 then, out from the confusion of minor noises, a new, arresting sound
 detached itself. i ceased my counting; no longer i noted the tick-tick of
 the clock, nor the vague creakings, rustlings and whispers. i saw smith,
 shadowly, raise his hand in warning—in needless warning, for i was
 almost holding my breath in an effort of acute listening.
 from high up in the house this new sound came from above the topmost room,
 it seemed, up under the roof; a regular squeaking, oddly familiar, yet
 elusive. upon it followed a very soft and muffled thud; then a metallic
 sound as of a rusty hinge in motion; then a new silence, pregnant with a
 thousand possibilities more eerie than any clamor.
 my mind was rapidly at work. lighting the topmost landing of the house was
 a sort of glazed trap, evidently set in the floor of a loft-like place
 extending over the entire building. somewhere in the red-tiled roof above,
 there presumably existed a corresponding skylight or lantern.
 so i argued; and, ere i had come to any proper decision, another sound,
 more intimate, came to interrupt me.
 this time i could be in no doubt; some one was lifting the trap above the
 stairhead—slowly, cautiously, and all but silently. yet to my ears,
 attuned to trifling disturbances, the trap creaked and groaned noisily.
 nayland smith waved to me to take a stand on the other side of the opened
 door—behind it, in fact, where i should be concealed from the view
 of any one descending the stair.
 i stood up and crossed the floor to my new post.
 a dull thud told of the trap fully raised and resting upon some supporting
 joist. a faint rustling (of discarded garments, i told myself) spoke to my
 newly awakened, acute perceptions, of the visitor preparing to lower
 himself to the landing. followed a groan of woodwork submitted to sudden
 strain—and the unmistakable pad of bare feet upon the linoleum of
 the top corridor.
 i knew now that one of dr. fu-manchu’s uncanny servants had gained the
 roof of the house by some means, had broken through the skylight and had
 descended by means of the trap beneath on to the landing.
 in such a tensed-up state as i cannot describe, nor, at this hour mentally
 reconstruct, i waited for the creaking of the stairs which should tell of
 the creature’s descent.
 i was disappointed. removed scarce a yard from me as he was, i could hear
 nayland smith’s soft, staccato breathing; but my eyes were all for the
 darkened hallway, for the smudgy outline of the stair-rail with the faint
 patterning in the background which, alone, indicated the wall.
 it was amid an utter silence, unheralded by even so slight a sound as
 those which i had acquired the power of detecting—that i saw the
 continuity of the smudgy line of stair-rail to be interrupted.
 a dark patch showed upon it, just within my line of sight, invisible to
 smith on the other side of the doorway, and some ten or twelve stairs up.
 no sound reached me, but the dark patch vanished and reappeared three feet
 lower down.
 still i knew that this phantom approach must be unknown to my companion—and
 i knew that it was impossible for me to advise him of it unseen by the
 dreaded visitor.
 a third time the dark patch—the hand of one who, ghostly, silent,
 was creeping down into the hallway—vanished and reappeared on a
 level with my eyes. then a vague shape became visible; no more than a blur
 upon the dim design of the wall-paper... and nayland smith got his first
 sight of the stranger.
 the clock on the mantelpiece boomed out the half-hour.
 at that, such was my state (i blush to relate it) i uttered a faint cry!
 it ended all secrecy—that hysterical weakness of mine. it might have
 frustrated our hopes; that it did not do so was in no measure due to me.
 but in a sort of passionate whirl, the ensuing events moved swiftly.
 smith hesitated not one instant. with a panther-like leap he hurled
 himself into the hall.
 “the lights, petrie!” he cried—“the lights! the switch is near the
 street-door!”
 i clenched my fists in a swift effort to regain control of my treacherous
 nerves, and, bounding past smith, and past the foot of the stair, i
 reached out my hand to the switch, the situation of which, fortunately, i
 knew.
 around i came, in response to a shrill cry from behind me—an inhuman
 cry, less a cry than the shriek of some enraged animal....
 with his left foot upon the first stair, nayland smith stood, his lean
 body bent perilously backward, his arms rigidly thrust out, and his sinewy
 fingers gripping the throat of an almost naked man—a man whose brown
 body glistened unctuously, whose shaven head was apish low, whose
 bloodshot eyes were the eyes of a mad dog! his teeth, upper and lower,
 were bared; they glistened, they gnashed, and a froth was on his lips.
 with both his hands, he clutched a heavy stick, and once—twice, he
 brought it down upon nayland smith’s head!
 i leaped forward to my friend’s aid; but as though the blows had been
 those of a feather, he stood like some figure of archaic statuary, nor for
 an instant relaxed the death grip which he had upon his adversary’s
 throat.
 thrusting my way up the stairs, i wrenched the stick from the hand of the
 dacoit—for in this glistening brown man, i recognized one of that
 deadly brotherhood who hailed dr. fu-manchu their lord and master.
 i cannot dwell upon the end of that encounter; i cannot hope to make
 acceptable to my readers an account of how nayland smith, glassy-eyed, and
 with consciousness ebbing from him instant by instant, stood there, a
 realization of leighton’s “athlete,” his arms rigid as iron bars even
 after fu-manchu’s servant hung limply in that frightful grip.
 in his last moments of consciousness, with the blood from his wounded head
 trickling down into his eyes, he pointed to the stick which i had torn
 from the grip of the dacoit, and which i still held in my hand.
 “not aaron’s rod, petrie!” he gasped hoarsely—“the rod of moses!—slattin’s
 stick!”
 even in upon my anxiety for my friend, amazement intruded.
 “but,” i began—and turned to the rack in which slattin’s favorite
 cane at that moment reposed—had reposed at the time of his death.
 yes!—there stood slattin’s cane; we had not moved it; we had
 disturbed nothing in that stricken house; there it stood, in company with
 an umbrella and a malacca.
 i glanced at the cane in my hand. surely there could not be two such in
 the world?
 smith collapsed on the floor at my feet.
 “examine the one in the rack, petrie,” he whispered, almost inaudibly,
 “but do not touch it. it may not be yet....”
 i propped him up against the foot of the stairs, and as the constable
 began knocking violently at the street door, crossed to the rack and
 lifted out the replica of the cane which i held in my hand.
 a faint cry from smith—and as if it had been a leprous thing, i
 dropped the cane instantly.
 “merciful god!” i groaned.
 although, in every other particular, it corresponded with that which i
 held—which i had taken from the dacoit—which he had come to
 substitute for the cane now lying upon the floor—in one dreadful
 particular it differed.
 up to the snake’s head it was an accurate copy; but the head lived!
 either from pain, fear or starvation, the thing confined in the hollow
 tube of this awful duplicate was become torpid. otherwise, no power on
 earth could have saved me from the fate of abel slattin; for the creature
 was an australian death-adder.
 nayland smith wasted no time in pursuing the plan of campaign which he had
 mentioned to inspector weymouth. less than forty-eight hours after
 quitting the house of the murdered slattin, i found myself bound along
 whitechapel road upon strange enough business.
 a very fine rain was falling, which rendered it difficult to see clearly
 from the windows; but the weather apparently had little effect upon the
 commercial activities of the district. the cab was threading a hazardous
 way through the cosmopolitan throng crowding the street. on either side of
 me extended a row of stalls, seemingly established in opposition to the
 more legitimate shops upon the inner side of the pavement.
 jewish hawkers, many of them in their shirt-sleeves, acclaimed the rarity
 of the bargains which they had to offer; and, allowing for the difference
 of costume, these tireless israelites, heedless of climatic conditions,
 sweating at their mongery, might well have stood, not in a squalid london
 thoroughfare, but in an equally squalid market-street of the orient.
 they offered linen and fine raiment; from footgear to hair-oil their wares
 ranged. they enlivened their auctioneering with conjuring tricks and witty
 stories, selling watches by the aid of legerdemain, and fancy vests by
 grace of a seasonable anecdote.
 poles, russians, serbs, roumanians, jews of hungary, and italians of
 whitechapel mingled in the throng. near east and far east rubbed
 shoulders. pidgin english contested with yiddish for the ownership of some
 tawdry article offered by an auctioneer whose nationality defied
 conjecture, save that always some branch of his ancestry had drawn
 nourishment from the soil of eternal judea.
 some wearing mens’ caps, some with shawls thrown over their oily locks,
 and some, more true to primitive instincts, defying, bare-headed, the
 unkindly elements, bedraggled women—more often than not burdened
 with muffled infants—crowded the pavements and the roadway, thronged
 about the stalls like white ants about some choicer carrion.
 and the fine drizzling rain fell upon all alike, pattering upon the hood
 of the taxi-cab, trickling down the front windows; glistening upon the
 unctuous hair of those in the street who were hatless; dewing the bare
 arms of the auctioneers, and dripping, melancholy, from the tarpaulin
 coverings of the stalls. heedless of the rain above and of the mud
 beneath, north, south, east, and west mingled their cries, their bids,
 their blandishments, their raillery, mingled their persons in that joyless
 throng.
 sometimes a yellow face showed close to one of the streaming windows;
 sometimes a black-eyed, pallid face, but never a face wholly sane and
 healthy. this was an underworld where squalor and vice went hand in hand
 through the beautiless streets, a melting-pot of the world’s outcasts;
 this was the shadowland, which last night had swallowed up nayland smith.
 ceaselessly i peered to right and left, searching amid that rain-soaked
 company for any face known to me. whom i expected to find there, i know
 not, but i should have counted it no matter for surprise had i detected
 amid that ungracious ugliness the beautiful face of karamaneh the eastern
 slave-girl, the leering yellow face of a burmese dacoit, the gaunt,
 bronzed features of nayland smith; a hundred times i almost believed that
 i had seen the ruddy countenance of inspector weymouth, and once (at which
 instant my heart seemed to stand still) i suffered from the singular
 delusion that the oblique green eyes of dr. fu-manchu peered out from the
 shadows between two stalls.
 it was mere phantasy, of course, the sick imaginings of a mind
 overwrought. i had not slept and had scarcely tasted food for more than
 thirty hours; for, following up a faint clue supplied by burke, slattin’s
 man, and, like his master, an ex-officer of new york police, my friend,
 nayland smith, on the previous evening had set out in quest of some
 obscene den where the man called shen-yan—former keeper of an
 opium-shop—was now said to be in hiding.
 shen-yan we knew to be a creature of the chinese doctor, and only a most
 urgent call had prevented me from joining smith upon this promising,
 though hazardous expedition.
 at any rate, fate willing it so, he had gone without me; and now—although
 inspector weymouth, assisted by a number of c. i. d. men, was sweeping the
 district about me—to the time of my departure nothing whatever had
 been heard of smith. the ordeal of waiting finally had proved too great to
 be borne. with no definite idea of what i proposed to do, i had thrown
 myself into the search, filled with such dreadful apprehensions as i hope
 never again to experience.
 i did not know the exact situation of the place to which smith was gone,
 for owing to the urgent case which i have mentioned, i had been absent at
 the time of his departure; nor could scotland yard enlighten me upon this
 point. weymouth was in charge of the case—under smith’s direction—and
 since the inspector had left the yard, early that morning, he had
 disappeared as completely as smith, no report having been received from
 him.
 as my driver turned into the black mouth of a narrow, ill-lighted street,
 and the glare and clamor of the greater thoroughfare died behind me, i
 sank into the corner of the cab burdened with such a sense of desolation
 as mercifully comes but rarely.
 we were heading now for that strange settlement off the west india dock
 road, which, bounded by limehouse causeway and pennyfields, and narrowly
 confined within four streets, composes an unique chinatown, a miniature of
 that at liverpool, and of the greater one in san francisco. inspired with
 an idea which promised hopefully, i raised the speaking tube.
 “take me first to the river police station,” i directed; “along ratcliffe
 highway.”
 the man turned and nodded comprehendingly, as i could see through the wet
 pane.
 presently we swerved to the right and into an even narrower street. this
 inclined in an easterly direction, and proved to communicate with a wide
 thoroughfare along which passed brilliantly lighted electric trams. i had
 lost all sense of direction, and when, swinging to the left and to the
 right again, i looked through the window and perceived that we were before
 the door of the police station, i was dully surprised.
 in quite mechanical fashion i entered the depot. inspector ryman, our
 associate in one of the darkest episodes of the campaign with the yellow
 doctor two years before, received me in his office.
 by a negative shake of the head, he answered my unspoken question.
 “the ten o’clock boat is lying off the stone stairs, doctor,” he said,
 “and co-operating with some of the scotland yard men who are dragging that
 district—”
 i shuddered at the word “dragging”; ryman had not used it literally, but
 nevertheless it had conjured up a dread possibility—a possibility in
 accordance with the methods of dr. fu-manchu. all within space of an
 instant i saw the tide of limehouse reach, the thames lapping about the
 green-coated timbers of a dock pier; and rising—falling—sometimes
 disclosing to the pallid light a rigid hand, sometimes a horribly bloated
 face—i saw the body of nayland smith at the mercy of those oily
 waters. ryman continued:
 “there is a launch out, too, patrolling the riverside from here to
 tilbury. another lies at the breakwater”—he jerked his thumb over
 his shoulder. “should you care to take a run down and see for yourself?”
 “no, thanks,” i replied, shaking my head. “you are doing all that can be
 done. can you give me the address of the place to which mr. smith went
 last night?”
 “certainly,” said ryman; “i thought you knew it. you remember shen-yan’s
 place—by limehouse basin? well, further east—east of the
 causeway, between gill street and three colt street—is a block of
 wooden buildings. you recall them?”
 “yes,” i replied. “is the man established there again, then?”
 “it appears so, but, although you have evidently not been informed of the
 fact, weymouth raided the establishment in the early hours of this
 morning!”
 “well?” i cried.
 “unfortunately with no result,” continued the inspector. “the notorious
 shen-yan was missing, and although there is no real doubt that the place
 is used as a gaming-house, not a particle of evidence to that effect could
 be obtained. also—there was no sign of mr. nayland smith, and no
 sign of the american, burke, who had led him to the place.”
 “is it certain that they went there?”
 “two c. i. d. men who were shadowing, actually saw the pair of them enter.
 a signal had been arranged, but it was never given; and at about half past
 four, the place was raided.”
 “surely some arrests were made?”
 “but there was no evidence!” cried ryman. “every inch of the rat-burrow
 was searched. the chinese gentleman who posed as the proprietor of what he
 claimed to be a respectable lodging-house offered every facility to the
 police. what could we do?”
 “i take it that the place is being watched?”
 “certainly,” said ryman. “both from the river and from the shore. oh! they
 are not there! god knows where they are, but they are not there!”
 i stood for a moment in silence, endeavoring to determine my course; then,
 telling ryman that i hoped to see him later, i walked out slowly into the
 rain and mist, and nodding to the taxi-driver to proceed to our original
 destination, i re-entered the cab.
 as we moved off, the lights of the river police depot were swallowed up in
 the humid murk, and again i found myself being carried through the
 darkness of those narrow streets, which, like a maze, hold secret within
 their labyrinth mysteries as great, and at least as foul, as that of
 pasiphae.
 the marketing centers i had left far behind me; to my right stretched the
 broken range of riverside buildings, and beyond them flowed the thames, a
 stream more heavily burdened with secrets than ever was tiber or tigris.
 on my left, occasional flickering lights broke through the mist, for the
 most part the lights of taverns; and saving these rents in the veil, the
 darkness was punctuated with nothing but the faint and yellow luminance of
 the street lamps.
 ahead was a black mouth, which promised to swallow me up as it had
 swallowed up my friend.
 in short, what with my lowered condition and consequent frame of mind, and
 what with the traditions, for me inseparable from that gloomy quarter of
 london, i was in the grip of a shadowy menace which at any moment might
 become tangible—i perceived, in the most commonplace objects, the
 yellow hand of dr. fu-manchu.
 when the cab stopped in a place of utter darkness, i aroused myself with
 an effort, opened the door, and stepped out into the mud of a narrow lane.
 a high brick wall frowned upon me from one side, and, dimly perceptible,
 there towered a smoke stack, beyond. on my right uprose the side of a
 wharf building, shadowly, and some distance ahead, almost obscured by the
 drizzling rain, a solitary lamp flickered. i turned up the collar of my
 raincoat, shivering, as much at the prospect as from physical chill.
 “you will wait here,” i said to the man; and, feeling in my breast-pocket,
 i added: “if you hear the note of a whistle, drive on and rejoin me.”
 he listened attentively and with a certain eagerness. i had selected him
 that night for the reason that he had driven smith and myself on previous
 occasions and had proved himself a man of intelligence. transferring a
 browning pistol from my hip-pocket to that of my raincoat, i trudged on
 into the mist.
 the headlights of the taxi were swallowed up behind me, and just abreast
 of the street lamp i stood listening.
 save for the dismal sound of rain, and the trickling of water along the
 gutters, all about me was silent. sometimes this silence would be broken
 by the distant, muffled note of a steam siren; and always, forming a sort
 of background to the near stillness, was the remote din of riverside
 activity.
 i walked on to the corner just beyond the lamp. this was the street in
 which the wooden buildings were situated. i had expected to detect some
 evidences of surveillances, but if any were indeed being observed, the
 fact was effectively masked. not a living creature was visible, peer as i
 could.
 plans, i had none, and perceiving that the street was empty, and that no
 lights showed in any of the windows, i passed on, only to find that i had
 entered a cul-de-sac.
 a rickety gate gave access to a descending flight of stone steps, the
 bottom invisible in the denser shadows of an archway, beyond which, i
 doubted not, lay the river.
 still uninspired by any definite design, i tried the gate and found that
 it was unlocked. like some wandering soul, as it has since seemed to me, i
 descended. there was a lamp over the archway, but the glass was broken,
 and the rain apparently had extinguished the light; as i passed under it,
 i could hear the gas whistling from the burner.
 continuing my way, i found myself upon a narrow wharf with the thames
 flowing gloomily beneath me. a sort of fog hung over the river, shutting
 me in. then came an incident.
 suddenly, quite near, there arose a weird and mournful cry—a cry
 indescribable, and inexpressibly uncanny!
 i started back so violently that how i escaped falling into the river i do
 not know to this day. that cry, so eerie and so wholly unexpected, had
 unnerved me; and realizing the nature of my surroundings, and the folly of
 my presence alone in such a place, i began to edge back toward the foot of
 the steps, away from the thing that cried; when—a great white shape
 uprose like a phantom before me!...
 there are few men, i suppose, whose lives have been crowded with so many
 eerie happenings as mine, but this phantom thing which grew out of the
 darkness, which seemed about to envelope me, takes rank in my memory
 amongst the most fearsome apparitions which i have witnessed.
 i knew that i was frozen with a sort of supernatural terror. i stood there
 with hands clenched, staring—staring at that white shape, which
 seemed to float.
 as i stared, every nerve in my body thrilling, i distinguished the outline
 of the phantom. with a subdued cry, i stepped forward. a new sensation
 claimed me. in that one stride i passed from the horrible to the bizarre.
 i found myself confronted with something tangible, certainly, but
 something whose presence in that place was utterly extravagant—could
 only be reconcilable in the dreams of an opium slave.
 was i awake, was i sane? awake and sane beyond doubt, but surely moving,
 not in the purlieus of limehouse, but in the fantastic realms of
 fairyland.
 swooping, with open arms, i rounded up in an angle against the building
 and gathered in this screaming thing which had inspired in me so keen a
 terror.
 the great, ghostly fan was closed as i did so, and i stumbled back toward
 the stair with my struggling captive tucked under my arm; i mounted into
 one of london’s darkest slums, carrying a beautiful white peacock!
 my adventure had done nothing to relieve the feeling of unreality which
 held me enthralled. grasping the struggling bird firmly by the body, and
 having the long white tail fluttering a yard or so behind me, i returned
 to where the taxi waited.
 “open the door!” i said to the man—who greeted me with such a stare
 of amazement that i laughed outright, though my mirth was but hollow.
 he jumped into the road and did as i directed. making sure that both
 windows were closed, i thrust the peacock into the cab and shut the door
 upon it.
 “for god’s sake, sir!” began the driver—
 “it has probably escaped from some collector’s place on the riverside,” i
 explained, “but one never knows. see that it does not escape again, and if
 at the end of an hour, as arranged, you do not hear from me, take it back
 with you to the river police station.”
 “right you are, sir,” said the man, remounting his seat. “it’s the first
 time i ever saw a peacock in limehouse!”
 it was the first time i had seen one, and the incident struck me as being
 more than odd; it gave me an idea, and a new, faint hope. i returned to
 the head of the steps, at the foot of which i had met with this singular
 experience, and gazed up at the dark building beneath which they led.
 three windows were visible, but they were broken and neglected. one,
 immediately above the arch, had been pasted up with brown paper, and this
 was now peeling off in the rain, a little stream of which trickled down
 from the detached corner to drop, drearily, upon the stone stairs beneath.
 where were the detectives? i could only assume that they had directed
 their attention elsewhere, for had the place not been utterly deserted,
 surely i had been challenged.
 in pursuit of my new idea, i again descended the steps. the persuasion
 (shortly to be verified) that i was close upon the secret hold of the
 chinaman, grew stronger, unaccountably. i had descended some eight steps,
 and was at the darkest part of the archway or tunnel, when confirmation of
 my theories came to me.
 a noose settled accurately upon my shoulders, was snatched tightly about
 my throat, and with a feeling of insupportable agony at the base of my
 skull, and a sudden supreme knowledge that i was being strangled—hanged—i
 lost consciousness!
 how long i remained unconscious, i was unable to determine at the time,
 but i learned later, that it was for no more than half an hour; at any
 rate, recovery was slow.
 the first sensation to return to me was a sort of repetition of the
 asphyxia. the blood seemed to be forcing itself into my eyes—i
 choked—i felt that my end was come. and, raising my hands to my
 throat, i found it to be swollen and inflamed. then the floor upon which i
 lay seemed to be rocking like the deck of a ship, and i glided back again
 into a place of darkness and forgetfulness.
 my second awakening was heralded by a returning sense of smell; for i
 became conscious of a faint, exquisite perfume.
 it brought me to my senses as nothing else could have done, and i sat
 upright with a hoarse cry. i could have distinguished that perfume amid a
 thousand others, could have marked it apart from the rest in a scent
 bazaar. for me it had one meaning, and one meaning only—karamaneh.
 she was near to me, or had been near to me!
 and in the first moments of my awakening, i groped about in the darkness
 blindly seeking her.
 then my swollen throat and throbbing head, together with my utter
 inability to move my neck even slightly, reminded me of the facts as they
 were. i knew in that bitter moment that karamaneh was no longer my friend;
 but, for all her beauty and charm, was the most heartless, the most
 fiendish creature in the service of dr. fu-manchu. i groaned aloud in my
 despair and misery.
 something stirred, near to me in the room, and set my nerves creeping with
 a new apprehension. i became fully alive to the possibilities of the
 darkness.
 to my certain knowledge, dr. fu-manchu at this time had been in england
 for fully three months, which meant that by now he must be equipped with
 all the instruments of destruction, animate and inanimate, which dread
 experience had taught me to associate with him.
 now, as i crouched there in that dark apartment listening for a repetition
 of the sound, i scarcely dared to conjecture what might have occasioned
 it, but my imagination peopled the place with reptiles which writhed upon
 the floor, with tarantulas and other deadly insects which crept upon the
 walls, which might drop upon me from the ceiling at any moment.
 then, since nothing stirred about me, i ventured to move, turning my
 shoulders, for i was unable to move my aching head; and i looked in the
 direction from which a faint, very faint, light proceeded.
 a regular tapping sound now began to attract my attention, and, having
 turned about, i perceived that behind me was a broken window, in places
 patched with brown paper; the corner of one sheet of paper was detached,
 and the rain trickled down upon it with a rhythmical sound.
 in a flash i realized that i lay in the room immediately above the
 archway; and listening intently, i perceived above the other faint sounds
 of the night, or thought that i perceived, the hissing of the gas from the
 extinguished lamp-burner.
 unsteadily i rose to my feet, but found myself swaying like a drunken man.
 i reached out for support, stumbling in the direction of the wall. my foot
 came in contact with something that lay there, and i pitched forward and
 fell....
 i anticipated a crash which would put an end to my hopes of escape, but my
 fall was comparatively noiseless—for i fell upon the body of a man
 who lay bound up with rope close against the wall!
 a moment i stayed as i fell, the chest of my fellow captive rising and
 falling beneath me as he breathed. knowing that my life depended upon
 retaining a firm hold upon myself, i succeeded in overcoming the dizziness
 and nausea which threatened to drown my senses, and, moving back so that i
 knelt upon the floor, i fumbled in my pocket for the electric lamp which i
 had placed there. my raincoat had been removed whilst i was unconscious,
 and with it my pistol, but the lamp was untouched.
 i took it out, pressed the button, and directed the ray upon the face of
 the man beside me.
 it was nayland smith!
 trussed up and fastened to a ring in the wall he lay, having a cork gag
 strapped so tightly between his teeth that i wondered how he had escaped
 suffocation.
 but, although a grayish pallor showed through the tan of his skin, his
 eyes were feverishly bright, and there, as i knelt beside him, i thanked
 heaven, silently but fervently.
 then, in furious haste, i set to work to remove the gag. it was most
 ingeniously secured by means of leather straps buckled at the back of his
 head, but i unfastened these without much difficulty, and he spat out the
 gag, uttering an exclamation of disgust.
 “thank god, old man!” he said, huskily. “thank god that you are alive! i
 saw them drag you in, and i thought...”
 “i have been thinking the same about you for more than twenty-four hours,”
 i said, reproachfully. “why did you start without—”
 “i did not want you to come, petrie,” he replied. “i had a sort of
 premonition. you see it was realized; and instead of being as helpless as
 i, fate has made you the instrument of my release. quick! you have a
 knife? good!” the old, feverish energy was by no means extinguished in
 him. “cut the ropes about my wrists and ankles, but don’t otherwise
 disturb them—”
 i set to work eagerly.
 “now,” smith continued, “put that filthy gag in place again—but you
 need not strap it so tightly! directly they find that you are alive, they
 will treat you the same—you understand? she has been here three
 times—”
 “karamaneh?”...
 “ssh!”
 i heard a sound like the opening of a distant door.
 “quick! the straps of the gag!” whispered smith, “and pretend to recover
 consciousness just as they enter—”
 clumsily i followed his directions, for my fingers were none too steady,
 replaced the lamp in my pocket, and threw myself upon the floor.
 through half-shut eyes, i saw the door open and obtained a glimpse of a
 desolate, empty passage beyond. on the threshold stood karamaneh. she held
 in her hand a common tin oil lamp which smoked and flickered with every
 movement, filling the already none too cleanly air with an odor of burning
 paraffin. she personified the outre; nothing so incongruous as her
 presence in that place could well be imagined. she was dressed as i
 remembered once to have seen her two years before, in the gauzy silks of
 the harem. there were pearls glittering like great tears amid the cloud of
 her wonderful hair. she wore broad gold bangles upon her bare arms, and
 her fingers were laden with jewelry. a heavy girdle swung from her hips,
 defining the lines of her slim shape, and about one white ankle was a gold
 band.
 as she appeared in the doorway i almost entirely closed my eyes, but my
 gaze rested fascinatedly upon the little red slippers which she wore.
 again i detected the exquisite, elusive perfume, which, like a breath of
 musk, spoke of the orient; and, as always, it played havoc with my reason,
 seeming to intoxicate me as though it were the very essence of her
 loveliness.
 but i had a part to play, and throwing out one clenched hand so that my
 fist struck upon the floor, i uttered a loud groan, and made as if to rise
 upon my knees.
 one quick glimpse i had of her wonderful eyes, widely opened and turned
 upon me with such an enigmatical expression as set my heart leaping wildly—then,
 stepping back, karamaneh placed the lamp upon the boards of the passage
 and clapped her hands.
 as i sank upon the floor in assumed exhaustion, a chinaman with a
 perfectly impassive face, and a burman, whose pock-marked, evil
 countenance was set in an apparently habitual leer, came running into the
 room past the girl.
 with a hand which trembled violently, she held the lamp whilst the two
 yellow ruffians tied me. i groaned and struggled feebly, fixing my gaze
 upon the lamp-bearer in a silent reproach which was by no means without
 its effect.
 she lowered her eyes, and i could see her biting her lip, whilst the color
 gradually faded from her cheeks. then, glancing up again quickly, and
 still meeting that reproachful stare, she turned her head aside
 altogether, and rested one hand upon the wall, swaying slightly as she did
 so.
 it was a singular ordeal for more than one of that incongruous group; but
 in order that i may not be charged with hypocrisy or with seeking to hide
 my own folly, i confess, here, that when again i found myself in darkness,
 my heart was leaping not because of the success of my strategy, but
 because of the success of that reproachful glance which i had directed
 toward the lovely, dark-eyed karamaneh, toward the faithless, evil
 karamaneh! so much for myself.
 the door had not been closed ten seconds, ere smith again was spitting out
 the gag, swearing under his breath, and stretching his cramped limbs free
 from their binding. within a minute from the time of my trussing, i was a
 free man again; save that look where i would—to right, to left, or
 inward, to my own conscience—two dark eyes met mine, enigmatically.
 “what now?” i whispered.
 “let me think,” replied smith. “a false move would destroy us.”
 “how long have you been here?”
 “since last night.”
 “is fu-manchu—”
 “fu-manchu is here!” replied smith, grimly—“and not only fu-manchu,
 but—another.”
 “another!”
 “a higher than fu-manchu, apparently. i have an idea of the identity of
 this person, but no more than an idea. something unusual is going on,
 petrie; otherwise i should have been a dead man twenty-four hours ago.
 something even more important than my death engages fu-manchu’s attention—and
 this can only be the presence of the mysterious visitor. your seductive
 friend, karamaneh, is arrayed in her very becoming national costume in his
 honor, i presume.” he stopped abruptly; then added: “i would give five
 hundred pounds for a glimpse of that visitor’s face!”
 “is burke—”
 “god knows what has become of burke, petrie! we were both caught napping
 in the establishment of the amiable shen-yan, where, amid a very mixed
 company of poker players, we were losing our money like gentlemen.”
 “but weymouth—”
 “burke and i had both been neatly sand-bagged, my dear petrie, and removed
 elsewhere, some hours before weymouth raided the gaming-house. oh! i don’t
 know how they smuggled us away with the police watching the place; but my
 presence here is sufficient evidence of the fact. are you armed?”
 “no; my pistol was in my raincoat, which is missing.”
 in the dim light from the broken window, i could see smith tugging
 reflectively at the lobe of his left ear.
 “i am without arms, too,” he mused. “we might escape from the window—”
 “it’s a long drop!”
 “ah! i imagined so. if only i had a pistol, or a revolver—”
 “what should you do?”
 “i should present myself before the important meeting, which, i am
 assured, is being held somewhere in this building; and to-night would see
 the end of my struggle with the fu-manchu group—the end of the whole
 yellow menace! for not only is fu-manchu here, petrie, with all his gang
 of assassins, but he whom i believe to be the real head of the group—a
 certain mandarin—is here also!”
 smith stepped quietly across the room and tried the door. it proved to be
 unlocked, and an instant later, we were both outside in the passage.
 coincident with our arrival there, arose a sudden outcry from some place
 at the westward end. a high-pitched, grating voice, in which guttural
 notes alternated with a serpent-like hissing, was raised in anger.
 “dr. fu-manchu!” whispered smith, grasping my arm.
 indeed, it was the unmistakable voice of the chinaman, raised hysterically
 in one of those outbursts which in the past i had diagnosed as symptomatic
 of dangerous mania.
 the voice rose to a scream, the scream of some angry animal rather than
 anything human. then, chokingly, it ceased. another short sharp cry
 followed—but not in the voice of fu-manchu—a dull groan, and
 the sound of a fall.
 with smith still grasping my wrist, i shrank back into the doorway, as
 something that looked in the darkness like a great ball of fluff came
 rapidly along the passage toward me. just at my feet the thing stopped and
 i made it out for a small animal. the tiny, gleaming eyes looked up at me,
 and, chattering wickedly, the creature bounded past and was lost from
 view.
 it was dr. fu-manchu’s marmoset.
 smith dragged me back into the room which we had just left. as he partly
 reclosed the door, i heard the clapping of hands. in a condition of most
 dreadful suspense, we waited; until a new, ominous sound proclaimed
 itself. some heavy body was being dragged into the passage. i heard the
 opening of a trap. exclamations in guttural voices told of a heavy task in
 progress; there was a great straining and creaking—whereupon the
 trap was softly reclosed.
 smith bent to my ear.
 “fu-manchu has chastised one of his servants,” he whispered. “there will
 be food for the grappling-irons to-night!”
 i shuddered violently, for, without smith’s words, i knew that a bloody
 deed had been done in that house within a few yards of where we stood.
 in the new silence, i could hear the drip, drip, drip of the rain outside
 the window; then a steam siren hooted dismally upon the river, and i
 thought how the screw of that very vessel, even as we listened, might be
 tearing the body of fu-manchu’s servant!
 “have you some one waiting?” whispered smith, eagerly.
 “how long was i insensible?”
 “about half an hour.”
 “then the cabman will be waiting.”
 “have you a whistle with you?”
 i felt in my coat pocket.
 “yes,” i reported.
 “good! then we will take a chance.”
 again we slipped out into the passage and began a stealthy progress to the
 west. ten paces amid absolute darkness, and we found ourselves abreast of
 a branch corridor. at the further end, through a kind of little window, a
 dim light shone.
 “see if you can find the trap,” whispered smith; “light your lamp.”
 i directed the ray of the pocket-lamp upon the floor, and there at my feet
 was a square wooden trap. as i stooped to examine it, i glanced back,
 painfully, over my shoulder—and saw nayland smith tiptoeing away
 from me along the passage toward the light!
 inwardly i cursed his folly, but the temptation to peep in at that little
 window proved too strong for me, as it had proved too strong for him.
 fearful that some board would creak beneath my tread, i followed; and side
 by side we two crouched, looking into a small rectangular room. it was a
 bare and cheerless apartment with unpapered walls and carpetless floor. a
 table and a chair constituted the sole furniture.
 seated in the chair, with his back toward us, was a portly chinaman who
 wore a yellow, silken robe. his face, it was impossible to see; but he was
 beating his fist upon the table, and pouring out a torrent of words in a
 thin, piping voice. so much i perceived at a glance; then, into view at
 the distant end of the room, paced a tall, high-shouldered figure—a
 figure unforgettable, at once imposing and dreadful, stately and sinister.
 with the long, bony hands behind him, fingers twining and intertwining
 serpentinely about the handle of a little fan, and with the pointed chin
 resting on the breast of the yellow robe, so that the light from the lamp
 swinging in the center of the ceiling gleamed upon the great, dome-like
 brow, this tall man paced somberly from left to right.
 he cast a sidelong, venomous glance at the voluble speaker out of
 half-shut eyes; in the act they seemed to light up as with an internal
 luminance; momentarily they sparkled like emeralds; then their brilliance
 was filmed over as in the eyes of a bird when the membrane is lowered.
 my blood seemed to chill, and my heart to double its pulsations; beside me
 smith was breathing more rapidly than usual. i knew now the explanation of
 the feeling which had claimed me when first i had descended the stone
 stairs. i knew what it was that hung like a miasma over that house. it was
 the aura, the glamour, which radiated from this wonderful and evil man as
 light radiates from radium. it was the vril, the force, of dr. fu-manchu.
 i began to move away from the window. but smith held my wrist as in a
 vise. he was listening raptly to the torrential speech of the chinaman who
 sat in the chair; and i perceived in his eyes the light of a sudden
 comprehension.
 as the tall figure of the chinese doctor came pacing into view again,
 smith, his head below the level of the window, pushed me gently along the
 passage.
 regaining the site of the trap, he whispered to me: “we owe our lives,
 petrie, to the national childishness of the chinese! a race of ancestor
 worshipers is capable of anything, and dr. fu-manchu, the dreadful being
 who has rained terror upon europe stands in imminent peril of disgrace for
 having lost a decoration.”
 “what do you mean, smith?”
 “i mean that this is no time for delay, petrie! here, unless i am greatly
 mistaken, lies the rope by means of which you made your entrance. it shall
 be the means of your exit. open the trap!”
 handling the lamp to smith, i stooped and carefully raised the trap-door.
 at which moment, a singular and dramatic thing happened.
 a softly musical voice—the voice of my dreams!—spoke.
 “not that way! o god, not that way!”
 in my surprise and confusion i all but let the trap fall, but i retained
 sufficient presence of mind to replace it gently. standing upright, i
 turned... and there, with her little jeweled hand resting upon smith’s
 arm, stood karamaneh!
 in all my experience of him, i had never seen nayland smith so utterly
 perplexed. between anger, distrust and dismay, he wavered; and each
 passing emotion was written legibly upon the lean bronzed features. rigid
 with surprise, he stared at the beautiful face of the girl. she, although
 her hand still rested upon smith’s arm, had her dark eyes turned upon me
 with that same enigmatical expression. her lips were slightly parted, and
 her breast heaved tumultuously.
 this ten seconds of silence in which we three stood looking at one another
 encompassed the whole gamut of human emotion. the silence was broken by
 karamaneh.
 “they will be coming back that way!” she whispered, bending eagerly toward
 me. (how, in the most desperate moments, i loved to listen to that odd,
 musical accent!) “please, if you would save your life, and spare mine,
 trust me!”—she suddenly clasped her hands together and looked up
 into my face, passionately—“trust me—just for once—and i
 will show you the way!”
 nayland smith never removed his gaze from her for a moment, nor did he
 stir.
 “oh!” she whispered, tremulously, and stamped one little red slipper upon
 the floor. “won’t you heed me? come, or it will be too late!”
 i glanced anxiously at my friend; the voice of dr. fu-manchu, now raised
 in anger, was audible above the piping tones of the other chinaman. and as
 i caught smith’s eye, in silent query—the trap at my feet began
 slowly to lift!
 karamaneh stifled a little sobbing cry; but the warning came too late. a
 hideous yellow face with oblique squinting eyes, appeared in the aperture.
 i found myself inert, useless; i could neither think nor act. nayland
 smith, however, as if instinctively, delivered a pitiless kick at the head
 protruding above the trap.
 a sickening crushing sound, with a sort of muffled snap, spoke of a broken
 jaw-bone; and with no word or cry, the chinaman fell. as the trap
 descended with a bang, i heard the thud of his body on the stone stairs
 beneath.
 but we were lost. karamaneh fled along one of the passages lightly as a
 bird, and disappeared as dr. fu-manchu, his top lip drawn up above his
 teeth in the manner of an angry jackal, appeared from the other.
 “this way!” cried smith, in a voice that rose almost to a shriek—“this
 way!”—and he led toward the room overhanging the steps.
 off we dashed with panic swiftness, only to find that this retreat also
 was cut off. dimly visible in the darkness was a group of yellow men, and
 despite the gloom, the curved blades of the knives which they carried
 glittered menacingly. the passage was full of dacoits!
 smith and i turned, together. the trap was raised again, and the burman,
 who had helped to tie me, was just scrambling up beside dr. fu-manchu, who
 stood there watching us, a shadowy, sinister figure.
 “the game’s up, petrie!” muttered smith. “it has been a long fight, but
 fu-manchu wins!”
 “not entirely!” i cried. i whipped the police whistle from my pocket, and
 raised it to my lips; but brief as the interval had been, the dacoits were
 upon me.
 a sinewy brown arm shot over my shoulder and the whistle was dashed from
 my grasp. then came a whirl of maelstrom fighting with smith and myself
 ever sinking lower amid a whirlpool, as it seemed, of blood-lustful eyes,
 yellow fangs, and gleaming blades.
 i had some vague idea that the rasping voice of fu-manchu broke once
 through the turmoil, and when, with my wrists tied behind me, i emerged
 from the strife to find myself lying beside smith in the passage, i could
 only assume that the chinaman had ordered his bloody servants to take us
 alive; for saving numerous bruises and a few superficial cuts, i was
 unwounded.
 the place was utterly deserted again, and we two panting captives found
 ourselves alone with dr. fu-manchu. the scene was unforgettable; that
 dimly lighted passage, its extremities masked in shadow, and the tall,
 yellow-robed figure of the satanic chinaman towering over us where we lay.
 he had recovered his habitual calm, and as i peered at him through the
 gloom i was impressed anew with the tremendous intellectual force of the
 man. he had the brow of a genius, the features of a born ruler; and even
 in that moment i could find time to search my memory, and to discover that
 the face, saving the indescribable evil of its expression, was identical
 with that of seti, the mighty pharaoh who lies in the cairo museum.
 down the passage came leaping and gamboling the doctor’s marmoset.
 uttering its shrill, whistling cry, it leaped onto his shoulder, clutched
 with its tiny fingers at the scanty, neutral-colored hair upon his crown,
 and bent forward, peering grotesquely into that still, dreadful face.
 dr. fu-manchu stroked the little creature; and crooned to it, as a mother
 to her infant. only this crooning, and the labored breathing of smith and
 myself, broke that impressive stillness.
 suddenly the guttural voice began:
 “you come at an opportune time, mr. commissioner nayland smith, and dr.
 petrie; at a time when the greatest man in china flatters me with a visit.
 in my absence from home, a tremendous honor has been conferred upon me,
 and, in the hour of this supreme honor, dishonor and calamity have
 befallen! for my services to china—the new china, the china of the
 future—i have been admitted by the sublime prince to the sacred
 order of the white peacock.”
 warming to his discourse, he threw wide his arms, hurling the chattering
 marmoset fully five yards along the corridor.
 “o god of cathay!” he cried, sibilantly, “in what have i sinned that this
 catastrophe has been visited upon my head! learn, my two dear friends,
 that the sacred white peacock brought to these misty shores for my undying
 glory, has been lost to me! death is the penalty of such a sacrilege;
 death shall be my lot, since death i deserve.”
 covertly smith nudged me with his elbow. i knew what the nudge was
 designed to convey; he would remind me of his words—anent the
 childish trifles which sway the life of intellectual china.
 personally, i was amazed. that fu-manchu’s anger, grief, sorrow and
 resignation were real, no one watching him, and hearing his voice, could
 doubt.
 he continued:
 “by one deed, and one deed alone, may i win a lighter punishment. by one
 deed, and the resignation of all my titles, all my lands, and all my
 honors, may i merit to be spared to my work—which has only begun.”
 i knew now that we were lost, indeed; these were confidences which our
 graves should hold inviolate! he suddenly opened fully those blazing green
 eyes and directed their baneful glare upon nayland smith.
 “the director of the universe,” he continued, softly, “has relented toward
 me. to-night, you die! to-night, the arch-enemy of our caste shall be no
 more. this is my offering—the price of redemption...”
 my mind was working again, and actively. i managed to grasp the stupendous
 truth—and the stupendous possibility.
 dr. fu-manchu was in the act of clapping his hands, when i spoke.
 “stop!” i cried.
 he paused, and the weird film, which sometimes became visible in his eyes,
 now obscured their greenness, and lent him the appearance of a blind man.
 “dr. petrie,” he said, softly, “i shall always listen to you with
 respect.”
 “i have an offer to make,” i continued, seeking to steady my voice. “give
 us our freedom, and i will restore your shattered honor—i will
 restore the sacred peacock!”
 dr. fu-manchu bent forward until his face was so close to mine that i
 could see the innumerable lines which, an intricate network, covered his
 yellow skin.
 “speak!” he hissed. “you lift up my heart from a dark pit!”
 “i can restore your white peacock,” i said; “i and i alone, know where it
 is!”—and i strove not to shrink from the face so close to mine.
 upright shot the tall figure; high above his head fu-manchu threw his arms—and
 a light of exaltation gleamed in the now widely opened, catlike eyes.
 “o god!” he screamed, frenziedly—“o god of the golden age! like a
 phoenix i arise from the ashes of myself!” he turned to me. “quick! quick!
 make your bargain! end my suspense!”
 smith stared at me like a man dazed; but, ignoring him, i went on:
 “you will release me, now, immediately. in another ten minutes it will be
 too late; my friend will remain. one of your—servants—can
 accompany me, and give the signal when i return with the peacock. mr.
 nayland smith and yourself, or another, will join me at the corner of the
 street where the raid took place last night. we shall then give you ten
 minutes grace, after which we shall take whatever steps we choose.”
 “agreed!” cried fu-manchu. “i ask but one thing from an englishman; your
 word of honor?”
 “i give it.”
 “i, also,” said smith, hoarsely.
 ten minutes later, nayland smith and i, standing beside the cab, whose
 lights gleamed yellowly through the mist, exchanged a struggling,
 frightened bird for our lives—capitulated with the enemy of the
 white race.
 with characteristic audacity—and characteristic trust in the british
 sense of honor—dr. fu-manchu came in person with nayland smith, in
 response to the wailing signal of the dacoit who had accompanied me. no
 word was spoken, save that the cabman suppressed a curse of amazement; and
 the chinaman, his sinister servant at his elbow, bowed low—and left
 us, surely to the mocking laughter of the gods!
 i leaped up in bed with a great start.
 my sleep was troubled often enough in these days, which immediately
 followed our almost miraculous escape, from the den of fu-manchu; and now
 as i crouched there, nerves aquiver—listening—listening—i
 could not be sure if this dank panic which possessed me had its origin in
 nightmare or in something else.
 surely a scream, a choking cry for help, had reached my ears; but now,
 almost holding my breath in that sort of nervous tensity peculiar to one
 aroused thus, i listened, and the silence seemed complete. perhaps i had
 been dreaming...
 “help! petrie! help!...”
 it was nayland smith in the room above me!
 my doubts were dissolved; this was no trick of an imagination disordered.
 some dreadful menace threatened my friend. not delaying even to snatch my
 dressing-gown, i rushed out on to the landing, up the stairs, bare-footed
 as i was, threw open the door of smith’s room and literally hurled myself
 in.
 those cries had been the cries of one assailed, had been uttered, i
 judged, in the brief interval of a life and death struggle; had been
 choked off...
 a certain amount of moonlight found access to the room, without spreading
 so far as the bed in which my friend lay. but at the moment of my headlong
 entrance, and before i had switched on the light, my gaze automatically
 was directed to the pale moonbeam streaming through the window and down on
 to one corner of the sheep-skin rug beside the bed.
 there came a sound of faint and muffled coughing.
 what with my recent awakening and the panic at my heart, i could not claim
 that my vision was true; but across this moonbeam passed a sort of gray
 streak, for all the world as though some long thin shape had been
 withdrawn, snakelike, from the room, through the open window... from
 somewhere outside the house, and below, i heard the cough again, followed
 by a sharp cracking sound like the lashing of a whip.
 i depressed the switch, flooding the room with light, and as i leaped
 forward to the bed a word picture of what i had seen formed in my mind;
 and i found that i was thinking of a gray feather boa.
 “smith!” i cried (my voice seemed to pitch itself, unwilled, in a very
 high key), “smith, old man!”
 he made no reply, and a sudden, sorrowful fear clutched at my
 heart-strings. he was lying half out of bed flat upon his back, his head
 at a dreadful angle with his body. as i bent over him and seized him by
 the shoulders, i could see the whites of his eyes. his arms hung limply,
 and his fingers touched the carpet.
 “my god!” i whispered—“what has happened?”
 i heaved him back onto the pillow, and looked anxiously into his face.
 habitually gaunt, the flesh so refined away by the consuming nervous
 energy of the man as to reveal the cheekbones in sharp prominence, he now
 looked truly ghastly. his skin was so sunbaked as to have changed
 constitutionally; nothing could ever eradicate that tan. but to-night a
 fearful grayness was mingled with the brown, his lips were purple... and
 there were marks of strangulation upon the lean throat—ever
 darkening weals made by clutching fingers.
 he began to breathe stentoriously and convulsively, inhalation being
 accompanied by a significant gurgling in the throat. but now my calm was
 restored in face of a situation which called for professional attention.
 i aided my friend’s labored respirations by the usual means, setting to
 work vigorously; so that presently he began to clutch at his inflamed
 throat which that murderous pressure had threatened to close.
 i could hear sounds of movement about the house, showing that not i alone
 had been awakened by those hoarse screams.
 “it’s all right, old man,” i said, bending over him; “brace up!”
 he opened his eyes—they looked bleared and bloodshot—and gave
 me a quick glance of recognition.
 “it’s all right, smith!” i said—“no! don’t sit up; lie there for a
 moment.”
 i ran across to the dressing-table, whereon i perceived his flask to lie,
 and mixed him a weak stimulant with which i returned to the bed.
 as i bent over him again, my housekeeper appeared in the doorway, pale and
 wide-eyed.
 “there is no occasion for alarm,” i said over my shoulder; “mr. smith’s
 nerves are overwrought and he was awakened by some disturbing dream. you
 can return to bed, mrs. newsome.”
 nayland smith seemed to experience much difficulty in swallowing the
 contents of the tumbler which i held to his lips; and, from the way in
 which he fingered the swollen glands, i could see that his throat, which i
 had vigorously massaged, was occasioning him great pain. but the danger
 was past, and already that glassy look was disappearing from his eyes, nor
 did they protrude so unnaturally.
 “god, petrie!” he whispered, “that was a near shave! i haven’t the
 strength of a kitten!”
 “the weakness will pass off,” i replied; “there will be no collapse, now.
 a little more fresh air...”
 i stood up, glancing at the windows, then back at smith, who forced a wry
 smile in answer to my look.
 “couldn’t be done, petrie,” he said, huskily.
 his words referred to the state of the windows. although the night was
 oppressively hot, these were only opened some four inches at top and
 bottom. further opening was impossible because of iron brackets screwed
 firmly into the casements which prevented the windows being raised or
 lowered further.
 it was a precaution adopted after long experience of the servants of dr.
 fu-manchu.
 now, as i stood looking from the half-strangled man upon the bed to those
 screwed-up windows, the fact came home to my mind that this precaution had
 proved futile. i thought of the thing which i had likened to a feather
 boa; and i looked at the swollen weals made by clutching fingers upon the
 throat of nayland smith.
 the bed stood fully four feet from the nearest window.
 i suppose the question was written in my face; for, as i turned again to
 smith, who, having struggled upright, was still fingering his injured
 throat ruefully:
 “god only knows, petrie!” he said; “no human arm could have reached me...”
 for us, the night was ended so far as sleep was concerned. arrayed in his
 dressing-gown, smith sat in the white cane chair in my study with a glass
 of brandy-and-water beside him, and (despite my official prohibition) with
 the cracked briar which had sent up its incense in many strange and dark
 places of the east and which yet survived to perfume these prosy rooms in
 suburban london, steaming between his teeth. i stood with my elbow resting
 upon the mantelpiece looking down at him where he sat.
 “by god! petrie,” he said, yet again, with his fingers straying gently
 over the surface of his throat, “that was a narrow shave—a damned
 narrow shave!”
 “narrower than perhaps you appreciate, old man,” i replied. “you were a
 most unusual shade of blue when i found you...”
 “i managed,” said smith evenly, “to tear those clutching fingers away for
 a moment and to give a cry for help. it was only for a moment, though.
 petrie! they were fingers of steel—of steel!”
 “the bed,” i began...
 “i know that,” rapped smith. “i shouldn’t have been sleeping in it, had it
 been within reach of the window; but, knowing that the doctor avoids noisy
 methods, i had thought myself fairly safe so long as i made it impossible
 for any one actually to enter the room...”
 “i have always insisted, smith,” i cried, “that there was danger! what of
 poisoned darts? what of the damnable reptiles and insects which form part
 of the armory of fu-manchu?”
 “familiarity breeds contempt, i suppose,” he replied. “but as it happened
 none of those agents was employed. the very menace that i sought to avoid
 reached me somehow. it would almost seem that dr. fu-manchu deliberately
 accepted the challenge of those screwed-up windows! hang it all, petrie!
 one cannot sleep in a room hermetically sealed, in weather like this! it’s
 positively burmese; and although i can stand tropical heat, curiously
 enough the heat of london gets me down almost immediately.”
 “the humidity; that’s easily understood. but you’ll have to put up with it
 in the future. after nightfall our windows must be closed entirely,
 smith.”
 nayland smith knocked out his pipe upon the side of the fireplace. the
 bowl sizzled furiously, but without delay he stuffed broad-cut mixture
 into the hot pipe, dropping a liberal quantity upon the carpet during the
 process. he raised his eyes to me, and his face was very grim.
 “petrie,” he said, striking a match on the heel of his slipper, “the
 resources of dr. fu-manchu are by no means exhausted. before we quit this
 room it is up to us to come to a decision upon a certain point.” he got
 his pipe well alight. “what kind of thing, what unnatural, distorted
 creature, laid hands upon my throat to-night? i owe my life, primarily, to
 you, old man, but, secondarily, to the fact that i was awakened, just
 before the attack—by the creature’s coughing—by its vile,
 high-pitched coughing...”
 i glanced around at the books upon my shelves. often enough, following
 some outrage by the brilliant chinese doctor whose genius was directed to
 the discovery of new and unique death agents, we had obtained a clue in
 those works of a scientific nature which bulk largely in the library of a
 medical man. there are creatures, there are drugs, which, ordinarily
 innocuous, may be so employed as to become inimical to human life; and in
 the distorting of nature, in the disturbing of balances and the diverting
 of beneficent forces into strange and dangerous channels, dr. fu-manchu
 excelled. i had known him to enlarge, by artificial culture, a minute
 species of fungus so as to render it a powerful agent capable of attacking
 man; his knowledge of venomous insects has probably never been paralleled
 in the history of the world; whilst, in the sphere of pure toxicology, he
 had, and has, no rival; the borgias were children by comparison. but, look
 where i would, think how i might, no adequate explanation of this latest
 outrage seemed possible along normal lines.
 “there’s the clue,” said nayland smith, pointing to a little ash-tray upon
 the table near by. “follow it if you can.”
 but i could not.
 “as i have explained,” continued my friend, “i was awakened by a sound of
 coughing; then came a death grip on my throat, and instinctively my hands
 shot out in search of my attacker. i could not reach him; my hands came in
 contact with nothing palpable. therefore i clutched at the fingers which
 were dug into my windpipe, and found them to be small—as the marks
 show—and hairy. i managed to give that first cry for help, then with
 all my strength i tried to unfasten the grip that was throttling the life
 out of me. at last i contrived to move one of the hands, and i called out
 again, though not so loudly. then both the hands were back again; i was
 weakening; but i clawed like a madman at the thin, hairy arms of the
 strangling thing, and with a blood-red mist dancing before my eyes, i
 seemed to be whirling madly round and round until all became a blank.
 evidently i used my nails pretty freely—and there’s the trophy.”
 for the twentieth time, i should think, i carried the ash-tray in my hand
 and laid it immediately under the table-lamp in order to examine its
 contents. in the little brass bowl lay a blood-stained fragment of grayish
 hair attached to a tatter of skin. this fragment of epidermis had an odd
 bluish tinge, and the attached hair was much darker at the roots than
 elsewhere. saving its singular color, it might have been torn from the
 forearm of a very hirsute human; but although my thoughts wandered
 unfettered, north, south, east and west; although, knowing the resources
 of fu-manchu, i considered all the recognized mongolian types, and, in
 quest of hirsute mankind, even roamed far north among the blubbering
 esquimo; although i glanced at australasia, at central africa, and passed
 in mental review the dark places of the congo, nowhere in the known world,
 nowhere in the history of the human species, could i come upon a type of
 man answering to the description suggested by our strange clue.
 nayland smith was watching me curiously as i bent over the little brass
 ash-tray.
 “you are puzzled,” he rapped in his short way.
 “so am i—utterly puzzled. fu-manchu’s gallery of monstrosities
 clearly has become reinforced; for even if we identified the type, we
 should not be in sight of our explanation.”
 “you mean,” i began...
 “fully four feet from the window, petrie, and that window but a few inches
 open! look”—he bent forward, resting his chest against the table,
 and stretched out his hand toward me. “you have a rule there; just
 measure.”
 setting down the ash-tray, i opened out the rule and measured the distance
 from the further edge of the table to the tips of smith’s fingers.
 “twenty-eight inches—and i have a long reach!” snapped smith,
 withdrawing his arm and striking a match to relight his pipe. “there’s one
 thing, petrie, often proposed before, which now we must do without delay.
 the ivy must be stripped from the walls at the back. it’s a pity, but we
 can not afford to sacrifice our lives to our sense of the aesthetic. what
 do you make of the sound like the cracking of a whip?”
 “i make nothing of it, smith,” i replied, wearily. “it might have been a
 thick branch of ivy breaking beneath the weight of a climber.”
 “did it sound like it?”
 “i must confess that the explanation does not convince me, but i have no
 better one.”
 smith, permitting his pipe to go out, sat staring straight before him, and
 tugging at the lobe of his left ear.
 “the old bewilderment is seizing me,” i continued. “at first, when i
 realized that dr. fu-manchu was back in england, when i realized that an
 elaborate murder-machine was set up somewhere in london, it seemed unreal,
 fantastical. then i met—karamaneh! she, whom we thought to be his
 victim, showed herself again to be his slave. now, with weymouth and
 scotland yard at work, the old secret evil is established again in our
 midst, unaccountably—our lives are menaced—sleep is a danger—every
 shadow threatens death... oh! it is awful.”
 smith remained silent; he did not seem to have heard my words. i knew
 these moods and had learnt that it was useless to seek to interrupt them.
 with his brows drawn down, and his deep-set eyes staring into space, he
 sat there gripping his cold pipe so tightly that my own jaw muscles ached
 sympathetically. no man was better equipped than this gaunt british
 commissioner to stand between society and the menace of the yellow doctor;
 i respected his meditations, for, unlike my own, they were informed by an
 intimate knowledge of the dark and secret things of the east, of that
 mysterious east out of which fu-manchu came, of that jungle of noxious
 things whose miasma had been wafted westward with the implacable chinaman.
 i walked quietly from the room, occupied with my own bitter reflections.
 “you say you have two items of news for me?” said nayland smith, looking
 across the breakfast table to where inspector weymouth sat sipping coffee.
 “there are two points—yes,” replied the scotland yard man, whilst
 smith paused, egg-spoon in hand, and fixed his keen eyes upon the speaker.
 “the first is this: the headquarters of the yellow group is no longer in
 the east end.”
 “how can you be sure of that?”
 “for two reasons. in the first place, that district must now be too hot to
 hold dr. fu-manchu; in the second place, we have just completed a
 house-to-house inquiry which has scarcely overlooked a rathole or a rat.
 that place where you say fu-manchu was visited by some chinese mandarin;
 where you, mr. smith,” and—glancing in my direction—“you,
 doctor, were confined for a time—”
 “yes?” snapped smith, attacking his egg.
 “well,” continued the inspector, “it is all deserted, now. there is not
 the slightest doubt that the chinaman has fled to some other abode. i am
 certain of it. my second piece of news will interest you very much, i am
 sure. you were taken to the establishment of the chinaman, shen-yan, by a
 certain ex-officer of new york police—burke...”
 “good god!” cried smith, looking up with a start; “i thought they had
 him!”
 “so did i,” replied weymouth grimly; “but they haven’t! he got away in the
 confusion following the raid, and has been hiding ever since with a
 cousin, a nurseryman out upminster way...”
 “hiding?” snapped smith.
 “exactly—hiding. he has been afraid to stir ever since, and has
 scarcely shown his nose outside the door. he says he is watched night and
 day.”
 “then how...”
 “he realized that something must be done,” continued the inspector, “and
 made a break this morning. he is so convinced of this constant
 surveillance that he came away secretly, hidden under the boxes of a
 market-wagon. he landed at covent garden in the early hours of this
 morning and came straight away to the yard.”
 “what is he afraid of exactly?”
 inspector weymouth put down his coffee cup and bent forward slightly.
 “he knows something,” he said in a low voice, “and they are aware that he
 knows it!”
 “and what is this he knows?”
 nayland smith stared eagerly at the detective.
 “every man has his price,” replied weymouth with a smile, “and burke seems
 to think that you are a more likely market than the police authorities.”
 “i see,” snapped smith. “he wants to see me?”
 “he wants you to go and see him,” was the reply. “i think he anticipates
 that you may make a capture of the person or persons spying upon him.”
 “did he give you any particulars?”
 “several. he spoke of a sort of gipsy girl with whom he had a short
 conversation one day, over the fence which divides his cousin’s flower
 plantations from the lane adjoining.”
 “gipsy girl!” i whispered, glancing rapidly at smith.
 “i think you are right, doctor,” said weymouth with his slow smile; “it
 was karamaneh. she asked him the way to somewhere or other and got him to
 write it upon a loose page of his notebook, so that she should not forget
 it.”
 “you hear that, petrie?” rapped smith.
 “i hear it,” i replied, “but i don’t see any special significance in the
 fact.”
 “i do!” rapped smith; “i didn’t sit up the greater part of last night
 thrashing my weary brains for nothing! but i am going to the british
 museum to-day, to confirm a certain suspicion.” he turned to weymouth.
 “did burke go back?” he demanded abruptly.
 “he returned hidden under the empty boxes,” was the reply. “oh! you never
 saw a man in such a funk in all your life!”
 “he may have good reasons,” i said.
 “he has good reasons!” replied nayland smith grimly; “if that man really
 possesses information inimical to the safety of fu-manchu, he can only
 escape doom by means of a miracle similar to that which has hitherto
 protected you and me.”
 “burke insists,” said weymouth at this point, “that something comes almost
 every night after dusk, slinking about the house—it’s an old
 farmhouse, i understand; and on two or three occasions he has been
 awakened (fortunately for him he is a light sleeper) by sounds of coughing
 immediately outside his window. he is a man who sleeps with a pistol under
 his pillow, and more than once, on running to the window, he has had a
 vague glimpse of some creature leaping down from the tiles of the roof,
 which slopes up to his room, into the flower beds below...”
 “creature!” said smith, his gray eyes ablaze now—“you said
 creature!”
 “i used the word deliberately,” replied weymouth, “because burke seems to
 have the idea that it goes on all fours.”
 there was a short and rather strained silence. then:
 “in descending a sloping roof,” i suggested, “a human being would probably
 employ his hands as well as his feet.”
 “quite so,” agreed the inspector. “i am merely reporting the impression of
 burke.”
 “has he heard no other sound?” rapped smith; “one like the cracking of dry
 branches, for instance?”
 “he made no mention of it,” replied weymouth, staring.
 “and what is the plan?”
 “one of his cousin’s vans,” said weymouth, with his slight smile, “has
 remained behind at covent garden and will return late this afternoon. i
 propose that you and i, mr. smith, imitate burke and ride down to
 upminster under the empty boxes!”
 nayland smith stood up, leaving his breakfast half finished, and began to
 wander up and down the room, reflectively tugging at his ear. then he
 began to fumble in the pockets of his dressing-gown and finally produced
 the inevitable pipe, dilapidated pouch, and box of safety matches. he
 began to load the much-charred agent of reflection.
 “do i understand that burke is actually too afraid to go out openly even
 in daylight?” he asked suddenly.
 “he has not hitherto left his cousin’s plantations at all,” replied
 weymouth. “he seems to think that openly to communicate with the
 authorities, or with you, would be to seal his death warrant.”
 “he’s right,” snapped smith.
 “therefore he came and returned secretly,” continued the inspector; “and
 if we are to do any good, obviously we must adopt similar precautions. the
 market wagon, loaded in such a way as to leave ample space in the interior
 for us, will be drawn up outside the office of messrs. pike and pike, in
 covent garden, until about five o’clock this afternoon. at, say, half past
 four, i propose that we meet there and embark upon the journey.”
 the speaker glanced in my direction interrogatively.
 “include me in the program,” i said. “will there be room in the wagon?”
 “certainly,” was the reply; “it is most commodious, but i cannot guarantee
 its comfort.”
 nayland smith promenaded the room, unceasingly, and presently he walked
 out altogether, only to return ere the inspector and i had had time to
 exchange more than a glance of surprise, carrying a brass ash-tray. he
 placed this on a corner of the breakfast table before weymouth.
 “ever seen anything like that?” he inquired.
 the inspector examined the gruesome relic with obvious curiosity, turning
 it over with the tip of his little finger and manifesting considerable
 repugnance—in touching it at all. smith and i watched him in
 silence, and, finally, placing the tray again upon the table, he looked up
 in a puzzled way.
 “it’s something like the skin of a water rat,” he said.
 nayland smith stared at him fixedly.
 “a water rat? now that you come to mention it, i perceive a certain
 resemblance—yes. but”—he had been wearing a silk scarf about
 his throat and now he unwrapped it—“did you ever see a water rat
 that could make marks like these?”
 weymouth started to his feet with some muttered exclamation.
 “what is this?” he cried. “when did it happen, and how?”
 in his own terse fashion, nayland smith related the happenings of the
 night. at the conclusion of the story:
 “by heaven!” whispered weymouth, “the thing on the roof—the coughing
 thing that goes on all fours, seen by burke...”
 “my own idea exactly!” cried smith...
 “fu-manchu,” i said excitedly, “has brought some new, some dreadful
 creature, from burma...”
 “no, petrie,” snapped smith, turning upon me suddenly. “not from burma—from
 abyssinia.”
 that day was destined to be an eventful one; a day never to be forgotten
 by any of us concerned in those happenings which i have to record. early
 in the morning nayland smith set off for the british museum to pursue his
 mysterious investigations, and having performed my brief professional
 round (for, as nayland smith had remarked on one occasion, this was a
 beastly healthy district), i found, having made the necessary
 arrangements, that, with over three hours to spare, i had nothing to
 occupy my time until the appointment in covent garden market. my lonely
 lunch completed, a restless fit seized me, and i felt unable to remain
 longer in the house. inspired by this restlessness, i attired myself for
 the adventure of the evening, not neglecting to place a pistol in my
 pocket, and, walking to the neighboring tube station, i booked to charing
 cross, and presently found myself rambling aimlessly along the crowded
 streets. led on by what link of memory i know not, i presently drifted
 into new oxford street, and looked up with a start—to learn that i
 stood before the shop of a second-hand book-seller where once two years
 before i had met karamaneh.
 the thoughts conjured up at that moment were almost too bitter to be
 borne, and without so much as glancing at the books displayed for sale, i
 crossed the roadway, entered museum street, and, rather in order to
 distract my mind than because i contemplated any purchase, began to
 examine the oriental pottery, egyptian statuettes, indian armor, and other
 curios, displayed in the window of an antique dealer.
 but, strive as i would to concentrate my mind upon the objects in the
 window, my memories persistently haunted me, and haunted me to the
 exclusion even of the actualities. the crowds thronging the pavement, the
 traffic in new oxford street, swept past unheeded; my eyes saw nothing of
 pot nor statuette, but only met, in a misty imaginative world, the glance
 of two other eyes—the dark and beautiful eyes of karamaneh. in the
 exquisite tinting of a chinese vase dimly perceptible in the background of
 the shop, i perceived only the blushing cheeks of karamaneh; her face rose
 up, a taunting phantom, from out of the darkness between a hideous, gilded
 idol and an indian sandalwood screen.
 i strove to dispel this obsessing thought, resolutely fixing my attention
 upon a tall etruscan vase in the corner of the window, near to the shop
 door. was i losing my senses indeed? a doubt of my own sanity momentarily
 possessed me. for, struggle as i would to dispel the illusion—there,
 looking out at me over that ancient piece of pottery, was the bewitching
 face of the slave-girl!
 probably i was glaring madly, and possibly i attracted the notice of the
 passers-by; but of this i cannot be certain, for all my attention was
 centered upon that phantasmal face, with the cloudy hair, slightly parted
 red lips, and the brilliant dark eyes which looked into mine out of the
 shadows of the shop.
 it was bewildering—it was uncanny; for, delusion or verity, the
 glamour prevailed. i exerted a great mental effort, stepped to the door,
 turned the handle, and entered the shop with as great a show of composure
 as i could muster.
 a curtain draped in a little door at the back of one counter swayed
 slightly, with no greater violence than may have been occasioned by the
 draught. but i fixed my eyes upon this swaying curtain almost fiercely...
 as an impassive half-caste of some kind who appeared to be a strange cross
 between a graeco-hebrew and a japanese, entered and quite unemotionally
 faced me, with a slight bow.
 so wholly unexpected was this apparition that i started back.
 “can i show you anything, sir?” inquired the new arrival, with a second
 slight inclination of the head.
 i looked at him for a moment in silence. then:
 “i thought i saw a lady of my acquaintance here a moment ago,” i said.
 “was i mistaken?”
 “quite mistaken, sir,” replied the shopman, raising his black eyebrows
 ever so slightly; “a mistake possibly due to a reflection in the window.
 will you take a look around now that you are here?”
 “thank you,” i replied, staring him hard in the face; “at some other
 time.”
 i turned and quitted the shop abruptly. either i was mad, or karamaneh was
 concealed somewhere therein.
 however, realizing my helplessness in the matter, i contented myself with
 making a mental note of the name which appeared above the establishment—j.
 salaman—and walked on, my mind in a chaotic condition and my heart
 beating with unusual rapidity.
 within my view, from the corner of the room where i sat in deepest shadow,
 through the partly opened window (it was screwed, like our own) were rows
 of glass-houses gleaming in the moonlight, and, beyond them, orderly ranks
 of flower-beds extending into a blue haze of distance. by reason of the
 moon’s position, no light entered the room, but my eyes, from long
 watching, were grown familiar with the darkness, and i could see burke
 quite clearly as he lay in the bed between my post and the window. i
 seemed to be back again in those days of the troubled past when first
 nayland smith and i had come to grips with the servants of dr. fu-manchu.
 a more peaceful scene than this flower-planted corner of essex it would be
 difficult to imagine; but, either because of my knowledge that its peace
 was chimerical, or because of that outflung consciousness of danger which,
 actually, or in my imagination, preceded the coming of the chinaman’s
 agents, to my seeming the silence throbbed electrically and the night was
 laden with stilly omens.
 already cramped by my journey in the market-cart, i found it difficult to
 remain very long in any one position. what information had burke to sell?
 he had refused, for some reason, to discuss the matter that evening, and
 now, enacting the part allotted him by nayland smith, he feigned sleep
 consistently, although at intervals he would whisper to me his doubts and
 fears.
 all the chances were in our favor to-night; for whilst i could not doubt
 that dr. fu-manchu was set upon the removal of the ex-officer of new york
 police, neither could i doubt that our presence in the farm was unknown to
 the agents of the chinaman. according to burke, constant attempts had been
 made to achieve fu-manchu’s purpose, and had only been frustrated by his
 (burke’s) wakefulness.
 there was every probability that another attempt would be made to-night.
 any one who has been forced by circumstance to undertake such a vigil as
 this will be familiar with the marked changes (corresponding with phases
 of the earth’s movement) which take place in the atmosphere, at midnight,
 at two o’clock, and again at four o’clock. during those fours hours falls
 a period wherein all life is at its lowest ebb, and every physician is
 aware that there is a greater likelihood of a patient’s passing between
 midnight and four a. m., than at any other period during the cycle of the
 hours.
 to-night i became specially aware of this lowering of vitality, and now,
 with the night at that darkest phase which precedes the dawn, an
 indescribable dread, such as i had known before in my dealings with the
 chinaman, assailed me, when i was least prepared to combat it. the
 stillness was intense. then:
 “here it is!” whispered burke from the bed.
 the chill at the very center of my being, which but corresponded with the
 chill of all surrounding nature at that hour, became intensified, keener,
 at the whispered words.
 i rose stealthily out of my chair, and from my nest of shadows watched—watched
 intently, the bright oblong of the window...
 without the slightest heralding sound—a black silhouette crept up
 against the pane... the silhouette of a small, malformed head, a dog-like
 head, deep-set in square shoulders. malignant eyes peered intently in.
 higher it arose—that wicked head—against the window, then
 crouched down on the sill and became less sharply defined as the creature
 stooped to the opening below. there was a faint sound of sniffing.
 judging from the stark horror which i experienced, myself, i doubted, now,
 if burke could sustain the role allotted him. in beneath the slightly
 raised window came a hand, perceptible to me despite the darkness of the
 room. it seemed to project from the black silhouette outside the pane, to
 be thrust forward—and forward—and forward... that small hand
 with the outstretched fingers.
 the unknown possesses unique terrors; and since i was unable to conceive
 what manner of thing this could be, which, extending its incredibly long
 arms, now sought the throat of the man upon the bed, i tasted of that sort
 of terror which ordinarily one knows only in dreams.
 “quick, sir—quick!” screamed burke, starting up from the pillow.
 the questing hands had reached his throat!
 choking down an urgent dread that i had of touching the thing which
 reached through the window to kill the sleeper, i sprang across the room
 and grasped the rigid, hairy forearms.
 heavens! never have i felt such muscles, such tendons, as those beneath
 the hirsute skin! they seemed to be of steel wire, and with a sudden
 frightful sense of impotence, i realized that i was as powerless as a
 child to relax that strangle-hold. burke was making the most frightful
 sounds and quite obviously was being asphyxiated before my eyes!
 “smith!” i cried, “smith! help! help! for god’s sake!”
 despite the confusion of my mind i became aware of sounds outside and
 below me. twice the thing at the window coughed; there was an incessant,
 lash-like cracking, then some shouted words which i was unable to make
 out; and finally the staccato report of a pistol.
 snarling like that of a wild beast came from the creature with the hairy
 arms, together with renewed coughing. but the steel grip relaxed not one
 iota.
 i realized two things: the first, that in my terror at the suddenness of
 the attack i had omitted to act as pre-arranged: the second, that i had
 discredited the strength of the visitant, whilst smith had foreseen it.
 desisting in my vain endeavor to pit my strength against that of the
 nameless thing, i sprang back across the room and took up the weapon which
 had been left in my charge earlier in the night, but which i had been
 unable to believe it would be necessary to employ. this was a sharp and
 heavy axe, which nayland smith, when i had met him in covent garden, had
 brought with him, to the great amazement of weymouth and myself.
 as i leaped back to the window and uplifted this primitive weapon, a
 second shot sounded from below, and more fierce snarling, coughing, and
 guttural mutterings assailed my ears from beyond the pane.
 lifting the heavy blade, i brought it down with all my strength upon the
 nearer of those hairy arms where it crossed the window-ledge, severing
 muscle, tendon and bone as easily as a knife might cut cheese....
 a shriek—a shriek neither human nor animal, but gruesomely
 compounded of both—followed... and merged into a choking cough. like
 a flash the other shaggy arm was withdrawn, and some vaguely-seen body
 went rolling down the sloping red tiles and crashed on to the ground
 beneath.
 with a second piercing shriek, louder than that recently uttered by burke,
 wailing through the night from somewhere below, i turned desperately to
 the man on the bed, who now was become significantly silent. a candle,
 with matches, stood upon a table hard by, and, my fingers far from steady,
 i set about obtaining a light. this accomplished, i stood the candle upon
 the little chest-of-drawers and returned to burke’s side.
 “merciful god!” i cried.
 of all the pictures which remain in my memory, some of them dark enough, i
 can find none more horrible than that which now confronted me in the dim
 candle-light. burke lay crosswise on the bed, his head thrown back and
 sagging; one rigid hand he held in the air, and with the other grasped the
 hairy forearm which i had severed with the ax; for, in a death-grip, the
 dead fingers were still fastened, vise-like, at his throat.
 his face was nearly black, and his eyes projected from their sockets
 horribly. mastering my repugnance, i seized the hideous piece of bleeding
 anatomy and strove to release it. it defied all my efforts; in death it
 was as implacable as in life. i took a knife from my pocket, and, tendon
 by tendon, cut away that uncanny grip from burke’s throat...
 but my labor was in vain. burke was dead!
 i think i failed to realize this for some time. my clothes were sticking
 clammily to my body; i was bathed in perspiration, and, shaking furiously,
 i clutched at the edge of the window, avoiding the bloody patch upon the
 ledge, and looked out over the roofs to where, in the more distant
 plantations, i could hear excited voices. what had been the meaning of
 that scream which i had heard but to which in my frantic state of mind i
 had paid comparatively little attention?
 there was a great stirring all about me.
 “smith!” i cried from the window; “smith, for mercy’s sake where are you?”
 footsteps came racing up the stairs. behind me the door burst open and
 nayland smith stumbled into the room.
 “god!” he said, and started back in the doorway.
 “have you got it, smith?” i demanded hoarsely. “in sanity’s name what is
 it—what is it?”
 “come downstairs,” replied smith quietly, “and see for yourself.” he
 turned his head aside from the bed.
 very unsteadily i followed him down the stairs and through the rambling
 old house out into the stone-paved courtyard. there were figures moving at
 the end of a long alleyway between the glass houses, and one, carrying a
 lantern, stooped over something which lay upon the ground.
 “that’s burke’s cousin with the lantern,” whispered smith in my ear;
 “don’t tell him yet.”
 i nodded, and we hurried up to join the group. i found myself looking down
 at one of those thick-set burmans whom i always associated with
 fu-manchu’s activities. he lay quite flat, face downward; but the back of
 his head was a shapeless blood-dotted mass, and a heavy stock-whip, the
 butt end ghastly because of the blood and hair which clung to it, lay
 beside him. i started back appalled as smith caught my arm.
 “it turned on its keeper!” he hissed in my ear. “i wounded it twice from
 below, and you severed one arm; in its insensate fury, its unreasoning
 malignity, it returned—and there lies its second victim...”
 “then...”
 “it’s gone, petrie! it has the strength of four men even now. look!”
 he stooped, and from the clenched left hand of the dead burman, extracted
 a piece of paper and opened it.
 “hold the lantern a moment,” he said.
 in the yellow light he glanced at the scrap of paper.
 “as i expected—a leaf of burke’s notebook; it worked by scent.” he
 turned to me with an odd expression in his gray eyes. “i wonder what piece
 of my personal property fu-manchu has pilfered,” he said, “in order to
 enable it to sleuth me?”
 he met the gaze of the man holding the lantern.
 “perhaps you had better return to the house,” he said, looking him
 squarely in the eyes.
 the other’s face blanched.
 “you don’t mean, sir—you don’t mean...”
 “brace up!” said smith, laying his hand upon his shoulder. “remember—he
 chose to play with fire!”
 one wild look the man cast from smith to me, then went off, staggering,
 toward the farm.
 “smith,” i began...
 he turned to me with an impatient gesture.
 “weymouth has driven into upminster,” he snapped; “and the whole district
 will be scoured before morning. they probably motored here, but the sounds
 of the shots will have enabled whoever was with the car to make good his
 escape. and exhausted from loss of blood, its capture is only a matter of
 time, petrie.”
 nayland smith returned from the telephone. nearly twenty-four hours had
 elapsed since the awful death of burke.
 “no news, petrie,” he said, shortly. “it must have crept into some
 inaccessible hole to die.”
 i glanced up from my notes. smith settled into the white cane armchair,
 and began to surround himself with clouds of aromatic smoke. i took up a
 half-sheet of foolscap covered with penciled writing in my friend’s
 cramped characters, and transcribed the following, in order to complete my
 account of the latest fu-manchu outrage:
 “the amharun, a semitic tribe allied to the falashas, who have been
 settled for many generations in the southern province of shoa (abyssinia)
 have been regarded as unclean and outcast, apparently since the days of
 menelek—son of suleyman and the queen of sheba—from whom they
 claim descent. apart from their custom of eating meat cut from living
 beasts, they are accursed because of their alleged association with the
 cynocephalus hamadryas (sacred baboon). i, myself, was taken to a hut on
 the banks of the hawash and shown a creature... whose predominant trait
 was an unreasoning malignity toward... and a ferocious tenderness for the
 society of its furry brethren. its powers of scent were fully equal to
 those of a bloodhound, whilst its abnormally long forearms possessed
 incredible strength... a cynocephalyte such as this, contracts phthisis
 even in the more northern provinces of abyssinia...”
 “you have not explained to me, smith,” i said, having completed this note,
 “how you got in touch with fu-manchu; how you learnt that he was not dead,
 as we had supposed, but living—active.”
 nayland smith stood up and fixed his steely eyes upon me with an
 indefinable expression in them. then:
 “no,” he replied; “i haven’t. do you wish to know?”
 “certainly,” i said with surprise; “is there any reason why i should not?”
 “there is no real reason,” said smith; “or”—staring at me very hard—“i
 hope there is no real reason.”
 “what do you mean?”
 “well”—he grabbed up his pipe from the table and began furiously to
 load it—“i blundered upon the truth one day in rangoon. i was
 walking out of a house which i occupied there for a time, and as i swung
 around the corner into the main street, i ran into—literally ran
 into...”
 again he hesitated oddly; then closed up his pouch and tossed it into the
 cane chair. he struck a match.
 “i ran into karamaneh,” he continued abruptly, and began to puff away at
 his pipe, filling the air with clouds of tobacco smoke.
 i caught my breath. this was the reason why he had kept me so long in
 ignorance of the story. he knew of my hopeless, uncrushable sentiments
 toward the gloriously beautiful but utterly hypocritical and evil eastern
 girl who was perhaps the most dangerous of all dr. fu-manchu’s servants;
 for the power of her loveliness was magical, as i knew to my cost.
 “what did you do?” i asked quietly, my fingers drumming upon the table.
 “naturally enough,” continued smith, “with a cry of recognition i held out
 both my hands to her, gladly. i welcomed her as a dear friend regained; i
 thought of the joy with which you would learn that i had found the missing
 one; i thought how you would be in rangoon just as quickly as the fastest
 steamer could get you there...”
 “well?”
 “karamaneh started back and treated me to a glance of absolute animosity.
 no recognition was there, and no friendliness—only a sort of
 scornful anger.”
 he shrugged his shoulders and began to walk up and down the room.
 “i do not know what you would have done in the circumstances, petrie, but
 “yes?”
 “i dealt with the situation rather promptly, i think. i simply picked her
 up without another word, right there in the public street, and raced back
 into the house, with her kicking and fighting like a little demon! she did
 not shriek or do anything of that kind, but fought silently like a vicious
 wild animal. oh! i had some scars, i assure you; but i carried her up into
 my office, which fortunately was empty at the time, plumped her down in a
 chair, and stood looking at her.”
 “go on,” i said rather hollowly; “what next?”
 “she glared at me with those wonderful eyes, an expression of implacable
 hatred in them! remembering all that we had done for her; remembering our
 former friendship; above all, remembering you—this look of hers
 almost made me shiver. she was dressed very smartly in european fashion,
 and the whole thing had been so sudden that as i stood looking at her i
 half expected to wake up presently and find it all a day-dream. but it was
 real—as real as her enmity. i felt the need for reflection, and
 having vainly endeavored to draw her into conversation, and elicited no
 other answer than this glare of hatred—i left her there, going out
 and locking the door behind me.”
 “very high-handed?”
 “a commissioner has certain privileges, petrie, and any action i might
 choose to take was not likely to be questioned. there was only one window
 to the office, and it was fully twenty feet above the level; it overlooked
 a narrow street off the main thoroughfare (i think i have explained that
 the house stood on a corner) so i did not fear her escaping. i had an
 important engagement which i had been on my way to fulfil when the
 encounter took place, and now, with a word to my native servant—who
 chanced to be downstairs—i hurried off.”
 smith’s pipe had gone out as usual, and he proceeded to relight it,
 whilst, with my eyes lowered, i continued to drum upon the table.
 “this boy took her some tea later in the afternoon,” he continued, “and
 apparently found her in a more placid frame of mind. i returned
 immediately after dusk, and he reported that when last he had looked in,
 about half an hour earlier, she had been seated in an armchair reading a
 newspaper (i may mention that everything of value in the office was
 securely locked up!) i was determined upon a certain course by this time,
 and i went slowly upstairs, unlocked the door, and walked into the
 darkened office. i turned up the light... the place was empty!”
 “empty!”
 “the window was open, and the bird flown! oh! it was not so simple a
 flight—as you would realize if you knew the place. the street, which
 the window overlooked, was bounded by a blank wall, on the opposite side,
 for thirty or forty yards along; and as we had been having heavy rains, it
 was full of glutinous mud. furthermore, the boy whom i had left in charge
 had been sitting in the doorway immediately below the office window
 watching for my return ever since his last visit to the room above...”
 “she must have bribed him,” i said bitterly—“or corrupted him with
 her infernal blandishments.”
 “i’ll swear she did not,” rapped smith decisively. “i know my man, and
 i’ll swear she did not. there were no marks in the mud of the road to show
 that a ladder had been placed there; moreover, nothing of the kind could
 have been attempted whilst the boy was sitting in the doorway; that was
 evident. in short, she did not descend into the roadway and did not come
 out by the door...”
 “was there a gallery outside the window?”
 “no; it was impossible to climb to right or left of the window or up on to
 the roof. i convinced myself of that.”
 “but, my dear man!” i cried, “you are eliminating every natural mode of
 egress! nothing remains but flight.”
 “i am aware, petrie, that nothing remains but flight; in other words i
 have never to this day understood how she quitted the room. i only know
 that she did.”
 “and then?”
 “i saw in this incredible escape the cunning hand of dr. fu-manchu—saw
 it at once. peace was ended; and i set to work along certain channels
 without delay. in this manner i got on the track at last, and learned,
 beyond the possibility of doubt, that the chinese doctor lived—nay!
 was actually on his way to europe again!”
 there followed a short silence. then:
 “i suppose it’s a mystery that will be cleared up some day,” concluded
 smith; “but to date the riddle remains intact.” he glanced at the clock.
 “i have an appointment with weymouth; therefore, leaving you to the task
 of solving this problem which thus far has defied my own efforts, i will
 get along.”
 he read a query in my glance.
 “oh! i shall not be late,” he added; “i think i may venture out alone on
 this occasion without personal danger.”
 nayland smith went upstairs to dress, leaving me seated at my writing
 table, deep in thought. my notes upon the renewed activity of dr.
 fu-manchu were stacked at my left hand, and, opening a new writing block,
 i commenced to add to them particulars of this surprising event in rangoon
 which properly marked the opening of the chinaman’s second campaign. smith
 looked in at the door on his way out, but seeing me thus engaged, did not
 disturb me.
 i think i have made it sufficiently evident in these records that my
 practice was not an extensive one, and my hour for receiving patients
 arrived and passed with only two professional interruptions.
 my task concluded, i glanced at the clock, and determined to devote the
 remainder of the evening to a little private investigation of my own. from
 nayland smith i had preserved the matter a secret, largely because i
 feared his ridicule; but i had by no means forgotten that i had seen, or
 had strongly imagined that i had seen, karamaneh—that beautiful
 anomaly, who (in modern london) asserted herself to be a slave—in
 the shop of an antique dealer not a hundred yards from the british museum!
 a theory was forming in my brain, which i was burningly anxious to put to
 the test. i remembered how, two years before, i had met karamaneh near to
 this same spot; and i had heard inspector weymouth assert positively that
 fu-manchu’s headquarters were no longer in the east end, as of yore. there
 seemed to me to be a distinct probability that a suitable center had been
 established for his reception in this place, so much less likely to be
 suspected by the authorities. perhaps i attached too great a value to what
 may have been a delusion; perhaps my theory rested upon no more solid
 foundation than the belief that i had seen karamaneh in the shop of the
 curio dealer. if her appearance there should prove to have been
 phantasmal, the structure of my theory would be shattered at its base.
 to-night i should test my premises, and upon the result of my
 investigations determine my future action.
 museum street certainly did not seem a likely spot for dr. fu-manchu to
 establish himself, yet, unless my imagination had strangely deceived me,
 from the window of the antique dealer who traded under the name of j.
 salaman, those wonderful eyes of karamaneh like the velvet midnight of the
 orient, had looked out at me.
 as i paced slowly along the pavement toward that lighted window, my heart
 was beating far from normally, and i cursed the folly which, in spite of
 all, refused to die, but lingered on, poisoning my life. comparative quiet
 reigned in museum street, at no time a busy thoroughfare, and, excepting
 another shop at the museum end, commercial activities had ceased there.
 the door of a block of residential chambers almost immediately opposite to
 the shop which was my objective, threw out a beam of light across the
 pavement, but not more than two or three people were visible upon either
 side of the street.
 i turned the knob of the door and entered the shop.
 the same dark and immobile individual whom i had seen before, and whose
 nationality defied conjecture, came out from the curtained doorway at the
 back to greet me.
 “good evening, sir,” he said monotonously, with a slight inclination of
 the head; “is there anything which you desire to inspect?”
 “i merely wish to take a look around,” i replied. “i have no particular
 item in view.”
 the shop man inclined his head again, swept a yellow hand comprehensively
 about, as if to include the entire stock, and seated himself on a chair
 behind the counter.
 i lighted a cigarette with such an air of nonchalance as i could summon to
 the operation, and began casually to inspect the varied objects of
 interest loading the shelves and tables about me. i am bound to confess
 that i retain no one definite impression of this tour. vases i handled,
 statuettes, egyptian scarabs, bead necklaces, illuminated missals,
 portfolios of old prints, jade ornaments, bronzes, fragments of rare lace,
 early printed books, assyrian tablets, daggers, roman rings, and a hundred
 other curiosities, leisurely, and i trust with apparent interest, yet
 without forming the slightest impression respecting any one of them.
 probably i employed myself in this way for half an hour or more, and
 whilst my hands busied themselves among the stock of j. salaman, my mind
 was occupied entirely elsewhere. furtively i was studying the shopman
 himself, a human presentment of a chinese idol; i was listening and
 watching; especially i was watching the curtained doorway at the back of
 the shop.
 “we close at about this time, sir,” the man interrupted me, speaking in
 the emotionless, monotonous voice which i had noted before.
 i replaced upon the glass counter a little sekhet boat, carved in wood and
 highly colored, and glanced up with a start. truly my methods were
 amateurish; i had learnt nothing; i was unlikely to learn anything. i
 wondered how nayland smith would have conducted such an inquiry, and i
 racked my brains for some means of penetrating into the recesses of the
 establishment. indeed, i had been seeking such a plan for the past half an
 hour, but my mind had proved incapable of suggesting one.
 why i did not admit failure i cannot imagine, but, instead, i began to tax
 my brains anew for some means of gaining further time; and, as i looked
 about the place, the shopman very patiently awaiting my departure, i
 observed an open case at the back of the counter. the three lower shelves
 were empty, but upon the fourth shelf squatted a silver buddha.
 “i should like to examine the silver image yonder,” i said; “what price
 are you asking for it?”
 “it is not for sale, sir,” replied the man, with a greater show of
 animation than he had yet exhibited.
 “not for sale!” i said, my eyes ever seeking the curtained doorway; “how’s
 that?”
 “it is sold.”
 “well, even so, there can be no objection to my examining it?”
 “it is not for sale, sir.”
 such a rebuff from a tradesman would have been more than sufficient to
 call for a sharp retort at any other time, but now it excited the
 strangest suspicions. the street outside looked comparatively deserted,
 and prompted, primarily, by an emotion which i did not pause to analyze, i
 adopted a singular measure; without doubt i relied upon the unusual powers
 vested in nayland smith to absolve me in the event of error. i made as if
 to go out into the street, then turned, leaped past the shopman, ran
 behind the counter, and grasped at the silver buddha!
 that i was likely to be arrested for attempted larceny i cared not; the
 idea that karamaneh was concealed somewhere in the building ruled
 absolutely, and a theory respecting this silver image had taken possession
 of my mind. exactly what i expected to happen at that moment i cannot say,
 but what actually happened was far more startling than anything i could
 have imagined.
 at the instant that i grasped the figure i realized that it was attached
 to the woodwork; in the next i knew that it was a handle ... as i tried to
 pull it toward me i became aware that this handle was the handle of a
 door. for that door swung open before me, and i found myself at the foot
 of a flight of heavily carpeted stairs.
 anxious as i had been to proceed a moment before, i was now trebly anxious
 to retire, and for this reason: on the bottom step of the stair, facing
 me, stood dr. fu-manchu!
 i cannot conceive that any ordinary mortal ever attained to anything like
 an intimacy with dr. fu-manchu; i cannot believe that any man could ever
 grow used to his presence, could ever cease to fear him. i suppose i had
 set eyes upon fu-manchu some five or six times prior to this occasion, and
 now he was dressed in the manner which i always associated with him,
 probably because it was thus i first saw him. he wore a plain yellow robe,
 and, with his pointed chin resting upon his bosom, he looked down at me,
 revealing a great expanse of the marvelous brow with its sparse,
 neutral-colored hair.
 never in my experience have i known such force to dwell in the glance of
 any human eye as dwelt in that of this uncanny being. his singular
 affliction (if affliction it were), the film or slight membrane which
 sometimes obscured the oblique eyes, was particularly evident at the
 moment that i crossed the threshold, but now, as i looked up at dr.
 fu-manchu, it lifted—revealing the eyes in all their emerald
 greenness.
 the idea of physical attack upon this incredible being seemed childish—inadequate.
 but, following that first instant of stupefaction, i forced myself to
 advance upon him.
 a dull, crushing blow descended on the top of my skull, and i became
 oblivious of all things.
 my return to consciousness was accompanied by tremendous pains in my head,
 whereby, from previous experience, i knew that a sandbag had been used
 against me by some one in the shop, presumably by the immobile shopman.
 this awakening was accompanied by none of those hazy doubts respecting
 previous events and present surroundings which are the usual symptoms of
 revival from sudden unconsciousness; even before i opened my eyes, before
 i had more than a partial command of my senses, i knew that, with my
 wrists handcuffed behind me, i lay in a room which was also occupied by
 dr. fu-manchu. this absolute certainty of the chinaman’s presence was
 evidenced, not by my senses, but only by an inner consciousness, and the
 same that always awoke into life at the approach not only of fu-manchu in
 person but of certain of his uncanny servants.
 a faint perfume hung in the air about me; i do not mean that of any
 essence or of any incense, but rather the smell which is suffused by
 oriental furniture, by oriental draperies; the indefinable but
 unmistakable perfume of the east.
 thus, london has a distinct smell of its own, and so has paris, whilst the
 difference between marseilles and suez, for instance, is even more marked.
 now, the atmosphere surrounding me was eastern, but not of the east that i
 knew; rather it was far eastern. perhaps i do not make myself very clear,
 but to me there was a mysterious significance in that perfumed atmosphere.
 i opened my eyes.
 i lay upon a long low settee, in a fairly large room which was furnished
 as i had anticipated in an absolutely oriental fashion. the two windows
 were so screened as to have lost, from the interior point of view, all
 resemblance to european windows, and the whole structure of the room had
 been altered in conformity, bearing out my idea that the place had been
 prepared for fu-manchu’s reception some time before his actual return. i
 doubt if, east or west, a duplicate of that singular apartment could be
 found.
 the end in which i lay, was, as i have said, typical of an eastern house,
 and a large, ornate lantern hung from the ceiling almost directly above
 me. the further end of the room was occupied by tall cases, some of them
 containing books, but the majority filled with scientific paraphernalia;
 rows of flasks and jars, frames of test-tubes, retorts, scales, and other
 objects of the laboratory. at a large and very finely carved table sat dr.
 fu-manchu, a yellow and faded volume open before him, and some dark red
 fluid, almost like blood, bubbling in a test-tube which he held over the
 flame of a bunsen-burner.
 the enormously long nail of his right index finger rested upon the opened
 page of the book to which he seemed constantly to refer, dividing his
 attention between the volume, the contents of the test-tube, and the
 progress of a second experiment, or possibly a part of the same, which was
 taking place upon another corner of the littered table.
 a huge glass retort (the bulb was fully two feet in diameter), fitted with
 a liebig’s condenser, rested in a metal frame, and within the bulb,
 floating in an oily substance, was a fungus some six inches high, shaped
 like a toadstool, but of a brilliant and venomous orange color. three flat
 tubes of light were so arranged as to cast violet rays upward into the
 retort, and the receiver, wherein condensed the product of this strange
 experiment, contained some drops of a red fluid which may have been
 identical with that boiling in the test-tube.
 these things i perceived at a glance: then the filmy eyes of dr. fu-manchu
 were raised from the book, turned in my direction, and all else was
 forgotten.
 “i regret,” came the sibilant voice, “that unpleasant measures were
 necessary, but hesitation would have been fatal. i trust, dr. petrie, that
 you suffer no inconvenience?”
 to this speech no reply was possible, and i attempted none.
 “you have long been aware of my esteem for your acquirements,” continued
 the chinaman, his voice occasionally touching deep guttural notes, “and
 you will appreciate the pleasure which this visit affords me. i kneel at
 the feet of my silver buddha. i look to you, when you shall have overcome
 your prejudices—due to ignorance of my true motives—to assist
 me in establishing that intellectual control which is destined to be the
 new world force. i bear you no malice for your ancient enmity, and even
 now”—he waved one yellow hand toward the retort—“i am
 conducting an experiment designed to convert you from your
 misunderstanding, and to adjust your perspective.”
 quite unemotionally he spoke, then turned again to his book, his test-tube
 and retort, in the most matter-of-fact way imaginable. i do not think the
 most frenzied outburst on his part, the most fiendish threats, could have
 produced such effect upon me as those cold and carefully calculated words,
 spoken in that unique voice which rang about the room sibilantly. in its
 tones, in the glance of the green eyes, in the very pose of the gaunt,
 high-shouldered body, there was power—force.
 i counted myself lost, and in view of the doctor’s words, studied the
 progress of the experiment with frightful interest. but a few moments
 sufficed in which to realize that, for all my training, i knew as little
 of chemistry—of chemistry as understood by this man’s genius—as
 a junior student in surgery knows of trephining. the process in operation
 was a complete mystery to me; the means and the end alike
 incomprehensible.
 thus, in the heavy silence of that room, a silence only broken by the
 regular bubbling from the test tube, i found my attention straying from
 the table to the other objects surrounding it; and at one of them my gaze
 stopped and remained chained with horror.
 it was a glass jar, some five feet in height and filled with viscous fluid
 of a light amber color. out from this peered a hideous, dog-like face, low
 browed, with pointed ears and a nose almost hoggishly flat. by the
 death-grin of the face the gleaming fangs were revealed; and the body, the
 long yellow-gray body, rested, or seemed to rest, upon short, malformed
 legs, whilst one long limp arm, the right, hung down straightly in the
 preservative. the left arm had been severed above the elbow.
 fu-manchu, finding his experiment to be proceeding favorably, lifted his
 eyes to me again.
 “you are interested in my poor cynocephalyte?” he said; and his eyes were
 filmed like the eyes of one afflicted with cataract. “he was a devoted
 servant, dr. petrie, but the lower influences in his genealogy, sometimes
 conquered. then he got out of hand; and at last he was so ungrateful
 toward those who had educated him, that, in one of those paroxysms of his,
 he attacked and killed a most faithful burman, one of my oldest
 followers.”
 fu-manchu returned to his experiment.
 not the slightest emotion had he exhibited thus far, but had chatted with
 me as any other scientist might chat with a friend who casually visits his
 laboratory. the horror of the thing was playing havoc with my own
 composure, however. there i lay, fettered, in the same room with this man
 whose existence was a menace to the entire white race, whilst placidly he
 pursued an experiment designed, if his own words were believable, to cut
 me off from my kind—to wreak some change, psychological or
 physiological i knew not; to place me, it might be, upon a level with such
 brute-things as that which now hung, half floating, in the glass jar!
 something i knew of the history of that ghastly specimen, that thing
 neither man nor ape; for within my own knowledge had it not attempted the
 life of nayland smith, and was it not i who, with an ax, had maimed it in
 the instant of one of its last slayings?
 of these things dr. fu-manchu was well aware, so that his placid speech
 was doubly, trebly horrible to my ears. i sought, furtively, to move my
 arms, only to realize that, as i had anticipated, the handcuffs were
 chained to a ring in the wall behind me. the establishments of dr.
 fu-manchu were always well provided with such contrivances as these.
 i uttered a short, harsh laugh. fu-manchu stood up slowly from the table,
 and, placing the test-tube in a rack, stood the latter carefully upon a
 shelf at his side.
 “i am happy to find you in such good humor,” he said softly. “other
 affairs call me; and, in my absence, that profound knowledge of chemistry,
 of which i have had evidence in the past, will enable you to follow with
 intelligent interest the action of these violet rays upon this
 exceptionally fine specimen of siberian amanita muscaria. at some future
 time, possibly when you are my guest in china—which country i am now
 making arrangements for you to visit—i shall discuss with you some
 lesser-known properties of this species; and i may say that one of your
 first tasks when you commence your duties as assistant in my laboratory in
 kiang-su, will be to conduct a series of twelve experiments, which i have
 outlined, into other potentialities of this unique fungus.”
 he walked quietly to a curtained doorway, with his cat-like yet awkward
 gait, lifted the drapery, and, with a slight nod in my direction, went out
 of the room.
 how long i lay there alone i had no means of computing. my mind was busy
 with many matters, but principally concerned with my fate in the immediate
 future. that dr. fu-manchu entertained for me a singular kind of regard, i
 had had evidence before. he had formed the erroneous opinion that i was an
 advanced scientist who could be of use to him in his experiments and i was
 aware that he cherished a project of transporting me to some place in
 china where his principal laboratory was situated. respecting the means
 which he proposed to employ, i was unlikely to forget that this man, who
 had penetrated further along certain byways of science than seemed humanly
 possible, undoubtedly was master of a process for producing artificial
 catalepsy. it was my lot, then, to be packed in a chest (to all intents
 and purposes a dead man for the time being) and despatched to the interior
 of china!
 what a fool i had been. to think that i had learned nothing from my long
 and dreadful experience of the methods of dr. fu-manchu; to think that i
 had come alone in quest of him; that, leaving no trace behind me, i had
 deliberately penetrated to his secret abode!
 i have said that my wrists were manacled behind me, the manacles being
 attached to a chain fastened in the wall. i now contrived, with extreme
 difficulty, to reverse the position of my hands; that is to say, i climbed
 backward through the loop formed by my fettered arms, so that instead of
 their being locked behind me, they now were locked in front.
 then i began to examine the fetters, learning, as i had anticipated, that
 they fastened with a lock. i sat gazing at the steel bracelets in the
 light of the lamp which swung over my head, and it became apparent to me
 that i had gained little by my contortion.
 a slight noise disturbed these unpleasant reveries. it was nothing less
 than the rattling of keys!
 for a moment i wondered if i had heard aright, or if the sound portended
 the coming of some servant of the doctor, who was locking up the
 establishment for the night. the jangling sound was repeated, and in such
 a way that i could not suppose it to be accidental. some one was
 deliberately rattling a small bunch of keys in an adjoining room.
 and now my heart leaped wildly—then seemed to stand still.
 with a low whistling cry a little gray shape shot through the doorway by
 which fu-manchu had retired, and rolled, like a ball of fluff blown by the
 wind, completely under the table which bore the weird scientific
 appliances of the chinaman; the advent of the gray object was accompanied
 by a further rattling of keys.
 my fear left me, and a mighty anxiety took its place. this creature which
 now crouched chattering at me from beneath the big table was fu-manchu’s
 marmoset, and in the intervals of its chattering and grimacing, it
 nibbled, speculatively, at the keys upon the ring which it clutched in its
 tiny hands. key after key it sampled in this manner, evincing a growing
 dissatisfaction with the uncrackable nature of its find.
 one of those keys might be that of the handcuffs!
 i could not believe that the tortures of tantulus were greater than were
 mine at this moment. in all my hopes of rescue or release, i had included
 nothing so strange, so improbable as this. a sort of awe possessed me; for
 if by this means the key which should release me should come into my
 possession, how, ever again, could i doubt a beneficent providence?
 but they were not yet in my possession; moreover, the key of the handcuffs
 might not be amongst the bunch.
 were there no means whereby i could induce the marmoset to approach me?
 whilst i racked my brains for some scheme, the little animal took the
 matter out of my hands. tossing the ring with its jangling contents a yard
 or so across the carpet in my direction, it leaped in pursuit, picked up
 the ring, whirled it over its head, and then threw a complete somersault
 around it. now it snatched up the keys again, and holding them close to
 its ear, rattled them furiously. finally, with an incredible spring, it
 leaped onto the chain supporting the lamp above my head, and with the
 garish shade swinging and spinning wildly, clung there looking down at me
 like an acrobat on a trapeze. the tiny, bluish face, completely framed in
 grotesque whiskers, enhanced the illusion of an acrobatic comedian. never
 for a moment did it release its hold upon the key-ring.
 my suspense now was intolerable. i feared to move, lest, alarming the
 marmoset, it should run off again, taking the keys with it. so as i lay
 there, looking up at the little creature swinging above me, the second
 wonder of the night came to pass.
 a voice that i could never forget, strive how i would, a voice that
 haunted my dreams by night, and for which by day i was ever listening,
 cried out from some adjoining room.
 “ta’ala hina!” it called. “ta’ala hina, peko!”
 it was karamaneh!
 the effect upon the marmoset was instantaneous. down came the bunch of
 keys upon one side of the shade, almost falling on my head, and down
 leaped the ape upon the other. in two leaps it had traversed the room and
 had vanished through the curtained doorway.
 if ever i had need of coolness it was now; the slightest mistake would be
 fatal. the keys had slipped from the mattress of the divan, and now lay
 just beyond reach of my fingers. rapidly i changed my position, and
 sought, without undue noise, to move the keys with my foot.
 i had actually succeeded in sliding them back on to the mattress, when,
 unheralded by any audible footstep, karamaneh came through the doorway,
 holding the marmoset in her arms. she wore a dress of fragile muslin
 material, and out from its folds protruded one silk-stockinged foot,
 resting in a high-heeled red shoe....
 for a moment she stood watching me, with a sort of enforced composure;
 then her glance strayed to the keys lying upon the floor. slowly, and with
 her eyes fixed again upon my face, she crossed the room, stooped, and took
 up the key-ring.
 it was one of the poignant moments of my life; for by that simple act all
 my hopes had been shattered!
 any poor lingering doubt that i may have had, left me now. had the
 slightest spark of friendship animated the bosom of karamaneh most
 certainly she would have overlooked the presence of the keys—of the
 keys which represented my one hope of escape from the clutches of the
 fiendish chinaman.
 there is a silence more eloquent than words. for half a minute or more,
 karamaneh stood watching me—forcing herself to watch me—and i
 looked up at her with a concentrated gaze in which rage and reproach must
 have been strangely mingled. what eyes she had!—of that blackly
 lustrous sort nearly always associated with unusually dark complexions;
 but karamaneh’s complexion was peachlike, or rather of an exquisite and
 delicate fairness which reminded me of the petal of a rose. by some i had
 been accused of raving about this girl’s beauty, but only by those who had
 not met her; for indeed she was astonishingly lovely.
 at last her eyes fell, the long lashes drooped upon her cheeks. she turned
 and walked slowly to the chair in which fu-manchu had sat. placing the
 keys upon the table amid the scientific litter, she rested one dimpled
 elbow upon the yellow page of the book, and with her chin in her palm,
 again directed upon me that enigmatical gaze.
 i dared not think of the past, of the past in which this beautiful,
 treacherous girl had played a part; yet, watching her, i could not
 believe, even now, that she was false! my state was truly a pitiable one;
 i could have cried out in sheer anguish. with her long lashes partly
 lowered, she watched me awhile, then spoke; and her voice was music which
 seemed to mock me; every inflection of that elusive accent reopened,
 lancet-like, the ancient wound.
 “why do you look at me so?” she said, almost in a whisper. “by what right
 do you reproach me?—have you ever offered me friendship, that i
 should repay you with friendship? when first you came to the house where i
 was, by the river—came to save some one from” (there was the
 familiar hesitation which always preceded the name of fu-manchu) “from—him,
 you treated me as your enemy, although—i would have been your
 friend...”
 there was appeal in the soft voice, but i laughed mockingly, and threw
 myself back upon the divan.
 karamaneh stretched out her hands toward me, and i shall never forget the
 expression which flashed into those glorious eyes; but, seeing me
 intolerant of her appeal, she drew back and quickly turned her head aside.
 even in this hour of extremity, of impotent wrath, i could find no
 contempt in my heart for her feeble hypocrisy; with all the old wonder i
 watched that exquisite profile, and karamaneh’s very deceitfulness was a
 salve—for had she not cared she would not have attempted it!
 suddenly she stood up, taking the keys in her hands, and approached me.
 “not by word, nor by look,” she said, quietly, “have you asked for my
 friendship, but because i cannot bear you to think of me as you do, i will
 prove that i am not the hypocrite and the liar you think me. you will not
 trust me, but i will trust you.”
 i looked up into her eyes, and knew a pagan joy when they faltered before
 my searching gaze. she threw herself upon her knees beside me, and the
 faint exquisite perfume inseparable from my memories of her, became
 perceptible, and seemed as of old to intoxicate me. the lock clicked...
 and i was free.
 karamaneh rose swiftly to her feet as i stood upright and outstretched my
 cramped arms. for one delirious moment her bewitching face was close to
 mine, and the dictates of madness almost ruled; but i clenched my teeth
 and turned sharply aside. i could not trust myself to speak.
 with fu-manchu’s marmoset again gamboling before us, she walked through
 the curtained doorway into the room beyond. it was in darkness, but i
 could see the slave-girl in front of me, a slim silhouette, as she walked
 to a screened window, and, opening the screen in the manner of a folding
 door, also threw up the window.
 “look!” she whispered.
 i crept forward and stood beside her. i found myself looking down into
 museum street from a first-floor window! belated traffic still passed
 along new oxford street on the left, but not a solitary figure was visible
 to the right, as far as i could see, and that was nearly to the railings
 of the museum. immediately opposite, in one of the flats which i had
 noticed earlier in the evening, another window was opened. i turned, and
 in the reflected light saw that karamaneh held a cord in her hand. our
 eyes met in the semi-darkness.
 she began to haul the cord into the window, and, looking upward, i
 perceived that it was looped in some way over the telegraph cables which
 crossed the street at that point. it was a slender cord, and it appeared
 to be passed across a joint in the cables almost immediately above the
 center of the roadway. as it was hauled in, a second and stronger line
 attached to it was pulled, in turn, over the cables, and thence in by the
 window. karamaneh twisted a length of it around a metal bracket fastened
 in the wall, and placed a light wooden crossbar in my hand.
 “make sure that there is no one in the street,” she said, craning out and
 looking to right and left, “then swing across. the length of the rope is
 just sufficient to enable you to swing through the open window opposite,
 and there is a mattress inside to drop upon. but release the bar
 immediately, or you may be dragged back. the door of the room in which you
 will find yourself is unlocked, and you have only to walk down the stairs
 and out into the street.”
 i peered at the crossbar in my hand, then looked hard at the girl beside
 me. i missed something of the old fire of her nature; she was very
 subdued, tonight.
 “thank you, karamaneh,” i said, softly.
 she suppressed a little cry as i spoke her name, and drew back into the
 shadows.
 “i believe you are my friend,” i said, “but i cannot understand. won’t you
 help me to understand?”
 i took her unresisting hand, and drew her toward me. my very soul seemed
 to thrill at the contact of her lithe body...
 she was trembling wildly and seemed to be trying to speak, but although
 her lips framed the words no sound followed. suddenly comprehension came
 to me. i looked down into the street, hitherto deserted... and into the
 upturned face of fu-manchu.
 wearing a heavy fur-collared coat, and with his yellow, malignant
 countenance grotesquely horrible beneath the shade of a large tweed motor
 cap, he stood motionless, looking up at me. that he had seen me, i could
 not doubt; but had he seen my companion?
 in a choking whisper karamaneh answered my unspoken question.
 “he has not seen me! i have done much for you; do in return a small thing
 for me. save my life!”
 she dragged me back from the window and fled across the room to the weird
 laboratory where i had lain captive. throwing herself upon the divan, she
 held out her white wrists and glanced significantly at the manacles.
 “lock them upon me!” she said, rapidly. “quick! quick!”
 great as was my mental disturbance, i managed to grasp the purpose of this
 device. the very extremity of my danger found me cool. i fastened the
 manacles, which so recently had confined my own wrists, upon the slim
 wrists of karamaneh. a faint and muffled disturbance, doubly ominous
 because there was nothing to proclaim its nature, reached me from some
 place below, on the ground floor.
 “tie something around my mouth!” directed karamaneh with nervous rapidity.
 as i began to look about me:—“tear a strip from my dress,” she said;
 “do not hesitate—be quick! be quick!”
 i seized the flimsy muslin and tore off half a yard or so from the hem of
 the skirt. the voice of dr fu-manchu became audible. he was speaking
 rapidly, sibilantly, and evidently was approaching—would be upon me
 in a matter of moments. i fastened the strip of fabric over the girl’s
 mouth and tied it behind, experiencing a pang half pleasurable and half
 fearful as i found my hands in contact with the foamy luxuriance of her
 hair.
 dr. fu-manchu was entering the room immediately beyond.
 snatching up the bunch of keys, i turned and ran, for in another instant
 my retreat would be cut off. as i burst once more into the darkened room i
 became aware that a door on the further side of it was open; and framed in
 the opening was the tall, high-shouldered figure of the chinaman, still
 enveloped in his fur coat and wearing the grotesque cap. as i saw him, so
 he perceived me; and as i sprang to the window, he advanced.
 i turned desperately and hurled the bunch of keys with all my force into
 the dimly-seen face...
 either because they possessed a chatoyant quality of their own (as i had
 often suspected), or by reason of the light reflected through the open
 window, the green eyes gleamed upon me vividly like those of a giant cat.
 one short guttural exclamation paid tribute to the accuracy of my aim;
 then i had the crossbar in my hand. i threw one leg across the sill, and
 dire as was my extremity, hesitated for an instant ere trusting myself to
 the flight...
 a vise-like grip fastened upon my left ankle.
 hazily i became aware that the dark room was flooded with figures. the
 whole yellow gang were upon me—the entire murder-group composed of
 units recruited from the darkest place of the east!
 i have never counted myself a man of resource, and have always envied
 nayland smith his possession of that quality, in him extraordinarily
 developed; but on this occasion the gods were kind to me, and i resorted
 to the only device, perhaps, which could have saved me. without releasing
 my hold upon the crossbar, i clutched at the ledge with the fingers of
 both hands and swung back into the room my right leg, which was already
 across the sill. with all my strength i kicked out. my heel came in
 contact, in sickening contact, with a human head; beyond doubt that i had
 split the skull of the man who held me.
 the grip upon my ankle was released automatically; and now consigning all
 my weight to the rope i slipped forward, as a diver, across the broad
 ledge and found myself sweeping through the night like a winged thing...
 the line, as karamaneh had assured me, was of well-judged length. down i
 swept to within six or seven feet of the street level, then up, at ever
 decreasing speed, toward the vague oblong of the open window beyond.
 i hope i have been successful, in some measure, in portraying the varied
 emotions which it was my lot to experience that night, and it may well
 seem that nothing more exquisite could remain for me. yet it was written
 otherwise; for as i swept up to my goal, describing the inevitable arc
 which i had no power to check, i saw that one awaited me.
 crouching forward half out of the open window was a burmese dacoit, a
 cross-eyed, leering being whom i well remembered to have encountered two
 years before in my dealings with dr. fu-manchu. one bare, sinewy arm held
 rigidly at right angles before his breast, he clutched a long curved knife
 and waited—waited—for the critical moment when my throat
 should be at his mercy!
 i have said that a strange coolness had come to my aid; even now it did
 not fail me, and so incalculably rapid are the workings of the human mind
 that i remember complimenting myself upon an achievement which smith
 himself could not have bettered, and this in the immeasurable interval
 which intervened between the commencement of my upward swing and my
 arrival on a level with the window.
 i threw my body back and thrust my feet forward. as my legs went through
 the opening, an acute pain in one calf told me that i was not to escape
 scatheless from the night’s melee. but the dacoit went rolling over in the
 darkness of the room, as helpless in face of that ramrod stroke as the
 veriest infant...
 back i swept upon my trapeze, a sight to have induced any passing citizen
 to question his sanity. with might and main i sought to check the swing of
 the pendulum, for if i should come within reach of the window behind i
 doubted not that other knives awaited me. it was no difficult feat, and i
 succeeded in checking my flight. swinging there above museum street i
 could even appreciate, so lucid was my mind, the ludicrous element of the
 situation.
 i dropped. my wounded leg almost failed me; and greatly shaken, but with
 no other serious damage, i picked myself up from the dust of the roadway.
 it was a mockery of fate that the problem which nayland smith had set me
 to solve, should have been solved thus; for i could not doubt that by
 means of the branch of a tall tree or some other suitable object situated
 opposite to smith’s house in rangoon, karamaneh had made her escape as
 tonight i had made mine.
 apart from the acute pain in my calf i knew that the dacoit’s knife had
 bitten deeply, by reason of the fact that a warm liquid was trickling down
 into my boot. like any drunkard i stood there in the middle of the road
 looking up at the vacant window where the dacoit had been, and up at the
 window above the shop of j. salaman where i knew fu-manchu to be. but for
 some reason the latter window had been closed or almost closed, and as i
 stood there this reason became apparent to me.
 the sound of running footsteps came from the direction of new oxford
 street. i turned—to see two policemen bearing down upon me!
 this was a time for quick decisions and prompt action. i weighed all the
 circumstances in the balance, and made the last vital choice of the night;
 i turned and ran toward the british museum as though the worst of
 fu-manchu’s creatures, and not my allies the police, were at my heels!
 no one else was in sight, but, as i whirled into the square, the red lamp
 of a slowly retreating taxi became visible some hundred yards to the left.
 my leg was paining me greatly, but the nature of the wound did not
 interfere with my progress; therefore i continued my headlong career, and
 ere the police had reached the end of museum street i had my hand upon the
 door handle of the cab—for, the fates being persistently kind to me,
 the vehicle was for hire.
 “dr. cleeve’s, harley street!” i shouted at the man. “drive like hell!
 it’s an urgent case.”
 i leaped into the cab.
 within five seconds from the time that i slammed the door and dropped back
 panting upon the cushions, we were speeding westward toward the house of
 the famous pathologist, thereby throwing the police hopelessly off the
 track.
 faintly to my ears came the purr of a police whistle. the taxi-man
 evidently did not hear the significant sound. merciful providence had rung
 down the curtain; for to-night my role in the yellow drama was finished.
 less than two hours later, inspector weymouth and a party of men from
 scotland yard raided the house in museum street. they found the stock of
 j. salaman practically intact, and, in the strangely appointed rooms
 above, every evidence of a hasty outgoing. but of the instruments, drugs
 and other laboratory paraphernalia not one item remained. i would gladly
 have given my income for a year, to have gained possession of the books,
 alone; for, beyond all shadow of doubt, i knew them to contain formula
 calculated to revolutionize the science of medicine.
 exhausted, physically and mentally, and with my mind a whispering-gallery
 of conjectures (it were needless for me to mention whom respecting) i
 turned in, gratefully, having patched up the slight wound in my calf.
 i seemed scarcely to have closed my eyes, when nayland smith was shaking
 me into wakefulness.
 “you are probably tired out,” he said; “but your crazy expedition of last
 night entitles you to no sympathy. read this; there is a train in an hour.
 we will reserve a compartment and you can resume your interrupted slumbers
 in a corner seat.”
 as i struggled upright in bed, rubbing my eyes sleepily, smith handed me
 the daily telegraph, pointing to the following paragraph upon the literary
 page:
 messrs. m—— announce that they will publish shortly the long
 delayed work of kegan van roon, the celebrated american traveler,
 orientalist and psychic investigator, dealing with his recent inquiries in
 china. it will be remembered that mr. van roon undertook to motor from
 canton to siberia last winter, but met with unforeseen difficulties in the
 province of ho-nan. he fell into the hands of a body of fanatics and was
 fortunate to escape with his life. his book will deal in particular with
 his experiences in ho-nan, and some sensational revelations regarding the
 awakening of that most mysterious race, the chinese, are promised. for
 reasons of his own he has decided to remain in england until the
 completion of his book (which will be published simultaneously in new york
 and london) and has leased cragmire tower, somersetshire, in which
 romantic and historical residence he will collate his notes and prepare
 for the world a work ear-marked as a classic even before it is published.
 i glanced up from the paper, to find smith’s eyes fixed upon me,
 inquiringly.
 “from what i have been able to learn,” he said, evenly, “we should reach
 saul, with decent luck, just before dusk.”
 as he turned, and quitted the room without another word, i realized, in a
 flash, the purport of our mission; i understood my friend’s ominous calm,
 betokening suppressed excitement.
 the fates were with us (or so it seemed); and whereas we had not hoped to
 gain saul before sunset, as a matter of fact, the autumn afternoon was in
 its most glorious phase as we left the little village with its oldtime
 hostelry behind us and set out in an easterly direction, with the bristol
 channel far away on our left and a gently sloping upland on our right.
 the crooked high-street practically constituted the entire hamlet of saul,
 and the inn, “the wagoners,” was the last house in the street. now, as we
 followed the ribbon of moor-path to the top of the rise, we could stand
 and look back upon the way we had come; and although we had covered fully
 a mile of ground, it was possible to detect the sunlight gleaming now and
 then upon the gilt lettering of the inn sign as it swayed in the breeze.
 the day had been unpleasantly warm, but was relieved by this same sea
 breeze, which, although but slight, had in it the tang of the broad
 atlantic. behind us, then, the foot-path sloped down to saul, unpeopled by
 any living thing; east and northeast swelled the monotony of the moor
 right out to the hazy distance where the sky began and the sea remotely
 lay hidden; west fell the gentle gradient from the top of the slope which
 we had mounted, and here, as far as the eye could reach, the country had
 an appearance suggestive of a huge and dried-up lake. this idea was borne
 out by an odd blotchiness, for sometimes there would be half a mile or
 more of seeming moorland, then a sharply defined change (or it seemed
 sharply defined from that bird’s-eye point of view). a vivid greenness
 marked these changes, which merged into a dun-colored smudge and again
 into the brilliant green; then the moor would begin once more.
 “that will be the tor of glastonbury, i suppose,” said smith, suddenly
 peering through his field-glasses in an easterly direction; “and yonder,
 unless i am greatly mistaken, is cragmire tower.”
 shading my eyes with my hand, i also looked ahead, and saw the place for
 which we were bound; one of those round towers, more common in ireland,
 which some authorities have declared to be of phoenician origin.
 ramshackle buildings clustered untidily about its base, and to it a sort
 of tongue of that oddly venomous green which patched the lowlands, shot
 out and seemed almost to reach the towerbase. the land for miles around
 was as flat as the palm of my hand, saving certain hummocks, lesser tors,
 and irregular piles of boulders which dotted its expanse. hills and
 uplands there were in the hazy distance, forming a sort of mighty inland
 bay which i doubted not in some past age had been covered by the sea. even
 in the brilliant sunlight the place had something of a mournful aspect,
 looking like a great dried-up pool into which the children of giants had
 carelessly cast stones.
 we met no living soul upon the moor. with cragmire tower but a quarter of
 a mile off, smith paused again, and raising his powerful glasses swept the
 visible landscape.
 “not a sign. petrie,” he said, softly; “yet...”
 dropping the glasses back into their case, my companion began to tug at
 his left ear.
 “have we been over-confident?” he said, narrowing his eyes in speculative
 fashion. “no less than three times i have had the idea that something, or
 some one, has just dropped out of sight, behind me, as i focused...”
 “what do you mean, smith?”
 “are we”—he glanced about him as though the vastness were peopled
 with listening chinamen—“followed?”
 silently we looked into one another’s eyes, each seeking for the dread
 which neither had named. then:
 “come on petrie!” said smith, grasping my arm; and at quick march we were
 off again.
 cragmire tower stood upon a very slight eminence, and what had looked like
 a green tongue, from the moorland slopes above, was in fact a creek,
 flanked by lush land, which here found its way to the sea. the house which
 we were come to visit consisted in a low, two-story building, joining the
 ancient tower on the east with two smaller outbuildings. there was a
 miniature kitchen-garden, and a few stunted fruit trees in the northwest
 corner; the whole being surrounded by a gray stone wall.
 the shadow of the tower fell sharply across the path, which ran up almost
 alongside of it. we were both extremely warm by reason of our long and
 rapid walk on that hot day, and this shade should have been grateful to
 us. in short, i find it difficult to account for the unwelcome chill which
 i experienced at the moment that i found myself at the foot of the
 time-worn monument. i know that we both pulled up sharply and looked at
 one another as though acted upon by some mutual disturbance.
 but not a sound broke the stillness save a remote murmuring, until a
 solitary sea gull rose in the air and circled directly over the tower,
 uttering its mournful and unmusical cry. automatically to my mind sprang
 the lines of the poem:
 far from all brother-men, in the weird of the fen,
 with god’s creatures i bide, ‘mid the birds that i ken;
 where the winds ever dree, where the hymn of the sea
 brings a message of peace from the ocean to me.
 not a soul was visible about the premises; there was no sound of human
 activity and no dog barked. nayland smith drew a long breath, glanced back
 along the way we had come, then went on, following the wall, i beside him,
 until we came to the gate. it was unfastened, and we walked up the stone
 path through a wilderness of weeds. four windows of the house were
 visible, two on the ground floor and two above. those on the ground floor
 were heavily boarded up, those above, though glazed, boasted neither
 blinds nor curtains. cragmire tower showed not the slightest evidence of
 tenancy.
 we mounted three steps and stood before a tremendously massive oaken door.
 an iron bell-pull, ancient and rusty, hung on the right of the door, and
 smith, giving me an odd glance, seized the ring and tugged it.
 from somewhere within the building answered a mournful clangor, a cracked
 and toneless jangle, which, seeming to echo through empty apartments,
 sought and found an exit apparently by way of one of the openings in the
 round tower; for it was from above our heads that the noise came to us.
 it died away, that eerie ringing—that clanging so dismal that it
 could chill my heart even then with the bright sunlight streaming down out
 of the blue; it awoke no other response than the mournful cry of the sea
 gull circling over our heads. silence fell. we looked at one another, and
 we were both about to express a mutual doubt when, unheralded by any
 unfastening of bolts or bars, the oaken door was opened, and a huge
 mulatto, dressed in white, stood there regarding us.
 i started nervously, for the apparition was so unexpected, but nayland
 smith, without evidence of surprise, thrust a card into the man’s hand.
 “take my card to mr. van roon, and say that i wish to see him on important
 business,” he directed, authoritatively.
 the mulatto bowed and retired. his white figure seemed to be swallowed up
 by the darkness within, for beyond the patch of uncarpeted floor revealed
 by the peeping sunlight, was a barn-like place of densest shadow. i was
 about to speak, but smith laid his hand upon my arm warningly, as, out
 from the shadows the mulatto returned. he stood on the right of the door
 and bowed again.
 “be pleased to enter,” he said, in his harsh, negro voice. “mr. van roon
 will see you.”
 the gladness of the sun could no longer stir me; a chill and sense of
 foreboding bore me company, as beside nayland smith i entered cragmire
 tower.
 the room in which van roon received us was roughly of the shape of an
 old-fashioned keyhole; one end of it occupied the base of the tower, upon
 which the remainder had evidently been built. in many respects it was a
 singular room, but the feature which caused me the greatest amazement was
 this:—it had no windows!
 in the deep alcove formed by the tower sat van roon at a littered table,
 upon which stood an oil reading-lamp, green shaded, of the “victoria”
 pattern, to furnish the entire illumination of the apartment. that
 bookshelves lined the rectangular portion of this strange study i divined,
 although that end of the place was dark as a catacomb. the walls were
 wood-paneled, and the ceiling was oaken beamed. a small bookshelf and
 tumble-down cabinet stood upon either side of the table, and the
 celebrated american author and traveler lay propped up in a long
 split-cane chair. he wore smoked glasses, and had a clean-shaven, olive
 face, with a profusion of jet black hair. he was garbed in a dirty red
 dressing-gown, and a perfect fog of cigar smoke hung in the room. he did
 not rise to greet us, but merely extended his right hand, between two
 fingers whereof he held smith’s card.
 “you will excuse the seeming discourtesy of an invalid, gentlemen?” he
 said; “but i am suffering from undue temerity in the interior of china!”
 he waved his hand vaguely, and i saw that two rough deal chairs stood near
 the table. smith and i seated ourselves, and my friend, leaning his elbow
 upon the table, looked fixedly at the face of the man whom we had come
 from london to visit. although comparatively unfamiliar to the british
 public, the name of van roon was well-known in american literary circles;
 for he enjoyed in the united states a reputation somewhat similar to that
 which had rendered the name of our mutual friend, sir lionel barton, a
 household word in england. it was van roon who, following in the footsteps
 of madame blavatsky, had sought out the haunts of the fabled mahatmas in
 the himalayas, and van roon who had essayed to explore the fever swamps of
 yucatan in quest of the secret of lost atlantis; lastly, it was van roon,
 who, with an overland car specially built for him by a celebrated american
 firm, had undertaken the journey across china.
 i studied the olive face with curiosity. its natural impassivity was so
 greatly increased by the presence of the colored spectacles that my study
 was as profitless as if i had scrutinized the face of a carven buddha. the
 mulatto had withdrawn, and in an atmosphere of gloom and tobacco smoke,
 smith and i sat staring, perhaps rather rudely, at the object of our visit
 to the west country.
 “mr. van roon,” began my friend abruptly, “you will no doubt have seen
 this paragraph. it appeared in this morning’s daily telegraph.”
 he stood up, and taking out the cutting from his notebook, placed it on
 the table.
 “i have seen this—yes,” said van roon, revealing a row of even,
 white teeth in a rapid smile. “is it to this paragraph that i owe the
 pleasure of seeing you here?”
 “the paragraph appeared in this morning’s issue,” replied smith. “an hour
 from the time of seeing it, my friend, dr. petrie, and i were entrained
 for bridgewater.”
 “your visit delights me, gentlemen, and i should be ungrateful to question
 its cause; but frankly i am at a loss to understand why you should have
 honored me thus. i am a poor host, god knows; for what with my tortured
 limb, a legacy from the chinese devils whose secrets i surprised, and my
 semi-blindness, due to the same cause, i am but sorry company.”
 nayland smith held up his right hand deprecatingly. van roon tendered a
 box of cigars and clapped his hands, whereupon the mulatto entered.
 “i see that you have a story to tell me, mr. smith,” he said; “therefore i
 suggest whisky-and-soda—or you might prefer tea, as it is nearly tea
 time?”
 smith and i chose the former refreshment, and the soft-footed half-breed
 having departed upon his errand, my companion, leaning forward earnestly
 across the littered table, outlined for van roon the story of dr.
 fu-manchu, the great and malign being whose mission in england at that
 moment was none other than the stoppage of just such information as our
 host was preparing to give to the world.
 “there is a giant conspiracy, mr. van roon,” he said, “which had its birth
 in this very province of ho-nan, from which you were so fortunate to
 escape alive; whatever its scope or limitations, a great secret society is
 established among the yellow races. it means that china, which has
 slumbered for so many generations, now stirs in that age-long sleep. i
 need not tell you how much more it means, this seething in the pot...”
 “in a word,” interrupted van roon, pushing smith’s glass across the table
 “you would say?—”
 “that your life is not worth that!” replied smith, snapping his fingers
 before the other’s face.
 a very impressive silence fell. i watched van roon curiously as he sat
 propped up among his cushions, his smooth face ghastly in the green light
 from the lamp-shade. he held the stump of a cigar between his teeth, but,
 apparently unnoticed by him, it had long since gone out. smith, out of the
 shadows, was watching him, too. then:
 “your information is very disturbing,” said the american. “i am the more
 disposed to credit your statement because i am all too painfully aware of
 the existence of such a group as you mention, in china, but that they had
 an agent here in england is something i had never conjectured. in seeking
 out this solitary residence i have unwittingly done much to assist their
 designs... but—my dear mr. smith, i am very remiss! of course you
 will remain tonight, and i trust for some days to come?”
 smith glanced rapidly across at me, then turned again to our host.
 “it seems like forcing our company upon you,” he said, “but in your own
 interests i think it will be best to do as you are good enough to suggest.
 i hope and believe that our arrival here has not been noticed by the
 enemy; therefore it will be well if we remain concealed as much as
 possible for the present, until we have settled upon some plan.”
 “hagar shall go to the station for your baggage,” said the american
 rapidly, and clapped his hands, his usual signal to the mulatto.
 whilst the latter was receiving his orders i noticed nayland smith
 watching him closely; and when he had departed:
 “how long has that man been in your service?” snapped my friend.
 van roon peered blindly through his smoked glasses.
 “for some years,” he replied; “he was with me in india—and in
 china.”
 “where did you engage him?”
 “actually, in st. kitts.”
 “h’m,” muttered smith, and automatically he took out and began to fill his
 pipe.
 “i can offer you no company but my own, gentlemen,” continued van roon,
 “but unless it interferes with your plans, you may find the surrounding
 district of interest and worthy of inspection, between now and dinner
 time. by the way, i think i can promise you quite a satisfactory meal, for
 hagar is a model chef.”
 “a walk would be enjoyable,” said smith, “but dangerous.”
 “ah! perhaps you are right. evidently you apprehend some attempt upon me?”
 “at any moment!”
 “to one in my crippled condition, an alarming outlook! however, i place
 myself unreservedly in your hands. but really, you must not leave this
 interesting district before you have made the acquaintance of some of its
 historical spots. to me, steeped as i am in what i may term the lore of
 the odd, it is a veritable wonderland, almost as interesting, in its way,
 as the caves and jungles of hindustan depicted by madame blavatsky.”
 his high-pitched voice, with a certain labored intonation, not quite so
 characteristically american as was his accent, rose even higher; he spoke
 with the fire of the enthusiast.
 “when i learned that cragmire tower was vacant,” he continued, “i leaped
 at the chance (excuse the metaphor, from a lame man!). this is a ghost
 hunter’s paradise. the tower itself is of unknown origin, though probably
 phoenician, and the house traditionally sheltered dr. macleod, the
 necromancer, after his flight from the persecution of james of scotland.
 then, to add to its interest, it borders on sedgemoor, the scene of the
 bloody battle during the monmouth rising, whereat a thousand were slain on
 the field. it is a local legend that the unhappy duke and his staff may be
 seen, on stormy nights, crossing the path which skirts the mire, after
 which this building is named, with flaming torches held aloft.”
 “merely marsh-lights, i take it?” interjected smith, gripping his pipe
 hard between his teeth.
 “your practical mind naturally seeks a practical explanation,” smiled van
 roon, “but i myself have other theories. then in addition to the charms of
 sedgemoor—haunted sedgemoor—on a fine day it is quite possible
 to see the ruins of glastonbury abbey from here; and glastonbury abbey, as
 you may know, is closely bound up with the history of alchemy. it was in
 the ruins of glastonbury abbey that the adept kelly, companion of dr. dee,
 discovered, in the reign of elizabeth, the famous caskets of st. dunstan,
 containing the two tinctures...”
 so he ran on, enumerating the odd charms of his residence, charms which
 for my part i did not find appealing. finally:
 “we cannot presume further upon your kindness,” said nayland smith,
 standing up. “no doubt we can amuse ourselves in the neighborhood of the
 house until the return of your servant.”
 “look upon cragmire tower as your own, gentlemen!” cried van roon. “most
 of the rooms are unfurnished, and the garden is a wilderness, but the
 structure of the brickwork in the tower may interest you archaeologically,
 and the view across the moor is at least as fine as any in the
 neighborhood.”
 so, with his brilliant smile and a gesture of one thin yellow hand, the
 crippled traveler made us free of his odd dwelling. as i passed out from
 the room close at smith’s heels, i glanced back, i cannot say why. van
 roon already was bending over his papers, in his green shadowed sanctuary,
 and the light shining down upon his smoked glasses created the odd
 illusion that he was looking over the tops of the lenses and not down at
 the table as his attitude suggested. however, it was probably ascribable
 to the weird chiaroscuro of the scene, although it gave the seated figure
 an oddly malignant appearance, and i passed out through the utter darkness
 of the outer room to the front door. smith opening it, i was conscious of
 surprise to find dusk come—to meet darkness where i had looked for
 sunlight.
 the silver wisps which had raced along the horizon, as we came to cragmire
 tower, had been harbingers of other and heavier banks. a stormy sunset
 smeared crimson streaks across the skyline, where a great range of clouds,
 like the oily smoke of a city burning, was banked, mountain topping
 mountain, and lighted from below by this angry red. as we came down the
 steps and out by the gate, i turned and looked across the moor behind us.
 a sort of reflection from this distant blaze encrimsoned the whole
 landscape. the inland bay glowed sullenly, as if internal fires and not
 reflected light were at work; a scene both wild and majestic.
 nayland smith was staring up at the cone-like top of the ancient tower in
 a curious, speculative fashion. under the influence of our host’s
 conversation i had forgotten the reasonless dread which had touched me at
 the moment of our arrival, but now, with the red light blazing over
 sedgemoor, as if in memory of the blood which had been shed there, and
 with the tower of unknown origin looming above me, i became very
 uncomfortable again, nor did i envy van roon his eerie residence. the
 proximity of a tower of any kind, at night, makes in some inexplicable way
 for awe, and to-night there were other agents, too.
 “what’s that?” snapped smith suddenly, grasping my arm.
 he was peering southward, toward the distant hamlet, and, starting
 violently at his words and the sudden grasp of his hand, i, too, stared in
 that direction.
 “we were followed, petrie,” he almost whispered. “i never got a sight of
 our follower, but i’ll swear we were followed. look! there’s something
 moving over yonder!”
 together we stood staring into the dusk; then smith burst abruptly into
 one of his rare laughs, and clapped me upon the shoulder.
 “it’s hagar, the mulatto!” he cried—“and our grips. that
 extraordinary american with his tales of witch-lights and haunted abbeys
 has been playing the devil with our nerves.”
 together we waited by the gate until the half-caste appeared on the bend
 of the path with a grip in either hand. he was a great, muscular fellow
 with a stoic face, and, for the purpose of visiting saul, presumably, he
 had doffed his white raiment and now wore a sort of livery, with a peaked
 cap.
 smith watched him enter the house. then:
 “i wonder where van roon obtains his provisions and so forth,” he
 muttered. “it’s odd they knew nothing about the new tenant of cragmire
 tower at ‘the wagoners.’”
 there came a sort of sudden expectancy into his manner for which i found
 myself at a loss to account. he turned his gaze inland and stood there
 tugging at his left ear and clicking his teeth together. he stared at me,
 and his eyes looked very bright in the dusk, for a sort of red glow from
 the sunset touched them; but he spoke no word, merely taking my arm and
 leading me off on a rambling walk around and about the house. neither of
 us spoke a word until we stood at the gate of cragmire tower again; then:
 “i’ll swear, now, that we were followed here today!” muttered smith.
 the lofty place immediately within the doorway proved, in the light of a
 lamp now fixed in an iron bracket, to be a square entrance hall meagerly
 furnished. the closed study door faced the entrance, and on the left of it
 ascended an open staircase up which the mulatto led the way. we found
 ourselves on the floor above, in a corridor traversing the house from back
 to front. an apartment on the immediate left was indicated by the mulatto
 as that allotted to smith. it was a room of fair size, furnished quite
 simply but boasting a wardrobe cupboard, and smith’s grip stood beside the
 white enameled bed. i glanced around, and then prepared to follow the man,
 who had awaited me in the doorway.
 he still wore his dark livery, and as i followed the lithe,
 broad-shouldered figure along the corridor, i found myself considering
 critically his breadth of shoulder and the extraordinary thickness of his
 neck.
 i have repeatedly spoken of a sort of foreboding, an elusive stirring in
 the depths of my being of which i became conscious at certain times in my
 dealings with dr. fu-manchu and his murderous servants. this sensation, or
 something akin to it, claimed me now, unaccountably, as i stood looking
 into the neat bedroom, on the same side of the corridor but at the extreme
 end, wherein i was to sleep.
 a voiceless warning urged me to return; a kind of childish panic came
 fluttering about my heart, a dread of entering the room, of allowing the
 mulatto to come behind me.
 doubtless this was no more than a sub-conscious product of my observations
 respecting his abnormal breadth of shoulder. but whatever the origin of
 the impulse, i found myself unable to disobey it. therefore, i merely
 nodded, turned on my heel and went back to smith’s room.
 i closed the door, then turned to face smith, who stood regarding me.
 “smith,” i said, “that man sends cold water trickling down my spine!”
 still regarding me fixedly, my friend nodded his head.
 “you are curiously sensitive to this sort of thing,” he replied slowly; “i
 have noticed it before as a useful capacity. i don’t like the look of the
 man myself. the fact that he has been in van roon’s employ for some years
 goes for nothing. we are neither of us likely to forget kwee, the chinese
 servant of sir lionel barton, and it is quite possible that fu-manchu has
 corrupted this man as he corrupted the other. it is quite possible...”
 his voice trailed off into silence, and he stood looking across the room
 with unseeing eyes, meditating deeply. it was quite dark now outside, as i
 could see through the uncurtained window, which opened upon the dreary
 expanse stretching out to haunted sedgemoor. two candles were burning upon
 the dressing table; they were but recently lighted, and so intense was the
 stillness that i could distinctly hear the spluttering of one of the
 wicks, which was damp. without giving the slightest warning of his
 intention, smith suddenly made two strides forward, stretched out his long
 arms, and snuffed the pair of candles in a twinkling.
 the room became plunged in impenetrable darkness.
 “not a word, petrie!” whispered my companion.
 i moved cautiously to join him, but as i did so, perceived that he was
 moving too. vaguely, against the window i perceived him silhouetted. he
 was looking out across the moor, and:
 “see! see!” he hissed.
 with my heart thumping furiously in my breast, i bent over him; and for
 the second time since our coming to cragmire tower, my thoughts flew to
 “the fenman.”
 there are shades in the fen; ghosts of women and men
 who have sinned and have died, but are living again.
 o’er the waters they tread, with their lanterns of dread,
 and they peer in the pools—in the pools of the dead...
 a light was dancing out upon the moor, a witchlight that came and went
 unaccountably, up and down, in and out, now clearly visible, now masked in
 the darkness!
 “lock the door!” snapped my companion—“if there’s a key.”
 i crept across the room and fumbled for a moment; then:
 “there is no key,” i reported.
 “then wedge the chair under the knob and let no one enter until i return!”
 he said, amazingly.
 with that he opened the window to its fullest extent, threw his leg over
 the sill, and went creeping along a wide concrete ledge, in which ran a
 leaded gutter, in the direction of the tower on the right!
 not pausing to follow his instructions respecting the chair, i craned out
 of the window, watching his progress, and wondering with what sudden
 madness he was bitten. indeed, i could not credit my senses, could not
 believe that i heard and saw aright. yet there out in the darkness on the
 moor moved the will-o’-the-wisp, and ten yards along the gutter crept my
 friend, like a great gaunt cat. unknown to me he must have prospected the
 route by daylight, for now i saw his design. the ledge terminated only
 where it met the ancient wall of the tower, and it was possible for an
 agile climber to step from it to the edge of the unglazed window some four
 feet below, and to scramble from that point to the stone fence and thence
 on to the path by which we had come from saul.
 this difficult operation nayland smith successfully performed, and, to my
 unbounded amazement, went racing into the darkness toward the dancing
 light, headlong, like a madman! the night swallowed him up, and between my
 wonder and my fear my hands trembled so violently that i could scarce
 support myself where i rested, with my full weight upon the sill.
 i seemed now to be moving through the fevered phases of a nightmare.
 around and below me cragmire tower was profoundly silent, but a faint odor
 of cookery was now perceptible. outside, from the night, came a faint
 whispering as of the distant sea, but no moon and no stars relieved the
 impenetrable blackness. only out over the moor the mysterious light still
 danced and moved.
 one—two—three—four—five minutes passed. the light
 vanished and did not appear again. five more age-long minutes elapsed in
 absolute silence, whilst i peered into the darkness of the night and
 listened, every nerve in my body tense, for the return of nayland smith.
 yet two more minutes, which embraced an agony of suspense, passed in the
 same fashion; then a shadowy form grew, phantomesque, out of the gloom; a
 moment more, and i distinctly heard the heavy breathing of a man nearly
 spent, and saw my friend scrambling up toward the black embrasure in the
 tower. his voice came huskily, pantingly:
 “creep along and lend me a hand, petrie! i am nearly winded.”
 i crept through the window, steadied my quivering nerves by an effort of
 the will, and reached the end of the ledge in time to take smith’s
 extended hand and to draw him up beside me against the wall of the tower.
 he was shaking with his exertions, and must have fallen, i think, without
 my assistance. inside the room again:
 “quick! light the candles!” he breathed hoarsely.
 “did any one come?”
 “no one—nothing.”
 having expended several matches in vain, for my fingers twitched
 nervously, i ultimately succeeded in relighting the candles.
 “get along to your room!” directed smith. “your apprehensions are
 unfounded at the moment, but you may as well leave both doors wide open!”
 i looked into his face—it was very drawn and grim, and his brow was
 wet with perspiration, but his eyes had the fighting glint, and i knew
 that we were upon the eve of strange happenings.
 of the events intervening between this moment and that when death called
 to us out of the night, i have the haziest recollections. an excellent
 dinner was served in the bleak and gloomy dining-room by the mulatto, and
 the crippled author was carried to the head of the table by this same
 herculean attendant, as lightly as though he had but the weight of a
 child.
 van roon talked continuously, revealing a deep knowledge of all sorts of
 obscure matters; and in the brief intervals, nayland smith talked also,
 with almost feverish rapidity. plans for the future were discussed. i can
 recall no one of them.
 i could not stifle my queer sentiments in regard to the mulatto, and every
 time i found him behind my chair i was hard put to repress a shudder. in
 this fashion the strange evening passed; and to the accompaniment of
 distant, muttering thunder, we two guests retired to our chambers in
 cragmire tower. smith had contrived to give me my instructions in a
 whisper, and five minutes after entering my own room, i had snuffed the
 candles, slipped a wedge, which he had given me, under the door, crept out
 through the window onto the guttered ledge, and joined smith in his room.
 he, too, had extinguished his candles, and the place was in darkness. as i
 climbed in, he grasped my wrist to silence me, and turned me forcibly
 toward the window.
 “listen!” he said.
 i turned and looked out upon a prospect which had been a fit setting for
 the witch scene in macbeth. thunder clouds hung low over the moor, but
 through them ran a sort of chasm, or rift, allowing a bar of lurid light
 to stretch across the drear, from east to west—a sort of lane walled
 by darkness. there came a remote murmuring, as of a troubled sea—a
 hushed and distant chorus; and sometimes in upon it broke the drums of
 heaven. in the west lightning flickered, though but faintly,
 intermittently.
 then came the call.
 out of the blackness of the moor it came, wild and distant—“help!
 help!”
 “smith!” i whispered—“what is it? what...”
 “mr. smith!” came the agonized cry... “nayland smith, help! for god’s
 sake....”
 “quick, smith!” i cried, “quick, man! it’s van roon—he’s been
 dragged out... they are murdering him...”
 nayland smith held me in a vise-like grip, silent, unmoved!
 louder and more agonized came the cry for aid, and i became more than ever
 certain that it was poor van roon who uttered it.
 “mr. smith! dr. petrie! for god’s sake come... or... it will be ... too...
 late...”
 “smith!” i said, turning furiously upon my friend, “if you are going to
 remain here whilst murder is done, i am not!”
 my blood boiled now with hot resentment. it was incredible, inhuman, that
 we should remain there inert whilst a fellow man, and our host to boot,
 was being done to death out there in the darkness. i exerted all my
 strength to break away; but although my efforts told upon him, as his loud
 breathing revealed, nayland smith clung to me tenaciously. had my hands
 been free, in my fury, i could have struck him, for the pitiable cries,
 growing fainter, now, told their own tale. then smith spoke shortly and
 angrily—breathing hard between the words.
 “be quiet, you fool!” he snapped; “it’s little less than an insult,
 petrie, to think me capable of refusing help where help is needed!”
 like a cold douche his words acted; in that instant i knew myself a fool.
 “you remember the call of siva?” he said, thrusting me away irritably, “—two
 years ago, and what it meant to those who obeyed it?”
 “you might have told me...”
 “told you! you would have been through the window before i had uttered two
 words!”
 i realized the truth of his assertion, and the justness of his anger.
 “forgive me, old man,” i said, very crestfallen, “but my impulse was a
 natural one, you’ll admit. you must remember that i have been trained
 never to refuse aid when aid is asked.”
 “shut up, petrie!” he growled; “forget it.”
 the cries had ceased now, entirely, and a peal of thunder, louder than any
 yet, echoed over distant sedgemoor. the chasm of light splitting the
 heavens closed in, leaving the night wholly black.
 “don’t talk!” rapped smith; “act! you wedged your door?”
 “yes.”
 “good. get into that cupboard, have your browning ready, and keep the door
 very slightly ajar.”
 he was in that mood of repressed fever which i knew and which always
 communicated itself to me. i spoke no further word, but stepped into the
 wardrobe indicated and drew the door nearly shut. the recess just
 accommodated me, and through the aperture i could see the bed, vaguely,
 the open window, and part of the opposite wall. i saw smith cross the
 floor, as a mighty clap of thunder boomed over the house.
 a gleam of lightning flickered through the gloom.
 i saw the bed for a moment, distinctly, and it appeared to me that smith
 lay therein, with the sheets pulled up over his head. the light was gone,
 and i could hear big drops of rain pattering upon the leaden gutter below
 the open window.
 my mood was strange, detached, and characterized by vagueness. that van
 roon lay dead upon the moor i was convinced; and—although i
 recognized that it must be a sufficient one—i could not even dimly
 divine the reason why we had refrained from lending him aid. to have
 failed to save him, knowing his peril, would have been bad enough; to have
 refused, i thought was shameful. better to have shared his fate—yet...
 the downpour was increasing, and beating now a regular tattoo upon the
 gutterway. then, splitting the oblong of greater blackness which marked
 the casement, quivered dazzlingly another flash of lightning in which i
 saw the bed again, with that impression of smith curled up in it. the
 blinding light died out; came the crash of thunder, harsh and fearsome,
 more imminently above the tower than ever. the building seemed to shake.
 coming as they did, horror and the wrath of heaven together, suddenly,
 crashingly, black and angry after the fairness of the day, these
 happenings and their setting must have terrorized the stoutest heart; but
 somehow i seemed detached, as i have said, and set apart from the whirl of
 events; a spectator. even when a vague yellow light crept across the room
 from the direction of the door, and flickered unsteadily on the bed, i
 remained unmoved to a certain degree, although passively alive to the
 significance of the incident. i realized that the ultimate issue was at
 hand, but either because i was emotionally exhausted, or from some other
 cause, the pending climax failed to disturb me.
 going on tiptoe, in stockinged feet, across my field of vision, passed
 kegan van roon! he was in his shirt-sleeves and held a lighted candle in
 one hand whilst with the other he shaded it against the draught from the
 window. he was a cripple no longer, and the smoked glasses were discarded;
 most of the light, at the moment when first i saw him, shone upon his
 thin, olive face, and at sight of his eyes much of the mystery of cragmire
 tower was resolved. for they were oblique, very slightly, but nevertheless
 unmistakably oblique. though highly educated, and possibly an american
 citizen, van roon was a chinaman!
 upon the picture of his face as i saw it then, i do not care to dwell. it
 lacked the unique horror of dr. fu-manchu’s unforgettable countenance, but
 possessed a sort of animal malignancy which the latter lacked... he
 approached within three or four feet of the bed, peering—peering.
 then, with a timidity which spoke well for nayland smith’s reputation,
 paused and beckoned to some one who evidently stood in the doorway behind
 him. as he did so i noted that the legs of his trousers were caked with
 greenish brown mud nearly up to the knees.
 the huge mulatto, silent-footed, crossed to the bed in three strides. he
 was stripped to the waist, and, excepting some few professional athletes,
 i had never seen a torso to compare with that which, brown and glistening,
 now bent over nayland smith. the muscular development was simply enormous;
 the man had a neck like a column, and the thews around his back and
 shoulders were like ivy tentacles wreathing some gnarled oak.
 whilst van roon, his evil gaze upon the bed, held the candle aloft, the
 mulatto, with a curious preparatory writhing movement of the mighty
 shoulders, lowered his outstretched fingers to the disordered bed linen...
 i pushed open the cupboard door and thrust out the browning. as i did so a
 dramatic thing happened. a tall, gaunt figure shot suddenly upright from
 beyond the bed. it was nayland smith!
 upraised in his hand he held a heavy walking cane. i knew the handle to be
 leaded, and i could judge of the force with which he wielded it by the
 fact that it cut the air with a keen swishing sound. it descended upon the
 back of the mulatto’s skull with a sickening thud, and the great brown
 body dropped inert upon the padded bed—in which not smith, but his
 grip, reposed. there was no word, no cry. then:
 “shoot, petrie! shoot the fiend! shoot...”
 van roon, dropping the candle, in the falling gleam of which i saw the
 whites of the oblique eyes turned and leaped from the room with the
 agility of a wild cat. the ensuing darkness was split by a streak of
 lightning... and there was nayland smith scrambling around the foot of the
 bed and making for the door in hot pursuit.
 we gained it almost together. smith had dropped the cane, and now held his
 pistol in his hand. together we fired into the chasm of the corridor, and
 in the flash, saw van roon hurling himself down the stairs. he went
 silently in his stockinged feet, and our own clatter was drowned by the
 awful booming of the thunder which now burst over us again.
 crack!—crack!—crack! three times our pistols spat venomously
 after the flying figure... then we had crossed the hall below and were in
 the wilderness of the night with the rain descending upon us in sheets.
 vaguely i saw the white shirt-sleeves of the fugitive near the corner of
 the stone fence. a moment he hesitated, then darted away inland, not
 toward saul, but toward the moor and the cup of the inland bay.
 “steady, petrie! steady!” cried nayland smith. he ran, panting, beside me.
 “it is the path to the mire.” he breathed sibilantly between every few
 words. “it was out there... that he hoped to lure us... with the cry for
 help.”
 a great blaze of lightning illuminated the landscape as far as the eye
 could see. ahead of us a flying shape, hair lank and glistening in the
 downpour, followed a faint path skirting that green tongue of morass which
 we had noted from the upland. it was kegan van roon. he glanced over his
 shoulder, showing a yellow, terror-stricken face. we were gaining upon
 him. darkness fell, and the thunder cracked and boomed as though the very
 moor were splitting about us.
 “another fifty yards, petrie,” breathed nayland smith, “and after that
 it’s unchartered ground.”
 on we went through the rain and the darkness; then:
 “slow up! slow up!” cried smith. “it feels soft!”
 indeed, already i had made one false step—and the hungry mire had
 fastened upon my foot, almost tripping me.
 “lost the path!”
 we stopped dead. the falling rain walled us in. i dared not move, for i
 knew that the mire, the devouring mire, stretched, eager, close about my
 feet. we were both waiting for the next flash of lightning, i think, but,
 before it came, out of the darkness ahead of us rose a cry that sometimes
 rings in my ears to this hour. yet it was no more than a repetition of
 that which had called to us, deathfully, awhile before.
 “help! help! for god’s sake help! quick! i am sinking...”
 nayland smith grasped my arm furiously.
 “we dare not move, petrie—we dare not move!” he breathed. “it’s
 god’s justice—visible for once.”
 then came the lightning; and—ignoring a splitting crash behind us—we
 both looked ahead, over the mire.
 just on the edge of the venomous green path, not thirty yards away, i saw
 the head and shoulders and upstretched, appealing arms of van roon. even
 as the lightning flickered and we saw him, he was gone; with one last,
 long, drawn-out cry, horribly like the mournful wail of a sea gull, he was
 gone!
 that eerie light died, and in the instant before the sound of the thunder
 came shatteringly, we turned about... in time to see cragmire tower, a
 blacker silhouette against the night, topple and fall! a red glow began to
 be perceptible above the building. the thunder came booming through the
 caverns of space. nayland smith lowered his wet face close to mine and
 shouted in my ear:
 “kegan van roon never returned from china. it was a trap. those were two
 creatures of dr. fu-manchu...”
 the thunder died away, hollowly, echoing over the distant sea...
 “that light on the moor to-night?”
 “you have not learned the morse code, petrie. it was a signal, and it
 read:—s m i t h... sos.”
 “well?”
 “i took the chance, as you know. and it was karamaneh! she knew of the
 plot to bury us in the mire. she had followed from london, but could do
 nothing until dusk. god forgive me if i’ve misjudged her—for we owe
 her our lives to-night.”
 flames were bursting up from the building beside the ruin of the ancient
 tower which had faced the storms of countless ages only to succumb at
 last. the lightning literally had cloven it in twain.
 “the mulatto?...”
 again the lightning flashed, and we saw the path and began to retrace our
 steps. nayland smith turned to me; his face was very grim in that
 unearthly light, and his eyes shone like steel.
 “i killed him, petrie... as i meant to do.”
 from out over sedgemoor it came, cracking and rolling and booming toward
 us, swelling in volume to a stupendous climax, that awful laughter of jove
 the destroyer of cragmire tower.
 in looking over my notes dealing with the second phase of dr. fu-manchu’s
 activities in england, i find that one of the worst hours of my life was
 associated with the singular and seemingly inconsequent adventure of the
 fiery hand. i shall deal with it in this place, begging you to bear with
 me if i seem to digress.
 inspector weymouth called one morning, shortly after the van roon episode,
 and entered upon a surprising account of a visit to a house at hampstead
 which enjoyed the sinister reputation of being uninhabitable.
 “but in what way does the case enter into your province?” inquired nayland
 smith, idly tapping out his pipe on a bar of the grate.
 we had not long finished breakfast, but from an early hour smith had been
 at his eternal smoking, which only the advent of the meal had interrupted.
 “well,” replied the inspector, who occupied a big armchair near the
 window, “i was sent to look into it, i suppose, because i had nothing
 better to do at the moment.”
 “ah!” jerked smith, glancing over his shoulder.
 the ejaculation had a veiled significance; for our quest of dr. fu-manchu
 had come to an abrupt termination by reason of the fact that all trace of
 that malignant genius, and of the group surrounding him, had vanished with
 the destruction of cragmire tower.
 “the house is called the gables,” continued the scotland yard man, “and i
 knew i was on a wild goose chase from the first—”
 “why?” snapped smith.
 “because i was there before, six months ago or so—just before your
 present return to england—and i knew what to expect.”
 smith looked up with some faint dawning of interest perceptible in his
 manner.
 “i was unaware,” he said with a slight smile, “that the cleaning-up of
 haunted houses came within the jurisdiction of scotland yard. i am
 learning something.”
 “in the ordinary way,” replied the big man good-humoredly, “it doesn’t.
 but a sudden death always excites suspicion, and—”
 “a sudden death?” i said, glancing up; “you didn’t explain that the ghost
 had killed any one!”
 “i’m afraid i’m a poor hand at yarn-spinning, doctor,” said weymouth,
 turning his blue, twinkling eyes in my direction. “two people have died at
 the gables within the last six months.”
 “you begin to interest me,” declared smith, and there came something of
 the old, eager look into his gaunt face, as, having lighted his pipe, he
 tossed the match-end into the hearth.
 “i had hoped for some little excitement, myself,” confessed the inspector.
 “this dead-end, with not a ghost of a clue to the whereabouts of the
 yellow fiend, has been getting on my nerves—”
 nayland smith grunted sympathetically.
 “although dr. fu-manchu has been in england for some months, now,”
 continued weymouth, “i have never set eyes upon him; the house we raided
 in museum street proved to be empty; in a word, i am wasting my time. so
 that i volunteered to run up to hampstead and look into the matter of the
 gables, principally as a distraction. it’s a queer business, but more in
 the psychical research society’s line than mine, i’m afraid. still, if
 there were no dr. fu-manchu it might be of interest to you—and to
 you, dr. petrie, because it illustrates the fact, that, given the right
 sort of subject, death can be brought about without any elaborate
 mechanism—such as our chinese friends employ.”
 “you interest me more and more,” declared smith, stretching himself in the
 long, white cane rest-chair.
 “two men, both fairly sound, except that the first one had an asthmatic
 heart, have died at the gables without any one laying a little finger upon
 them. oh! there was no jugglery! they weren’t poisoned, or bitten by
 venomous insects, or suffocated, or anything like that. they just died of
 fear—stark fear.”
 with my elbows resting upon the table cover, and my chin in my hands, i
 was listening attentively, now, and nayland smith, a big cushion behind
 his head, was watching the speaker with a keen and speculative look in
 those steely eyes of his.
 “you imply that dr. fu-manchu has something to learn from the gables?” he
 jerked.
 weymouth nodded stolidly.
 “i can’t work up anything like amazement in these days,” continued the
 latter; “every other case seems stale and hackneyed alongside the case.
 but i must confess that when the gables came on the books of the yard the
 second time, i began to wonder. i thought there might be some tangible
 clue, some link connecting the two victims; perhaps some evidence of
 robbery or of revenge—of some sort of motive. in short, i hoped to
 find evidence of human agency at work, but, as before, i was
 disappointed.”
 “it’s a legitimate case of a haunted house, then?” said smith.
 “yes; we find them occasionally, these uninhabitable places, where there
 is something, something malignant and harmful to human life, but something
 that you cannot arrest, that you cannot hope to bring into court.”
 “ah,” replied smith slowly; “i suppose you are right. there are historic
 instances, of course: glamys castle and spedlins tower in scotland, peel
 castle, isle of man, with its maudhe dhug, the gray lady of rainham hall,
 the headless horses of caistor, the wesley ghost of epworth rectory, and
 others. but i have never come in personal contact with such a case, and if
 i did i should feel very humiliated to have to confess that there was any
 agency which could produce a physical result—death—but which
 was immune from physical retaliation.”
 weymouth nodded his head again.
 “i might feel a bit sour about it, too,” he replied, “if it were not that
 i haven’t much pride left in these days, considering the show of physical
 retaliation i have made against dr. fu-manchu.”
 “a home thrust, weymouth!” snapped nayland smith, with one of those rare,
 boyish laughs of his. “we’re children to that chinese doctor, inspector,
 to that weird product of a weird people who are as old in evil as the
 pyramids are old in mystery. but about the gables?”
 “well, it’s an uncanny place. you mentioned glamys castle a moment ago,
 and it’s possible to understand an old stronghold like that being haunted,
 but the gables was only built about ; it’s quite a modern house. it
 was built for a wealthy quaker family, and they occupied it,
 uninterruptedly and apparently without anything unusual occurring, for
 over forty years. then it was sold to a mr. maddison—and mr.
 maddison died there six months ago.”
 “maddison?” said smith sharply, staring across at weymouth. “what was he?
 where did he come from?”
 “he was a retired tea-planter from colombo,” replied the inspector.
 “colombo?”
 “there was a link with the east, certainly, if that’s what you are
 thinking; and it was this fact which interested me at the time, and which
 led me to waste precious days and nights on the case. but there was no
 mortal connection between this liverish individual and the schemes of dr.
 fu-manchu. i’m certain of that.”
 “and how did he die?” i asked, interestedly.
 “he just died in his chair one evening, in the room which he used as a
 library. it was his custom to sit there every night, when there were no
 visitors, reading, until twelve o’clock—or later. he was a bachelor,
 and his household consisted of a cook, a housemaid, and a man who had been
 with him for thirty years, i believe. at the time of mr. maddison’s death,
 his household had recently been deprived of two of its members. the cook
 and housemaid both resigned one morning, giving as their reason the fact
 that the place was haunted.”
 “in what way?”
 “i interviewed the precious pair at the time, and they told me absurd and
 various tales about dark figures wandering along the corridors and bending
 over them in bed at night, whispering; but their chief trouble was a
 continuous ringing of bells about the house.”
 “bells?”
 “they said that it became unbearable. night and day there were bells
 ringing all over the house. at any rate, they went, and for three or four
 days the gables was occupied only by mr. maddison and his man, whose name
 was stevens. i interviewed the latter also, and he was an altogether more
 reliable witness; a decent, steady sort of man whose story impressed me
 very much at the time.”
 “did he confirm the ringing?”
 “he swore to it—a sort of jangle, sometimes up in the air, near the
 ceilings, and sometimes under the floor, like the shaking of silver
 bells.”
 nayland smith stood up abruptly and began to pace the room, leaving great
 trails of blue-gray smoke behind him.
 “your story is sufficiently interesting, inspector,” he declared, “even to
 divert my mind from the eternal contemplation of the fu-manchu problem.
 this would appear to be distinctly a case of an ‘astral bell’ such as we
 sometimes hear of in india.”
 “it was stevens,” continued weymouth, “who found mr. maddison. he
 (stevens) had been out on business connected with the household
 arrangements, and at about eleven o’clock he returned, letting himself in
 with a key. there was a light in the library, and getting no response to
 his knocking, stevens entered. he found his master sitting bolt upright in
 a chair, clutching the arms with rigid fingers and staring straight before
 him with a look of such frightful horror on his face, that stevens
 positively ran from the room and out of the house. mr. maddison was stone
 dead. when a doctor, who lives at no great distance away, came and
 examined him, he could find no trace of violence whatever; he had
 apparently died of fright, to judge from the expression on his face.”
 “anything else?”
 “only this: i learnt, indirectly, that the last member of the quaker
 family to occupy the house had apparently witnessed the apparition, which
 had led to his vacating the place. i got the story from the wife of a man
 who had been employed as gardener there at that time. the apparition—which
 he witnessed in the hallway, if i remember rightly—took the form of
 a sort of luminous hand clutching a long, curved knife.”
 “oh, heavens!” cried smith, and laughed shortly; “that’s quite in order!”
 “this gentleman told no one of the occurrence until after he had left the
 house, no doubt in order that the place should not acquire an evil
 reputation. most of the original furniture remained, and mr. maddison took
 the house furnished. i don’t think there can be any doubt that what killed
 him was fear at seeing a repetition—”
 “of the fiery hand?” concluded smith.
 “quite so. well, i examined the gables pretty closely, and, with another
 scotland yard man, spent a night in the empty house. we saw nothing; but
 once, very faintly, we heard the ringing of bells.”
 smith spun around upon him rapidly.
 “you can swear to that?” he snapped.
 “i can swear to it,” declared weymouth stolidly. “it seemed to be over our
 heads. we were sitting in the dining-room. then it was gone, and we heard
 nothing more whatever of an unusual nature. following the death of mr.
 maddison, the gables remained empty until a while ago, when a french
 gentleman, name lejay, leased it—”
 “furnished?”
 “yes; nothing was removed—”
 “who kept the place in order?”
 “a married couple living in the neighborhood undertook to do so. the man
 attended to the lawn and so forth, and the woman came once a week, i
 believe, to clean up the house.”
 “and lejay?”
 “he came in only last week, having leased the house for six months. his
 family were to have joined him in a day or two, and he, with the aid of
 the pair i have just mentioned, and assisted by a french servant he
 brought over with him, was putting the place in order. at about twelve
 o’clock on friday night this servant ran into a neighboring house
 screaming ‘the fiery hand!’ and when at last a constable arrived and a
 frightened group went up the avenue of the gables, they found m. lejay,
 dead in the avenue, near the steps just outside the hall door! he had the
 same face of horror...”
 “what a tale for the press!” snapped smith.
 “the owner has managed to keep it quiet so far, but this time i think it
 will leak into the press—yes.”
 there was a short silence; then:
 “and you have been down to the gables again?”
 “i was there on saturday, but there’s not a scrap of evidence. the man
 undoubtedly died of fright in the same way as maddison. the place ought to
 be pulled down; it’s unholy.”
 “unholy is the word,” i said. “i never heard anything like it. this m.
 lejay had no enemies?—there could be no possible motive?”
 “none whatever. he was a business man from marseilles, and his affairs
 necessitated his remaining in or near london for some considerable time;
 therefore, he decided to make his headquarters here, temporarily, and
 leased the gables with that intention.”
 nayland smith was pacing the floor with increasing rapidity; he was
 tugging at the lobe of his left ear and his pipe had long since gone out.
 i started to my feet as a tall, bearded man swung open the door and hurled
 himself impetuously into the room. he wore a silk hat, which fitted him
 very ill, and a black frock coat which did not fit him at all.
 “it’s all right, petrie!” cried the apparition; “i’ve leased the gables!”
 it was nayland smith! i stared at him in amazement
 “the first time i have employed a disguise,” continued my friend rapidly,
 “since the memorable episode of the false pigtail.” he threw a small brown
 leather grip upon the floor. “in case you should care to visit the house,
 petrie, i have brought these things. my tenancy commences to-night!”
 two days had elapsed, and i had entirely forgotten the strange story of
 the gables which inspector weymouth had related to us; evidently it was
 otherwise with my friend, and utterly at a loss for an explanation of his
 singular behavior, i stooped mechanically and opened the grip. it
 contained an odd assortment of garments, and amongst other things several
 gray wigs and a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles.
 kneeling there with this strange litter about me, i looked up amazedly.
 nayland smith, with the unsuitable silk hat set right upon the back of his
 head, was pacing the room excitedly, his fuming pipe protruding from the
 tangle of factitious beard.
 “you see, petrie,” he began again, rapidly, “i did not entirely trust the
 agent. i’ve leased the house in the name of professor maxton...”
 “but, smith,” i cried, “what possible reason can there be for disguise?”
 “there’s every reason,” he snapped.
 “why should you interest yourself in the gables?”
 “does no explanation occur to you?”
 “none whatever; to me the whole thing smacks of stark lunacy.”
 “then you won’t come?”
 “i’ve never stuck at anything, smith,” i replied, “however undignified,
 when it has seemed that my presence could be of the slightest use.”
 as i rose to my feet, smith stepped in front of me, and the steely gray
 eyes shone out strangely from the altered face. he clapped his hands upon
 my shoulders.
 “if i assure you that your presence is necessary to my safety,” he said—“that
 if you fail me i must seek another companion—will you come?”
 intuitively, i knew that he was keeping something back, and i was
 conscious of some resentment, but nevertheless my reply was a foregone
 conclusion, and—with the borrowed appearance of an extremely untidy
 old man—i crept guiltily out of my house that evening and into the
 cab which smith had waiting.
 the gables was a roomy and rambling place lying back a considerable
 distance from the road. a semicircular drive gave access to the door, and
 so densely wooded was the ground, that for the most part the drive was
 practically a tunnel—a verdant tunnel. a high brick wall concealed
 the building from the point of view of any one on the roadway, but either
 horn of the crescent drive terminated at a heavy, wrought-iron gateway.
 smith discharged the cab at the corner of the narrow and winding road upon
 which the gables fronted. it was walled in on both sides; on the left the
 wall being broken by tradesmen’s entrances to the houses fronting upon
 another street, and on the right following, uninterruptedly, the grounds
 of the gables. as we came to the gate:
 “nothing now,” said smith, pointing into the darkness of the road before
 us, “except a couple of studios, until one comes to the heath.”
 he inserted the key in the lock of the gate and swung it creakingly open.
 i looked into the black arch of the avenue, thought of the haunted
 residence that lay hidden somewhere beyond, of those who had died in it—especially
 of the one who had died there under the trees—and found myself out
 of love with the business of the night.
 “come on!” said nayland smith briskly, holding the gate open; “there
 should be a fire in the library and refreshments, if the charwoman has
 followed instructions.”
 i heard the great gate clang to behind us. even had there been any moon
 (and there was none) i doubted if more than a patch or two of light could
 have penetrated there. the darkness was extraordinary. nothing broke it,
 and i think smith must have found his way by the aid of some sixth sense.
 at any rate, i saw nothing of the house until i stood some five paces from
 the steps leading up to the porch. a light was burning in the hallway, but
 dimly and inhospitably; of the facade of the building i could perceive
 little.
 when we entered the hall and the door was closed behind us, i began
 wondering anew what purpose my friend hoped to serve by a vigil in this
 haunted place. there was a light in the library, the door of which was
 ajar, and on the large table were decanters, a siphon, and some biscuits
 and sandwiches. a large grip stood upon the floor, also. for some reason
 which was a mystery to me, smith had decided that we must assume false
 names whilst under the roof of the gables; and:
 “now, pearce,” he said, “a whisky-and-soda before we look around?”
 the proposal was welcome enough, for i felt strangely dispirited, and, to
 tell the truth, in my strange disguise, not a little ridiculous.
 all my nerves, no doubt, were highly strung, and my sense of hearing
 unusually acute, for i went in momentary expectation of some uncanny
 happening. i had not long to wait. as i raised the glass to my lips and
 glanced across the table at my friend, i heard the first faint sound
 heralding the coming of the bells.
 it did not seem to proceed from anywhere within the library, but from some
 distant room, far away overhead. a musical sound it was, but breaking in
 upon the silence of that ill-omened house, its music was the music of
 terror. in a faint and very sweet cascade it rippled; a ringing as of tiny
 silver bells.
 i set down my glass upon the table, and rising slowly from the chair in
 which i had been seated, stared fixedly at my companion, who was staring
 with equal fixity at me. i could see that i had not been deluded; nayland
 smith had heard the ringing, too.
 “the ghosts waste no time!” he said softly. “this is not new to me; i
 spent an hour here last night and heard the same sound...”
 i glanced hastily around the room. it was furnished as a library, and
 contained a considerable collection of works, principally novels. i was
 unable to judge of the outlook, for the two lofty windows were draped with
 heavy purple curtains which were drawn close. a silk shaded lamp swung
 from the center of the ceiling, and immediately over the table by which i
 stood. there was much shadow about the room; and now i glanced
 apprehensively about me, but especially toward the open door.
 in that breathless suspense of listening we stood awhile; then:
 “there it is again!” whispered smith, tensely.
 the ringing of bells was repeated, and seemingly much nearer to us; in
 fact it appeared to come from somewhere above, up near the ceiling of the
 room in which we stood. simultaneously, we looked up, then smith laughed,
 shortly.
 “instinctive, i suppose,” he snapped; “but what do we expect to see in the
 air?”
 the musical sound now grew in volume; the first tiny peal seemed to be
 reinforced by others and by others again, until the air around about us
 was filled with the pealings of these invisible bell-ringers.
 although, as i have said, the sound was rather musical than horrible, it
 was, on the other hand, so utterly unaccountable as to touch the supreme
 heights of the uncanny. i could not doubt that our presence had attracted
 these unseen ringers to the room in which we stood, and i knew quite well
 that i was growing pale. this was the room in which at least one unhappy
 occupant of the gables had died of fear. i recognized the fact that if
 this mere overture were going to affect my nerves to such an extent, i
 could not hope to survive the ordeal of the night; a great effort was
 called for. i emptied my glass at a gulp, and stared across the table at
 nayland smith with a sort of defiance. he was standing very upright and
 motionless, but his eyes were turning right and left, searching every
 visible corner of the big room.
 “good!” he said in a very low voice. “the terrorizing power of the unknown
 is boundless, but we must not get in the grip of panic, or we could not
 hope to remain in this house ten minutes.”
 i nodded without speaking. then smith, to my amazement, suddenly began to
 speak in a loud voice, a marked contrast to that, almost a whisper, in
 which he had spoken formerly.
 “my dear pearce,” he cried, “do you hear the ringing of bells?”
 clearly the latter words were spoken for the benefit of the unseen
 intelligence controlling these manifestations; and although i regarded
 such finesse as somewhat wasted, i followed my friend’s lead and replied
 in a voice as loud as his own:
 “distinctly, professor!”
 silence followed my words, a silence in which both stood watchful and
 listening. then, very faintly, i seemed to detect the silvern ringing
 receding away through distant rooms. finally it became inaudible, and in
 the stillness of the gables i could distinctly hear my companion
 breathing. for fully ten minutes we two remained thus, each momentarily
 expecting a repetition of the ringing, or the coming of some new and more
 sinister manifestation. but we heard nothing and saw nothing.
 “hand me that grip, and don’t stir until i come back!” hissed smith in my
 ear.
 he turned and walked out of the library, his boots creaking very loudly in
 that awe-inspiring silence.
 standing beside the table, i watched the open door for his return,
 crushing down a dread that another form than his might suddenly appear
 there.
 i could hear him moving from room to room, and presently, as i waited in
 hushed, tense watchfulness, he came in, depositing the grip upon the
 table. his eyes were gleaming feverishly.
 “the house is haunted, pearce!” he cried. “but no ghost ever frightened
 me! come, i will show you your room.”
 smith walked ahead of me upstairs; he had snapped up the light in the
 hallway, and now he turned and cried back loudly:
 “i fear we should never get servants to stay here.”
 again i detected the appeal to a hidden audience; and there was something
 very uncanny in the idea. the house now was deathly still; the ringing had
 entirely subsided. in the upper corridor my companion, who seemed to be
 well acquainted with the position of the switches, again turned up all the
 lights, and in pursuit of the strange comedy which he saw fit to enact,
 addressed me continuously in the loud and unnatural voice which he had
 adopted as part of his disguise.
 we looked into a number of rooms all well and comfortably furnished, but
 although my imagination may have been responsible for the idea, they all
 seemed to possess a chilly and repellent atmosphere. i felt that to essay
 sleep in any one of them would be the merest farce, that the place to all
 intents and purposes was uninhabitable, that something incalculably evil
 presided over the house.
 and through it all, so obtuse was i, that no glimmer of the truth entered
 my mind. outside again in the long, brightly lighted corridor, we stood
 for a moment as if a mutual anticipation of some new event pending had
 come to us. it was curious that sudden pulling up and silent questioning
 of one another; because, although we acted thus, no sound had reached us.
 a few seconds later our anticipation was realized. from the direction of
 the stairs it came—a low wailing in a woman’s voice; and the
 sweetness of the tones added to the terror of the sound. i clutched at
 smith’s arm convulsively whilst that uncanny cry rose and fell—rose
 and fell—and died away.
 neither of us moved immediately. my mind was working with feverish
 rapidity and seeking to run down a memory which the sound had stirred into
 faint quickness. my heart was still leaping wildly when the wailing began
 again, rising and falling in regular cadence. at that instant i identified
 it.
 during the time smith and i had spent together in egypt, two years before,
 searching for karamaneh, i had found myself on one occasion in the
 neighborhood of a native cemetery near to bedrasheen. now, the scene which
 i had witnessed there rose up again vividly before me, and i seemed to see
 a little group of black-robed women clustered together about a native
 grave; for the wailing which now was dying away again in the gables was
 the same, or almost the same, as the wailing of those egyptian mourners.
 the house was very silent again, now. my forehead was damp with
 perspiration, and i became more and more convinced that the uncanny ordeal
 must prove too much for my nerves. hitherto, i had accorded little
 credence to tales of the supernatural, but face to face with such
 manifestations as these, i realized that i would have faced rather a group
 of armed dacoits, nay! dr. fu-manchu himself, than have remained another
 hour in that ill-omened house.
 my companion must have read as much in my face. but he kept up the
 strange, and to me, purposeless comedy, when presently he spoke.
 “i feel it to be incumbent upon me to suggest,” he said, “that we spend
 the night at a hotel after all.”
 he walked rapidly downstairs and into the library and began to strap up
 the grip.
 “after all,” he said, “there may be a natural explanation of what we’ve
 heard; for it is noteworthy that we have actually seen nothing. it might
 even be possible to get used to the ringing and the wailing after a time.
 frankly, i am loath to go back on my bargain!”
 whilst i stared at him in amazement, he stood there indeterminate as it
 seemed, then:
 “come, pearce!” he cried loudly, “i can see that you do not share my
 views; but for my own part i shall return to-morrow and devote further
 attention to the phenomena.”
 extinguishing the light, he walked out into the hallway, carrying the grip
 in his hand. i was not far behind him. we walked toward the door together,
 and:
 “turn the light out, pearce,” directed smith; “the switch is at your
 elbow. we can see our way to the door well enough, now.”
 in order to carry out these instructions, it became necessary for me to
 remain a few paces in the rear of my companion, and i think i have never
 experienced such a pang of nameless terror as pierced me at the moment of
 extinguishing the light; for smith had not yet opened the door, and the
 utter darkness of the gables was horrible beyond expression. surely
 darkness is the most potent weapon of the unknown. i know that at the
 moment my hand left the switch, i made for the door as though the hosts of
 hell pursued me. i collided violently with smith. he was evidently facing
 toward me in the darkness, for at the moment of our collision, he grasped
 my shoulder as in a vise.
 “my god, petrie! look behind you!” he whispered.
 i was enabled to judge of the extent and reality of his fear by the fact
 that the strange subterfuge of addressing me always as pearce was
 forgotten. i turned, in a flash....
 never can i forget what i saw. many strange and terrible memories are
 mine, memories stranger and more terrible than those of the average man;
 but this thing which now moved slowly down upon us through the
 impenetrable gloom of that haunted place, was (if the term be understood)
 almost absurdly horrible. it was a medieval legend come to life in modern
 london; it was as though some horrible chimera of the black and ignorant
 past was become create and potent in the present.
 a luminous hand—a hand in the veins of which fire seemed to run so
 that the texture of the skin and the shape of the bones within were
 perceptible—in short a hand of glowing, fiery flesh clutching a
 short knife or dagger which also glowed with the same hellish, internal
 luminance, was advancing upon us where we stood—was not three paces
 removed!
 what i did or how i came to do it, i can never recall. in all my years i
 have experienced nothing to equal the stark panic which seized upon me
 then. i know that i uttered a loud and frenzied cry; i know that i tore
 myself like a madman from smith’s restraining grip...
 “don’t touch it! keep away, for your life!” i heard...
 but, dimly i recollect that, finding the thing approaching yet nearer, i
 lashed out with my fists—madly, blindly—and struck something
 palpable...
 what was the result, i cannot say. at that point my recollections merge
 into confusion. something or some one (smith, as i afterwards discovered)
 was hauling me by main force through the darkness; i fell a considerable
 distance onto gravel which lacerated my hands and gashed my knees. then,
 with the cool night air fanning my brow, i was running, running—my
 breath coming in hysterical sobs. beside me fled another figure.... and my
 definite recollections commence again at that point. for this companion of
 my flight from the gables threw himself roughly against me to alter my
 course.
 “not that way! not that way!” came pantingly.
 “not on to the heath... we must keep to the roads...”
 it was nayland smith. that healing realization came to me, bringing such a
 gladness as no words of mine can express nor convey. still we ran on.
 “there’s a policeman’s lantern,” panted my companion. “they’ll attempt
 nothing, now!”
 i gulped down the stiff brandy-and-soda, then glanced across to where
 nayland smith lay extended in the long, cane chair.
 “perhaps you will explain,” i said, “for what purpose you submitted me to
 that ordeal. if you proposed to correct my skepticism concerning
 supernatural manifestations, you have succeeded.”
 “yes,” said my companion, musingly, “they are devilishly clever; but we
 knew that already.”
 i stared at him, fatuously.
 “have you ever known me to waste my time when there was important work to
 do?” he continued. “do you seriously believe that my ghost-hunting was
 undertaken for amusement? really, petrie, although you are very fond of
 assuring me that i need a holiday, i think the shoe is on the other foot!”
 from the pocket of his dressing-gown, he took out a piece of silk fringe
 which had apparently been torn from a scarf, and rolling it into a ball,
 tossed it across to me.
 “smell!” he snapped.
 i did as he directed—and gave a great start. the silk exhaled a
 faint perfume, but its effect upon me was as though some one had cried
 aloud:—
 “karamaneh!”
 beyond doubt the silken fragment had belonged to the beautiful servant of
 dr. fu-manchu, to the dark-eyed, seductive karamaneh. nayland smith was
 watching me keenly.
 “you recognize it—yes?”
 i placed the piece of silk upon the table, slightly shrugging my
 shoulders.
 “it was sufficient evidence in itself,” continued my friend, “but i
 thought it better to seek confirmation, and the obvious way was to pose as
 a new lessee of the gables...”
 “but, smith,” i began...
 “let me explain, petrie. the history of the gables seemed to be
 susceptible of only one explanation; in short it was fairly evident to me
 that the object of the manifestations was to insure the place being kept
 empty. this idea suggested another, and with them both in mind, i set out
 to make my inquiries, first taking the precaution to disguise my identity,
 to which end weymouth gave me the freedom of scotland yard’s fancy
 wardrobe. i did not take the agent into my confidence, but posed as a
 stranger who had heard that the house was to let furnished and thought it
 might suit his purpose. my inquiries were directed to a particular end,
 but i failed to achieve it at the time. i had theories, as i have said,
 and when, having paid the deposit and secured possession of the keys, i
 was enabled to visit the place alone, i was fortunate enough to obtain
 evidence to show that my imagination had not misled me.
 “you were very curious the other morning, i recall, respecting my object
 in borrowing a large brace and bit. my object, petrie, was to bore a
 series of holes in the wainscoating of various rooms at the gables—in
 inconspicuous positions, of course...”
 “but, my dear smith!” i cried, “you are merely adding to my
 mystification.”
 he stood up and began to pace the room in his restless fashion.
 “i had cross-examined weymouth closely regarding the phenomenon of the
 bell-ringing, and an exhaustive search of the premises led to the
 discovery that the house was in such excellent condition that, from
 ground-floor to attic, there was not a solitary crevice large enough to
 admit of the passage of a mouse.”
 i suppose i must have been staring very foolishly indeed, for nayland
 smith burst into one of his sudden laughs.
 “a mouse, i said, petrie!” he cried. “with the brace-and-bit i rectified
 that matter. i made the holes i have mentioned, and before each set a trap
 baited with a piece of succulent, toasted cheese. just open that grip!”
 the light at last was dawning upon my mental darkness, and i pounced upon
 the grip, which stood upon a chair near the window, and opened it. a
 sickly smell of cooked cheese assailed my nostrils.
 “mind your fingers!” cried smith; “some of them are still set, possibly.”
 out from the grip i began to take mouse-traps! two or three of them were
 still set but in the case of the greater number the catches had slipped.
 nine i took out and placed upon the table, and all were empty. in the
 tenth there crouched, panting, its soft furry body dank with perspiration,
 a little white mouse!
 “only one capture!” cried my companion, “showing how well-fed the
 creatures were. examine his tail!”
 but already i had perceived that to which smith would draw my attention,
 and the mystery of the “astral bells” was a mystery no longer. bound to
 the little creature’s tail, close to the root, with fine soft wire such as
 is used for making up bouquets, were three tiny silver bells. i looked
 across at my companion in speechless surprise.
 “almost childish, is it not?” he said; “yet by means of this simple device
 the gables has been emptied of occupant after occupant. there was small
 chance of the trick being detected, for, as i have said, there was
 absolutely no aperture from roof to basement by means of which one of them
 could have escaped into the building.”
 “then...”
 “they were admitted into the wall cavities and the rafters, from some
 cellar underneath, petrie, to which, after a brief scamper under the
 floors and over the ceilings, they instinctively returned for the food
 they were accustomed to receive, and for which, even had it been possible
 (which it was not) they had no occasion to forage.”
 i, too, stood up; for excitement was growing within me. i took up the
 piece of silk from the table.
 “where did you find this?” i asked, my eyes upon smith’s keen face.
 “in a sort of wine cellar, petrie,” he replied, “under the stair. there is
 no cellar proper to the gables—at least no such cellar appears in
 the plans.”
 “but...”
 “but there is one beyond doubt—yes! it must be part of some older
 building which occupied the site before the gables was built. one can only
 surmise that it exists, although such a surmise is a fairly safe one, and
 the entrance to the subterranean portion of the building is situated
 beyond doubt in the wine cellar. of this we have at least two evidences:—the
 finding of the fragment of silk there, and the fact that in one case at
 least—as i learned—the light was extinguished in the library
 unaccountably. this could only have been done in one way: by manipulating
 the main switch, which is also in the wine cellar.”
 “but smith!” i cried, “do you mean that fu-manchu...”
 nayland smith turned in his promenade of the floor, and stared into my
 eyes.
 “i mean that dr. fu-manchu has had a hiding-place under the gables for an
 indefinite period!” he replied. “i always suspected that a man of his
 genius would have a second retreat prepared for him, anticipating the
 event of the first being discovered. oh! i don’t doubt it! the place
 probably is extensive, and i am almost certain—though the point has
 to be confirmed—that there is another entrance from the studio
 further along the road. we know, now, why our recent searchings in the
 east end have proved futile; why the house in museum street was deserted;
 he has been lying low in this burrow at hampstead!”
 “but the hand, smith, the luminous hand...”
 nayland smith laughed shortly.
 “your superstitious fears overcame you to such an extent, petrie—and
 i don’t wonder at it; the sight was a ghastly one—that probably you
 don’t remember what occurred when you struck out at that same ghostly
 hand?”
 “i seemed to hit something.”
 “that was why we ran. but i think our retreat had all the appearance of a
 rout, as i intended that it should. pardon my playing upon your very
 natural fears, old man, but you could not have simulated panic half so
 naturally! and if they had suspected that the device was discovered, we
 might never have quitted the gables alive. it was touch-and-go for a
 moment.”
 “but...”
 “turn out the light!” snapped my companion.
 wondering greatly, i did as he desired. i turned out the light... and in
 the darkness of my own study i saw a fiery fist being shaken at me
 threateningly!... the bones were distinctly visible, and the luminosity of
 the flesh was truly ghastly.
 “turn on the light, again!” cried smith.
 deeply mystified, i did so... and my friend tossed a little electric
 pocket-lamp on to the writing-table.
 “they used merely a small electric lamp fitted into the handle of a glass
 dagger,” he said with a sort of contempt. “it was very effective, but the
 luminous hand is a phenomenon producible by any one who possesses an
 electric torch.”
 “the gables—will be watched?”
 “at last, petrie, i think we have fu-manchu—in his own trap!”
 “dash it all, petrie!” cried smith, “this is most annoying!”
 the bell was ringing furiously, although midnight was long past. whom
 could my late visitor be? almost certainly this ringing portended an
 urgent case. in other words, i was not fated to take part in what i
 anticipated would prove to be the closing scene of the fu-manchu drama.
 “every one is in bed,” i said, ruefully; “and how can i possibly see a
 patient—in this costume?”
 smith and i were both arrayed in rough tweeds, and anticipating the labors
 before us, had dispensed with collars and wore soft mufflers. it was hard
 to be called upon to face a professional interview dressed thus, and
 having a big tweed cap pulled down over my eyes.
 across the writing-table we confronted one another in dismayed silence,
 whilst, below, the bell sent up its ceaseless clangor.
 “it has to be done, smith,” i said, regretfully. “almost certainly it
 means a journey and probably an absence of some hours.”
 i threw my cap upon the table, turned up my coat to hide the absence of
 collar, and started for the door. my last sight of smith showed him
 standing looking after me, tugging at the lobe of his ear and clicking his
 teeth together with suppressed irritability. i stumbled down the dark
 stairs, along the hall, and opened the front door. vaguely visible in the
 light of a street lamp which stood at no great distance away, i saw a
 slender man of medium height confronting me. from the shadowed face two
 large and luminous eyes looked out into mine. my visitor, who, despite the
 warmth of the evening, wore a heavy greatcoat, was an oriental!
 i drew back, apprehensively; then:
 “ah! dr. petrie!” he said in a softly musical voice which made me start
 again, “to god be all praise that i have found you!”
 some emotion, which at present i could not define, was stirring within me.
 where had i seen this graceful eastern youth before? where had i heard
 that soft voice?
 “do you wish to see me professionally?” i asked—yet even as i put
 the question, i seemed to know it unnecessary.
 “so you know me no more?” said the stranger—and his teeth gleamed in
 a slight smile.
 heavens! i knew now what had struck that vibrant chord within me! the
 voice, though infinitely deeper, yet had an unmistakable resemblance to
 the dulcet tones of karamaneh—of karamaneh whose eyes haunted my
 dreams, whose beauty had done much to embitter my years.
 the oriental youth stepped forward, with outstretched hand.
 “so you know me no more?” he repeated; “but i know you, and give praise to
 allah that i have found you!”
 i stepped back, pressed the electric switch, and turned, with leaping
 heart, to look into the face of my visitor. it was a face of the purest
 greek beauty, a face that might have served as a model for praxiteles; the
 skin had a golden pallor, which, with the crisp black hair and magnetic
 yet velvety eyes, suggested to my fancy that this was the young antinious
 risen from the nile, whose wraith now appeared to me out of the night. i
 stifled a cry of surprise, not unmingled with gladness.
 it was aziz—the brother of karamaneh!
 never could the entrance of a figure upon the stage of a drama have been
 more dramatic than the coming of aziz upon this night of all nights. i
 seized the outstretched hand and drew him forward, then reclosed the door
 and stood before him a moment in doubt.
 a vaguely troubled look momentarily crossed the handsome face; with the
 oriental’s unerring instinct, he had detected the reserve of my greeting.
 yet, when i thought of the treachery of karamaneh, when i remember how
 she, whom we had befriended, whom we had rescued from the house of
 fu-manchu, now had turned like the beautiful viper that she was to strike
 at the hand that caressed her; when i thought how to-night we were set
 upon raiding the place where the evil chinese doctor lurked in hiding,
 were set upon the arrest of that malignant genius and of all his
 creatures, karamaneh amongst them, is it strange that i hesitated? yet,
 again, when i thought of my last meeting with her, and of how, twice, she
 had risked her life to save me...
 so, avoiding the gaze of the lad, i took his arm, and in silence we two
 ascended the stairs and entered my study... where nayland smith stood bolt
 upright beside the table, his steely eyes fixed upon the face of the new
 arrival.
 no look of recognition crossed the bronzed features, and aziz who had
 started forward with outstretched hands, fell back a step and looked
 pathetically from me to nayland smith, and from the grim commissioner back
 again to me. the appeal in the velvet eyes was more than i could tolerate,
 unmoved.
 “smith,” i said shortly, “you remember aziz?”
 not a muscle visibly moved in smith’s face, as he snapped back:
 “i remember him perfectly.”
 “he has come, i think, to seek our assistance.”
 “yes, yes!” cried aziz laying his hand upon my arm with a gesture
 painfully reminiscent of karamaneh—“i came only to-night to london.
 oh, my gentlemen! i have searched, and searched, and searched, until i am
 weary. often i have wished to die. and then at last i come to rangoon...”
 “to rangoon!” snapped smith, still with the gray eyes fixed almost
 fiercely upon the lad’s face.
 “to rangoon—yes; and there i heard news at last. i hear that you
 have seen her—have seen karamaneh—that you are back in
 london.” he was not entirely at home with his english. “i know then that
 she must be here, too. i ask them everywhere, and they answer ‘yes.’ oh,
 smith pasha!”—he stepped forward and impulsively seized both smith’s
 hands—“you know where she is—take me to her!”
 smith’s face was a study in perplexity, now. in the past we had befriended
 the young aziz, and it was hard to look upon him in the light of an enemy.
 yet had we not equally befriended his sister?—and she...
 at last smith glanced across at me where i stood just within the doorway.
 “what do you make of it, petrie?” he said harshly. “personally i take it
 to mean that our plans have leaked out.” he sprang suddenly back from aziz
 and i saw his glance traveling rapidly over the slight figure as if in
 quest of concealed arms. “i take it to be a trap!”
 a moment he stood so, regarding him, and despite my well-grounded distrust
 of the oriental character, i could have sworn that the expression of
 pained surprise upon the youth’s face was not simulated but real. even
 smith, i think, began to share my view; for suddenly he threw himself into
 the white cane rest-chair, and, still fixedly regarding aziz:
 “perhaps i have wronged you,” he said. “if i have, you shall know the
 reason presently. tell your own story!”
 there was a pathetic humidity in the velvet eyes of aziz—eyes so
 like those others that were ever looking into mine in dreams—as
 glancing from smith to me he began, hands outstretched,
 characteristically, palms upward and fingers curling, to tell in broken
 english the story of his search for karamaneh...
 “it was fu-manchu, my kind gentlemen—it was the hakim who is really
 not a man at all, but an efreet. he found us again less than four days
 after you had left us, smith pasha!... he found us in cairo, and to
 karamaneh he made the forgetting of all things—even of me—even
 of me...”
 nayland smith snapped his teeth together sharply; then:
 “what do you mean by that?” he demanded.
 for my own part i understood well enough, remembering how the brilliant
 chinese doctor once had performed such an operation as this upon poor
 inspector weymouth; how, by means of an injection of some serum prepared
 (as karamaneh afterwards told us) from the venom of a swamp adder or
 similar reptile, he had induced amnesia, or complete loss of memory. i
 felt every drop of blood recede from my cheeks.
 “smith!” i began...
 “let him speak for himself,” interrupted my friend sharply.
 “they tried to take us both,” continued aziz still speaking in that soft,
 melodious manner, but with deep seriousness. “i escaped, i, who am swift
 of foot, hoping to bring help.”—he shook his head sadly—“but,
 except the all powerful, who is so powerful as the hakim fu-manchu? i hid,
 my gentlemen, and watched and waited, one—two—three weeks. at
 last i saw her again, my sister, karamaneh; but ah! she did not know me,
 did not know me, aziz her brother! she was in an arabeeyeh, and passed me
 quickly along the sharia en-nahhasin. i ran, and ran, and ran, crying her
 name, but although she looked back, she did not know me—she did not
 know me! i felt that i was dying, and presently i fell—upon the
 steps of the mosque of abu.”
 he dropped the expressive hands wearily to his sides and sank his chin
 upon his breast.
 “and then?” i said, huskily—for my heart was fluttering like a
 captive bird.
 “alas! from that day to this i see her no more, my gentlemen. i travel,
 not only in egypt, but near and far, and still i see her no more until in
 rangoon i hear that which brings me to england again”—he extended
 his palms naively—“and here i am—smith pasha.”
 smith sprang upright again and turned to me.
 “either i am growing over-credulous,” he said, “or aziz speaks the truth.
 but”—he held up his hand—“you can tell me all that at some
 other time, petrie! we must take no chances. sergeant carter is downstairs
 with the cab; you might ask him to step up. he and aziz can remain here
 until our return.”
 the muffled drumming of sleepless london seemed very remote from us, as
 side by side we crept up the narrow path to the studio. this was a starry
 but moonless night, and the little dingy white building with a solitary
 tree peeping, in silhouette, above the glazed roof, bore an odd
 resemblance to one of those tombs which form a city of the dead so near to
 the city of feverish life on the slopes of the mokattam hills. this line
 of reflection proved unpleasant, and i dismissed it sternly from my mind.
 the shriek of a train-whistle reached me, a sound which breaks the
 stillness of the most silent london night, telling of the ceaseless,
 febrile life of the great world-capital whose activity ceases not with the
 coming of darkness. around and about us a very great stillness reigned,
 however, and the velvet dusk which, with the star-jeweled sky, was
 strongly suggestive of an eastern night—gave up no sign to show that
 it masked the presence of more than twenty men. some distance away on our
 right was the gables, that sinister and deserted mansion which we assumed,
 and with good reason, to be nothing less than the gateway to the
 subterranean abode of dr. fu-manchu; before us was the studio, which, if
 nayland smith’s deductions were accurate, concealed a second entrance to
 the same mysterious dwelling.
 as my friend, glancing cautiously all about him, inserted the key in the
 lock, an owl hooted dismally almost immediately above our heads. i caught
 my breath sharply, for it might be a signal; but, looking upward, i saw a
 great black shape float slantingly from the tree beyond the studio into
 the coppice on the right which hemmed in the gables. silently the owl
 winged its uncanny flight into the greater darkness of the trees, and was
 gone. smith opened the door and we stepped into the studio. our plans had
 been well considered, and in accordance with these, i now moved up beside
 my friend, who was dimly perceptible to me in the starlight which found
 access through the glass roof, and pressed the catch of my electric
 pocket-lamp...
 i suppose that by virtue of my self-imposed duty as chronicler of the
 deeds of dr. fu-manchu—the greatest and most evil genius whom the
 later centuries have produced, the man who dreamt of an universal yellow
 empire—i should have acquired a certain facility in describing
 bizarre happenings. but i confess that it fails me now as i attempt in
 cold english to portray my emotions when the white beam from the little
 lamp cut through the darkness of the studio, and shone fully upon the
 beautiful face of karamaneh!
 less than six feet away from me she stood, arrayed in the gauzy dress of
 the harem, her fingers and slim white arms laden with barbaric jewelry!
 the light wavered in my suddenly nerveless hand, gleaming momentarily upon
 bare ankles and golden anklets, upon little red leather shoes.
 i spoke no word, and smith was as silent as i; both of us, i think, were
 speechless rather from amazement than in obedience to the evident wishes
 of fu-manchu’s slave-girl. yet i have only to close my eyes at this moment
 to see her as she stood, one finger raised to her lips, enjoining us to
 silence. she looked ghastly pale in the light of the lamp, but so lovely
 that my rebellious heart threatened already, to make a fool of me.
 so we stood in that untidy studio, with canvases and easels heaped against
 the wall and with all sorts of litter about us, a trio strangely met, and
 one to have amused the high gods watching through the windows of the
 stars.
 “go back!” came in a whisper from karamaneh.
 i saw the red lips moving and read a dreadful horror in the widely opened
 eyes, in those eyes like pools of mystery to taunt the thirsty soul. the
 world of realities was slipping past me; i seemed to be losing my hold on
 things actual; i had built up an eastern palace about myself and karamaneh
 wherein, the world shut out, i might pass the hours in reading the mystery
 of those dark eyes. nayland smith brought me sharply to my senses.
 “steady with the light, petrie!” he hissed in my ear. “my skepticism has
 been shaken, to-night, but i am taking no chances.”
 he moved from my side and forward toward that lovely, unreal figure which
 stood immediately before the model’s throne and its background of plush
 curtains. karamaneh started forward to meet him, suppressing a little cry,
 whose real anguish could not have been simulated.
 “go back! go back!” she whispered urgently, and thrust out her hands
 against smith’s breast. “for god’s sake, go back! i have risked my life to
 come here to-night. he knows, and is ready!”...
 the words were spoken with passionate intensity, and nayland smith
 hesitated. to my nostrils was wafted that faint, delightful perfume which,
 since one night, two years ago, it had come to disturb my senses, had
 taunted me many times as the mirage taunts the parched sahara traveler. i
 took a step forward.
 “don’t move!” snapped smith.
 karamaneh clutched frenziedly at the lapels of his coat.
 “listen to me!” she said, beseechingly and stamped one little foot upon
 the floor—“listen to me! you are a clever man, but you know nothing
 of a woman’s heart—nothing—nothing—if seeing me, hearing
 me, knowing, as you do know, i risk, you can doubt that i speak the truth.
 and i tell you that it is death to go behind those curtains—that
 he...”
 “that’s what i wanted to know!” snapped smith. his voice quivered with
 excitement.
 suddenly grasping karamaneh by the waist, he lifted her and set her aside;
 then in three bounds he was on to the model’s throne and had torn the
 plush curtains bodily from their fastenings.
 how it occurred i cannot hope to make dear, for here my recollections
 merge into a chaos. i know that smith seemed to topple forward amid the
 purple billows of velvet, and his muffled cry came to me:
 “petrie! my god, petrie!”...
 the pale face of karamaneh looked up into mine and her hands were
 clutching me, but the glamour of her personality had lost its hold, for i
 knew—heavens, how poignantly it struck home to me!—that
 nayland smith was gone to his death. what i hoped to achieve, i know not,
 but hurling the trembling girl aside, i snatched the browning pistol from
 my coat pocket, and with the ray of the lamp directed upon the purple
 mound of velvet, i leaped forward.
 i think i realized that the curtains had masked a collapsible trap, a
 sheer pit of blackness, an instant before i was precipitated into it, but
 certainly the knowledge came too late. with the sound of a soft,
 shuddering cry in my ears, i fell, dropping lamp and pistol, and clutching
 at the fallen hangings. but they offered me no support. my head seemed to
 be bursting; i could utter only a hoarse groan, as i fell—fell—fell...
 when my mind began to work again, in returning consciousness, i found it
 to be laden with reproach. how often in the past had we blindly hurled
 ourselves into just such a trap as this? should we never learn that where
 fu-manchu was, impetuosity must prove fatal? on two distinct occasions in
 the past we had been made the victims of this device, yet even although we
 had had practically conclusive evidence that this studio was used by dr.
 fu-manchu, we had relied upon its floor being as secure as that of any
 other studio, we had failed to sound every foot of it ere trusting our
 weight to its support....
 “there is such a divine simplicity in the english mind that one may lay
 one’s plans with mathematical precision, and rely upon the nayland smiths
 and dr. petries to play their allotted parts. excepting two faithful
 followers, my friends are long since departed. but here, in these vaults
 which time has overlooked and which are as secret and as serviceable
 to-day as they were two hundred years ago, i wait patiently, with my trap
 set, like the spider for the fly!...”
 to the sound of that taunting voice, i opened my eyes. as i did so i
 strove to spring upright—only to realize that i was tied fast to a
 heavy ebony chair inlaid with ivory, and attached by means of two iron
 brackets to the floor.
 “even children learn from experience,” continued the unforgettable voice,
 alternately guttural and sibilant, but always as deliberate as though the
 speaker were choosing with care words which should perfectly clothe his
 thoughts. “for ‘a burnt child fears the fire,’ says your english adage.
 but mr. commissioner nayland smith, who enjoys the confidence of the india
 office, and who is empowered to control the movements of the criminal
 investigation department, learns nothing from experience. he is less than
 a child, since he has twice rashly precipitated himself into a chamber
 charged with an anesthetic prepared, by a process of my own, from the
 lycoperdon or common puff-ball.”
 i became fully master of my senses, and i became fully alive to a
 stupendous fact. at last it was ended; we were utterly in the power of dr.
 fu-manchu; our race was run.
 i sat in a low vaulted room. the roof was of ancient brickwork, but the
 walls were draped with exquisite chinese fabric having a green ground
 whereon was a design representing a grotesque procession of white
 peacocks. a green carpet covered the floor, and the whole of the furniture
 was of the same material as the chair to which i was strapped, viz:—ebony
 inlaid with ivory. this furniture was scanty. there was a heavy table in
 one corner of the dungeonesque place, on which were a number of books and
 papers. before this table was a high-backed, heavily carven chair. a
 smaller table stood upon the right of the only visible opening, a low door
 partially draped with bead work curtains, above which hung a silver lamp.
 on this smaller table, a stick of incense, in a silver holder, sent up a
 pencil of vapor into the air, and the chamber was loaded with the sickly
 sweet fumes. a faint haze from the incense-stick hovered up under the
 roof.
 in the high-backed chair sat dr. fu-manchu, wearing a green robe upon
 which was embroidered a design, the subject of which at first glance was
 not perceptible, but which presently i made out to be a huge white
 peacock. he wore a little cap perched upon the dome of his amazing skull,
 and with one clawish hand resting upon the ebony of the table, he sat
 slightly turned toward me, his emotionless face a mask of incredible evil.
 in spite of, or because of, the high intellect written upon it, the face
 of dr. fu-manchu was more utterly repellent than any i have ever known,
 and the green eyes, eyes green as those of a cat in the darkness, which
 sometimes burned like witch lamps, and sometimes were horribly filmed like
 nothing human or imaginable, might have mirrored not a soul, but an
 emanation of hell, incarnate in this gaunt, high-shouldered body.
 stretched flat upon the floor lay nayland smith, partially stripped, his
 arms thrown back over his head and his wrists chained to a stout iron
 staple attached to the wall; he was fully conscious and staring intently
 at the chinese doctor. his bare ankles also were manacled, and fixed to a
 second chain, which quivered tautly across the green carpet and passed out
 through the doorway, being attached to something beyond the curtain, and
 invisible to me from where i sat.
 fu-manchu was now silent. i could hear smith’s heavy breathing and hear my
 watch ticking in my pocket. i suddenly realized that although my body was
 lashed to the ebony chair, my hands and arms were free. next, looking
 dazedly about me, my attention was drawn to a heavy sword which stood hilt
 upward against the wall within reach of my hand. it was a magnificent
 piece, of japanese workmanship; a long, curved damascened blade having a
 double-handed hilt of steel, inlaid with gold, and resembling fine kuft
 work. a host of possibilities swept through my mind. then i perceived that
 the sword was attached to the wall by a thin steel chain some five feet in
 length.
 “even if you had the dexterity of a mexican knife-thrower,” came the
 guttural voice of fu-manchu, “you would be unable to reach me, dear dr.
 petrie.”
 the chinaman had read my thoughts.
 smith turned his eyes upon me momentarily, only to look away again in the
 direction of fu-manchu. my friend’s face was slightly pale beneath the
 tan, and his jaw muscles stood out with unusual prominence. by this fact
 alone did he reveal his knowledge that he lay at the mercy of this enemy
 of the white race, of this inhuman being who himself knew no mercy, of
 this man whose very genius was inspired by the cool, calculated cruelty of
 his race, of that race which to this day disposes of hundreds, nay!
 thousands, of its unwanted girl-children by the simple measure of throwing
 them down a well specially dedicated to the purpose.
 “the weapon near your hand,” continued the chinaman, imperturbably, “is a
 product of the civilization of our near neighbors, the japanese, a race to
 whose courage i prostrate myself in meekness. it is the sword of a
 samurai, dr. petrie. it is of very great age, and was, until an
 unfortunate misunderstanding with myself led to the extinction of the
 family, a treasured possession of a noble japanese house...”
 the soft voice, into which an occasional sibilance crept, but which never
 rose above a cool monotone, gradually was lashing me into fury, and i
 could see the muscles moving in smith’s jaws as he convulsively clenched
 his teeth; whereby i knew that, impotent, he burned with a rage at least
 as great as mine. but i did not speak, and did not move.
 “the ancient tradition of seppuku,” continued the chinaman, “or hara-kiri,
 still rules, as you know, in the great families of japan. there is a
 sacred ritual, and the samurai who dedicates himself to this honorable
 end, must follow strictly the ritual. as a physician, the exact nature of
 the ceremony might possibly interest you, dr. petrie, but a technical
 account of the two incisions which the sacrificant employs in his
 self-dismissal, might, on the other hand, bore mr. nayland smith.
 therefore i will merely enlighten you upon one little point, a minor one,
 but interesting to the student of human nature. in short, even a samurai—and
 no braver race has ever honored the world—sometimes hesitates to
 complete the operation. the weapon near to your hand, my dear dr. petrie,
 is known as the friend’s sword. on such occasions as we are discussing, a
 trusty friend is given the post—an honored one of standing behind
 the brave man who offers himself to his gods, and should the latter’s
 courage momentarily fail him, the friend with the trusty blade (to which
 now i especially direct your attention) diverts the hierophant’s mind from
 his digression, and rectifies his temporary breach of etiquette by
 severing the cervical vertebrae of the spinal column with the friendly
 blade—which you can reach quite easily, dr. petrie, if you care to
 extend your hand.”
 some dim perceptions of the truth was beginning to creep into my mind.
 when i say a perception of the truth, i mean rather of some part of the
 purpose of dr. fu-manchu; of the whole horrible truth, of the scheme which
 had been conceived by that mighty, evil man, i had no glimmering, but i
 foresaw that a frightful ordeal was before us both.
 “that i hold you in high esteem,” continued fu-manchu, “is a fact which
 must be apparent to you by this time, but in regard to your companion, i
 entertain very different sentiments....”
 always underlying the deliberate calm of the speaker, sometimes showing
 itself in an unusually deep guttural, sometimes in an unusually serpentine
 sibilance, lurked the frenzy of hatred which in the past had revealed
 itself occasionally in wild outbursts. momentarily i expected such an
 outburst now, but it did not come.
 “one quality possessed by mr. nayland smith,” resumed the chinaman, “i
 admire; i refer to his courage. i would wish that so courageous a man
 should seek his own end, should voluntarily efface himself from the path
 of that world-movement which he is powerless to check. in short, i would
 have him show himself a samurai. always his friend, you shall remain so to
 the end, dr. petrie. i have arranged for this.”
 he struck lightly a little silver gong, dependent from the corner of the
 table, whereupon, from the curtained doorway, there entered a short,
 thickly built burman whom i recognized for a dacoit. he wore a shoddy blue
 suit, which had been made for a much larger man; but these things claimed
 little of my attention, which automatically was directed to the load
 beneath which the burman labored.
 upon his back he carried a sort of wire box rather less than six feet
 long, some two feet high, and about two feet wide. in short, it was a
 stout framework covered with fine wire-netting on the top, sides and ends,
 but being open at the bottom. it seemed to be made in five sections or to
 contain four sliding partitions which could be raised or lowered at will.
 these were of wood, and in the bottom of each was cut a little arch. the
 arches in the four partitions varied in size, so that whereas the first
 was not more than five inches high, the fourth opened almost to the wire
 roof of the box or cage; and a fifth, which was but little higher than the
 first, was cut in the actual end of the contrivance.
 so intent was i upon this device, the purpose of which i was wholly unable
 to divine, that i directed the whole of my attention upon it. then, as the
 burman paused in the doorway, resting a corner of the cage upon the
 brilliant carpet, i glanced toward fu-manchu. he was watching nayland
 smith, and revealing his irregular yellow teeth—the teeth of an
 opium smoker—in the awful mirthless smile which i knew.
 “god!” whispered smith—“the six gates!”
 “the knowledge of my beautiful country serves you well,” replied fu-manchu
 gently.
 instantly i looked to my friend... and every drop of blood seemed to
 recede from my heart, leaving it cold in my breast. if i did not know the
 purpose of the cage, obviously smith knew it all too well. his pallor had
 grown more marked, and although his gray eyes stared defiantly at the
 chinaman, i, who knew him, could read a deathly horror in their depths.
 the dacoit, in obedience to a guttural order from dr. fu-manchu, placed
 the cage upon the carpet, completely covering smith’s body, but leaving
 his neck and head exposed. the seared and pock-marked face set in a sort
 of placid leer, the dacoit adjusted the sliding partitions to smith’s
 recumbent form, and i saw the purpose of the graduated arches. they were
 intended to divide a human body in just such fashion, and, as i realized,
 were most cunningly shaped to that end. the whole of smith’s body lay now
 in the wire cage, each of the five compartments whereof was shut off from
 its neighbor.
 the burman stepped back and stood waiting in the doorway. dr. fu-manchu,
 removing his gaze from the face of my friend, directed it now upon me.
 “mr. commissioner nayland smith shall have the honor of acting as
 hierophant, admitting himself to the mysteries,” said fu-manchu softly,
 “and you, dr. petrie, shall be the friend.”
 he glanced toward the burman, who retired immediately, to re-enter a
 moment later carrying a curious leather sack, in shape not unlike that of
 a sakka or arab water-carrier. opening a little trap in the top of the
 first compartment of the cage (that is, the compartment which covered
 smith’s bare feet and ankles) he inserted the neck of the sack, then
 suddenly seized it by the bottom and shook it vigorously. before my
 horrified gaze four huge rats came tumbling out from the bag into the
 cage! the dacoit snatched away the sack and snapped the shutter fast. a
 moving mist obscured my sight, a mist through which i saw the green eyes
 of dr. fu-manchu fixed upon me, and through which, as from a great
 distance, his voice, sunk to a snake-like hiss, came to my ears.
 “cantonese rats, dr. petrie, the most ravenous in the world... they have
 eaten nothing for nearly a week!”
 then all became blurred as though a painter with a brush steeped in red
 had smudged out the details of the picture. for an indefinite period,
 which seemed like many minutes yet probably was only a few seconds, i saw
 nothing and heard nothing; my sensory nerves were dulled entirely. from
 this state i was awakened and brought back to the realities by a sound
 which ever afterward i was doomed to associate with that ghastly scene.
 this was the squealing of the rats.
 the red mist seemed to disperse at that, and with frightfully intense
 interest, i began to study the awful torture to which nayland smith was
 being subjected. the dacoit had disappeared, and fu-manchu placidly was
 watching the four lean and hideous animals in the cage. as i also turned
 my eyes in that direction, the rats overcame their temporary fear, and
 began...
 “you have been good enough to notice,” said the chinaman, his voice still
 sunk in that sibilant whisper, “my partiality for dumb allies. you have
 met my scorpions, my death-adders, my baboon-man. the uses of such a
 playful little animal as a marmoset have never been fully appreciated
 before, i think, but to an indiscretion of this last-named pet of mine, i
 seem to remember that you owed something in the past, dr. petrie...”
 nayland smith stifled a deep groan. one rapid glance i ventured at his
 face. it was a grayish hue, now, and dank with perspiration. his gaze met
 mine.
 the rats had almost ceased squealing.
 “much depends upon yourself, doctor,” continued fu-manchu, slightly
 raising his voice. “i credit mr. commissioner nayland smith with courage
 high enough to sustain the raising of all the gates; but i estimate the
 strength of your friendship highly, also, and predict that you will use
 the sword of the samurai certainly not later than the time when i shall
 raise the third gate....”
 a low shuddering sound, which i cannot hope to describe, but alas i can
 never forget, broke from the lips of the tortured man.
 “in china,” resumed fu-manchu, “we call this quaint fancy the six gates of
 joyful wisdom. the first gate, by which the rats are admitted, is called
 the gate of joyous hope; the second, the gate of mirthful doubt. the third
 gate is poetically named, the gate of true rapture, and the fourth, the
 gate of gentle sorrow. i once was honored in the friendship of an exalted
 mandarin who sustained the course of joyful wisdom to the raising of the
 fifth gate (called the gate of sweet desires) and the admission of the
 twentieth rat. i esteem him almost equally with my ancestors. the sixth,
 or gate celestial—whereby a man enters into the joy of complete
 understanding—i have dispensed with, here, substituting a japanese
 fancy of an antiquity nearly as great and honorable. the introduction of
 this element of speculation, i count a happy thought, and accordingly take
 pride to myself.”
 “the sword, petrie!” whispered smith. i should not have recognized his
 voice, but he spoke quite evenly and steadily. “i rely upon you, old man,
 to spare me the humiliation of asking mercy from that yellow fiend!”
 my mind throughout this time had been gaining a sort of dreadful clarity.
 i had avoided looking at the sword of hara-kiri, but my thoughts had been
 leading me mercilessly up to the point at which we were now arrived. no
 vestige of anger, of condemnation of the inhuman being seated in the ebony
 chair, remained; that was past. of all that had gone before, and of what
 was to come in the future, i thought nothing, knew nothing. our long fight
 against the yellow group, our encounters with the numberless creatures of
 fu-manchu, the dacoits—even karamaneh—were forgotten, blotted
 out. i saw nothing of the strange appointments of that subterranean
 chamber; but face to face with the supreme moment of a lifetime, i was
 alone with my poor friend—and god.
 the rats began squealing again. they were fighting...
 “quick, petrie! quick, man! i am weakening....”
 i turned and took up the samurai sword. my hands were very hot and dry,
 but perfectly steady, and i tested the edge of the heavy weapon upon my
 left thumb-nail as quietly as one might test a razor blade. it was as
 keen, this blade of ghastly history, as any razor ever wrought in
 sheffield. i seized the graven hilt, bent forward in my chair, and raised
 the friend’s sword high above my head. with the heavy weapon poised there,
 i looked into my friend’s eyes. they were feverishly bright, but never in
 all my days, nor upon the many beds of suffering which it had been my lot
 to visit, had i seen an expression like that within them.
 “the raising of the first gate is always a crucial moment,” came the
 guttural voice of the chinaman. although i did not see him, and barely
 heard his words, i was aware that he had stood up and was bending forward
 over the lower end of the cage.
 “now, petrie! now! god bless you... and good-by...”
 from somewhere—somewhere remote—i heard a hoarse and
 animal-like cry, followed by the sound of a heavy fall. i can scarcely
 bear to write of that moment, for i had actually begun the downward sweep
 of the great sword when that sound came—a faint hope, speaking of
 aid where i had thought no aid possible.
 how i contrived to divert the blade, i do not know to this day; but i do
 know that its mighty sweep sheared a lock from smith’s head and laid bare
 the scalp. with the hilt in my quivering hands i saw the blade bite deeply
 through the carpet and floor above nayland smith’s skull. there, buried
 fully two inches in the woodwork, it stuck, and still clutching the hilt,
 i looked to the right and across the room—i looked to the curtained
 doorway.
 fu-manchu, with one long, claw-like hand upon the top of the first gate,
 was bending over the trap, but his brilliant green eyes were turned in the
 same direction as my own—upon the curtained doorway.
 upright within it, her beautiful face as pale as death, but her great eyes
 blazing with a sort of splendid madness, stood karamaneh!
 she looked, not at the tortured man, not at me, but fully at dr.
 fu-manchu. one hand clutched the trembling draperies; now she suddenly
 raised the other, so that the jewels on her white arm glittered in the
 light of the lamp above the door. she held my browning pistol! fu-manchu
 sprang upright, inhaling sibilantly, as karamaneh pointed the pistol point
 blank at his high skull and fired....
 i saw a little red streak appear, up by the neutral colored hair, under
 the black cap. i became as a detached intelligence, unlinked with the
 corporeal, looking down upon a thing which for some reason i had never
 thought to witness.
 fu-manchu threw up both arms, so that the sleeves of the green robe fell
 back to the elbows. he clutched at his head, and the black cap fell behind
 him. he began to utter short, guttural cries; he swayed backward—to
 the right—to the left then lurched forward right across the cage.
 there he lay, writhing, for a moment, his baneful eyes turned up,
 revealing the whites; and the great gray rats, released, began leaping
 about the room. two shot like gray streaks past the slim figure in the
 doorway, one darted behind the chair to which i was lashed, and the fourth
 ran all around against the wall... fu-manchu, prostrate across the
 overturned cage, lay still, his massive head sagging downward.
 i experienced a mental repetition of my adventure in the earlier evening—i
 was dropping, dropping, dropping into some bottomless pit ... warm arms
 were about my neck; and burning kisses upon my lips.
 i seemed to haul myself back out of the pit of unconsciousness by the aid
 of two little hands which clasped my own. i uttered a sigh that was almost
 a sob, and opened my eyes.
 i was sitting in the big red-leathern armchair in my own study... and a
 lovely but truly bizarre figure, in a harem dress, was kneeling on the
 carpet at my feet; so that my first sight of the world was the sweetest
 sight that the world had to offer me, the dark eyes of karamaneh, with
 tears trembling like jewels upon her lashes!
 i looked no further than that, heeded not if there were others in the room
 beside we two, but, gripping the jewel-laden fingers in what must have
 been a cruel clasp, i searched the depths of the glorious eyes in ever
 growing wonder. what change had taken place in those limpid, mysterious
 pools? why was a wild madness growing up within me like a flame? why was
 the old longing returned, ten-thousandfold, to snatch that pliant,
 exquisite shape to my breast?
 no word was spoken, but the spoken words of a thousand ages could not have
 expressed one tithe of what was held in that silent communion. a hand was
 laid hesitatingly on my shoulder. i tore my gaze away from the lovely face
 so near to mine, and glanced up.
 aziz stood at the back of my chair.
 “god is all merciful,” he said. “my sister is restored to us” (i loved him
 for the plural); “and she remembers.”
 those few words were enough; i understood now that this lovely girl, who
 half knelt, half lay, at my feet, was not the evil, perverted creature of
 fu-manchu whom we had gone out to arrest with the other vile servants of
 the chinese doctor, but was the old, beloved companion of two years ago,
 the karamaneh for whom i had sought long and wearily in egypt, who had
 been swallowed up and lost to me in that land of mystery.
 the loss of memory which fu-manchu had artificially induced was subject to
 the same inexplicable laws which ordinarily rule in cases of amnesia. the
 shock of her brave action that night had begun to effect a cure; the sight
 of aziz had completed it.
 inspector weymouth was standing by the writing-table. my mind cleared
 rapidly now, and standing up, but without releasing the girl’s hands, so
 that i drew her up beside me, i said:
 “weymouth—where is—?”
 “he’s waiting to see you, doctor,” replied the inspector.
 a pang, almost physical, struck at my heart.
 “poor, dear old smith!” i cried, with a break in my voice.
 dr. gray, a neighboring practitioner, appeared in the doorway at the
 moment that i spoke the words.
 “it’s all right, petrie,” he said, reassuringly; “i think we took it in
 time. i have thoroughly cauterized the wounds, and granted that no
 complication sets in, he’ll be on his feet again in a week or two.”
 i suppose i was in a condition closely bordering upon the hysterical. at
 any rate, my behavior was extraordinary. i raised both my hands above my
 head.
 “thank god!” i cried at the top of my voice, “thank god!—thank god!”
 “thank him, indeed,” responded the musical voice of aziz. he spoke with
 all the passionate devoutness of the true moslem.
 everything, even karamaneh was forgotten, and i started for the door as
 though my life depended upon my speed. with one foot upon the landing, i
 turned, looked back, and met the glance of inspector weymouth.
 “what have you done with—the body?” i asked.
 “we haven’t been able to get to it. that end of the vault collapsed two
 minutes after we hauled you out!”
 as i write, now, of those strange days, already they seem remote and
 unreal. but, where other and more dreadful memories already are grown
 misty, the memory of that evening in my rooms remains clear-cut and
 intimate. it marked a crisis in my life.
 during the days that immediately followed, whilst smith was slowly
 recovering from his hurts, i made my plans deliberately; i prepared to cut
 myself off from old associations—prepared to exile myself, gladly;
 how gladly i cannot hope to express in mere cold words.
 that my friend approved of my projects, i cannot truthfully state, but his
 disapproval at least was not openly expressed. to karamaneh i said nothing
 of my plans, but her complete reliance in my powers to protect her, now,
 from all harm, was at once pathetic and exquisite.
 since, always, i have sought in these chronicles to confine myself to the
 facts directly relating to the malignant activity of dr. fu-manchu, i
 shall abstain from burdening you with details of my private affairs. as an
 instrument of the chinese doctor, it has sometimes been my duty to write
 of the beautiful eastern girl; i cannot suppose that my readers have any
 further curiosity respecting her from the moment that fate freed her from
 that awful servitude. therefore, when i shall have dealt with the episodes
 which marked our voyage to egypt—i had opened negotiations in regard
 to a practice in cairo—i may honorably lay down my pen.
 these episodes opened, dramatically, upon the second night of the voyage
 from marseilles.
 i suppose i did not awake very readily. following the nervous vigilance of
 the past six months, my tired nerves, in the enjoyment of this relaxation,
 were rapidly recuperating. i no longer feared to awake to find a knife at
 my throat, no longer dreaded the darkness as a foe.
 so that the voice may have been calling (indeed, had been calling) for
 some time, and of this i had been hazily conscious before finally i awoke.
 then, ere the new sense of security came to reassure me, the old sense of
 impending harm set my heart leaping nervously. there is always a certain
 physical panic attendant upon such awakening in the still of night,
 especially in novel surroundings. now, i sat up abruptly, clutching at the
 rail of my berth and listening.
 there was a soft thudding on my cabin door, and a voice, low and urgent,
 was crying my name.
 through the open porthole the moonlight streamed into my room, and save
 for a remote and soothing throb, inseparable from the progress of a great
 steamship, nothing else disturbed the stillness; i might have floated
 lonely upon the bosom of the mediterranean. but there was the drumming on
 the door again, and the urgent appeal:
 “dr. petrie! dr. petrie!”
 i threw off the bedclothes and stepped on to the floor of the cabin,
 fumbling hastily for my slippers. a fear that something was amiss, that
 some aftermath, some wraith of the dread chinaman, was yet to come to
 disturb our premature peace, began to haunt me. i threw open the door.
 upon the gleaming deck, blackly outlined against a wondrous sky, stood a
 man who wore a blue greatcoat over his pyjamas, and whose unstockinged
 feet were thrust into red slippers. it was platts, the marconi operator.
 “i’m awfully sorry to disturb you, dr. petrie,” he said, “and i was even
 less anxious to arouse your neighbor; but somebody seems to be trying to
 get a message, presumably urgent, through to you.”
 “to me!” i cried.
 “i cannot make it out,” admitted platts, running his fingers through
 disheveled hair, “but i thought it better to arouse you. will you come
 up?”
 i turned without a word, slipped into my dressing-gown, and with platts
 passed aft along the deserted deck. the sea was as calm as a great lake.
 ahead, on the port bow, an angry flambeau burned redly beneath the
 peaceful vault of the heavens. platts nodded absently in the direction of
 the weird flames.
 “stromboli,” he said; “we shall be nearly through the straits by
 breakfast-time.”
 we mounted the narrow stair to the marconi deck. at the table sat platts’ 
 assistant with the marconi attachment upon his head—an apparatus
 which always set me thinking of the electric chair.
 “have you got it?” demanded my companion as we entered the room.
 “it’s still coming through,” replied the other without moving, “but in the
 same jerky fashion. every time i get it, it seems to have gone back to the
 beginning—just dr. petrie—dr. petrie.”
 he began to listen again for the elusive message. i turned to platts.
 “where is it being sent from?” i asked.
 platts shook his head.
 “that’s the mystery,” he declared. “look!”—and he pointed to the
 table; “according to the marconi chart, there’s a messagerie boat due west
 between us and marseilles, and the homeward-bound p. & o. which we
 passed this morning must be getting on that way also, by now. the isis is
 somewhere ahead, but i’ve spoken to all these, and the message comes from
 none of them.”
 “then it may come from messina.”
 “it doesn’t come from messina,” replied the man at the table, beginning to
 write rapidly.
 platts stepped forward and bent over the message which the other was
 writing.
 “here it is!” he cried, excitedly; “we’re getting it.”
 stepping in turn to the table, i leaned over between the two and read
 these words as the operator wrote them down:
 dr. petrie—my shadow...
 i drew a quick breath and gripped platts’ shoulder harshly. his assistant
 began fingering the instrument with irritation.
 “lost it again!” he muttered.
 “this message,” i began...
 but again the pencil was traveling over the paper:—lies upon you
 all... end of message.
 the operator stood up and unclasped the receivers from his ears. there,
 high above the sleeping ship’s company, with the carpet of the blue
 mediterranean stretched indefinitely about us, we three stood looking at
 one another. by virtue of a miracle of modern science, some one, divided
 from me by mile upon mile of boundless ocean, had spoken—and had
 been heard.
 “is there no means of learning,” i said, “from whence this message
 emanated?”
 platts shook his head, perplexedly.
 “they gave no code word,” he said. “god knows who they were. it’s a
 strange business and a strange message. have you any sort of idea, dr.
 petrie, respecting the identity of the sender?”
 i stared him hard in the face; an idea had mechanically entered my mind,
 but one of which i did not choose to speak, since it was opposed to human
 possibility.
 but, had i not seen with my own eyes the bloody streak across his forehead
 as the shot fired by karamaneh entered his high skull, had i not known, so
 certainly as it is given to man to know, that the giant intellect was no
 more, the mighty will impotent, i should have replied:
 “the message is from dr. fu-manchu!”
 my reflections were rudely terminated and my sinister thoughts given new
 stimulus, by a loud though muffled cry which reached me from somewhere in
 the ship, below. both my companions started as violently as i, whereby i
 knew that the mystery of the wireless message had not been without its
 effect upon their minds also. but whereas they paused in doubt, i leaped
 from the room and almost threw myself down the ladder.
 it was karamaneh who had uttered that cry of fear and horror!
 although i could perceive no connection betwixt the strange message and
 the cry in the night, intuitively i linked them, intuitively i knew that
 my fears had been well-grounded; that the shadow of fu-manchu still lay
 upon us.
 karamaneh occupied a large stateroom aft on the main deck; so that i had
 to descend from the upper deck on which my own room was situated to the
 promenade deck, again to the main deck and thence proceed nearly the whole
 length of the alleyway.
 karamaneh and her brother, aziz, who occupied a neighboring room, met me,
 near the library. karamaneh’s eyes were wide with fear; her peerless
 coloring had fled, and she was white to the lips. aziz, who wore a
 dressing-gown thrown hastily over his night attire, had his arm
 protectively about the girl’s shoulders.
 “the mummy!” she whispered tremulously—“the mummy!”
 there came a sound of opening doors, and several passengers, whom
 karamaneh cries had alarmed, appeared in various stages of undress. a
 stewardess came running from the far end of the alleyway, and i found time
 to wonder at my own speed; for, starting from the distant marconi deck,
 yet i had been the first to arrive upon the scene.
 stacey, the ship’s doctor, was quartered at no great distance from the
 spot, and he now joined the group. anticipating the question which
 trembled upon the lips of several of those about me:
 “come to dr. stacey’s room,” i said, taking karamaneh arm; “we will give
 you something to enable you to sleep.” i turned to the group. “my patient
 has had severe nerve trouble,” i explained, “and has developed
 somnambulistic tendencies.”
 i declined the stewardess’ offer of assistance, with a slight shake of the
 head, and shortly the four of us entered the doctor’s cabin, on the deck
 above. stacey carefully closed the door. he was an old fellow student of
 mine, and already he knew much of the history of the beautiful eastern
 girl and her brother aziz.
 “i fear there’s mischief afoot, petrie,” he said.
 “thanks to your presence of mind, the ship’s gossips need know nothing of
 it.”
 i glanced at karamaneh who, since the moment of my arrival had never once
 removed her gaze from me; she remained in that state of passive fear in
 which i had found her, the lovely face pallid; and she stared at me
 fixedly in a childish, expressionless way which made me fear that the
 shock to which she had been subjected, whatever its nature, had caused a
 relapse into that strange condition of forgetfulness from which a previous
 shock had aroused her. i could see that stacey shared my view, for:
 “something has frightened you,” he said gently, seating himself on the arm
 of karamaneh’s chair and patting her hand as if to reassure her. “tell us
 all about it.”
 for the first time since our meeting that night, the girl turned her eyes
 from me and glanced up at stacey, a sudden warm blush stealing over her
 face and throat and as quickly departing, to leave her even more pale than
 before. she grasped stacey’s hand in both her own—and looked again
 at me.
 “send for mr. nayland smith without delay!” she said, and her sweet voice
 was slightly tremulous. “he must be put on his guard!”
 i started up.
 “why?” i said. “for god’s sake tell us what has happened!”
 aziz who evidently was as anxious as myself for information, and who now
 knelt at his sister’s feet looking at her with that strange love, which
 was almost adoration, in his eyes, glanced back at me and nodded his head
 rapidly.
 “something”—karamaneh paused, shuddering violently—“some
 dreadful thing, like a mummy escaped from its tomb, came into my room
 to-night through the porthole...”
 “through the porthole?” echoed stacey, amazedly.
 “yes, yes, through the porthole! a creature tall and very, very thin. he
 wore wrappings—yellow wrappings—swathed about his head, so
 that only his eyes, his evil gleaming eyes, were visible.... from waist to
 knees he was covered, also, but his body, his feet, and his legs were
 bare...”
 “was he—?” i began...
 “he was a brown man, yes,”—karamaneh divining my question, nodded,
 and the shimmering cloud of her wonderful hair, hastily confined, burst
 free and rippled about her shoulders. “a gaunt, fleshless brown man, who
 bent, and writhed bony fingers—so!”
 “a thug!” i cried.
 “he—it—the mummy thing—would have strangled me if i had
 slept, for he crouched over the berth—seeking—seeking...”
 i clenched my teeth convulsively.
 “but i was sitting up—”
 “with the light on?” interrupted stacey in surprise.
 “no,” added karamaneh; “the light was out.” she turned her eyes toward me,
 as the wonderful blush overspread her face once more. “i was sitting
 thinking. it all happened within a few seconds, and quite silently. as the
 mummy crouched over the berth, i unlocked the door and leaped out into the
 passage. i think i screamed; i did not mean to. oh, dr. stacey, there is
 not a moment to spare! mr. nayland smith must be warned immediately. some
 horrible servant of dr. fu-manchu is on the ship!”
 nayland smith leaned against the edge of the dressing-table, attired in
 pyjamas. the little stateroom was hazy with smoke, and my friend gripped
 the charred briar between his teeth and watched the blue-gray clouds
 arising from the bowl, in an abstracted way. i knew that he was thinking
 hard, and from the fact that he had exhibited no surprise when i had
 related to him the particular’s of the attack upon karamaneh i judged that
 he had half anticipated something of the kind. suddenly he stood up,
 staring at me fixedly.
 “your tact has saved the situation, petrie,” he snapped. “it failed you
 momentarily, though, when you proposed to me just now that we should
 muster the lascars for inspection. our game is to pretend that we know
 nothing—that we believe karamaneh to have had a bad dream.”
 “but, smith,” i began—
 “it would be useless, petrie,” he interrupted me. “you cannot suppose that
 i overlooked the possibility of some creature of the doctor’s being among
