 given him by his late employer peace was let off lightly with a month's
 imprisonment.
 after his release peace would seem to have devoted himself for a time to
 music, for which he had always a genuine passion. he taught himself to
 play tunes on a violin with one string, and at entertainments which he
 attended was described as "the modern paganini." in later life when he had
 attained to wealth and prosperity the violin and the harmonium were a
 constant source of solace during long winter evenings in greenwich and
 peckham. but playing a one-stringed violin at fairs and public-houses
 could not be more than a relaxation to a man of peace's active temper, who
 had once tasted what many of those who have practised it, describe as the
 fascination of that particular form of nocturnal adventure known by the
 unsympathetic name of burglary. among the exponents of the art peace was
 at this time known as a "portico-thief," that is to say one who contrived
 to get himself on to the portico of a house and from that point of vantage
 make his entrance into the premises. during the year  the houses of a
 number of well-to-do residents in and about sheffield were entered after
 this fashion, and much valuable property stolen. peace was arrested, and
 with him a girl with whom he was keeping company, and his sister, mary
 ann, at that time mrs. neil. on october , , peace was sentenced at
 doncaster sessions to four years' penal servitude, and the ladies who had
 been found in possession of the stolen property to six months apiece. mrs.
 neil did not long survive her misfortune. she would seem to have been
 married to a brutal and drunken husband, whom peace thrashed on more than
 one occasion for ill-treating his sister. after one of these punishments
 neil set a bulldog on to peace; but peace caught the dog by the lower jaw
 and punched it into a state of coma. the death in  of the unhappy mrs.
 neil was lamented in appropriate verse, probably the work of her brother:
 "i was so long with pain opprest
 that wore my strength away;
 it made me long for endless rest
 which never can decay."
 on coming out of prison in , peace resumed his fiddling, but it was
 now no more than a musical accompaniment to burglary. this had become the
 serious business of peace's life, to be pursued, should necessity arise,
 even to the peril of men's lives. his operations extended beyond the
 bounds of his native town. the house of a lady living in manchester was
 broken into on the night of august , , and a substantial booty
 carried away. this was found the following day concealed in a hole in a
 field. the police left it undisturbed and awaited the return of the
 robber. when peace and another man arrived to carry it away, the officers
 sprang out on them. peace, after nearly killing the officer who was trying
 to arrest him, would have made his escape, had not other policemen come to
 the rescue. for this crime peace was sentenced to six years' penal
 servitude, in spite of a loyal act of perjury on the part of his aged
 mother, who came all the way from sheffield to swear that he had been with
 her there on the night of the crime.
 he was released from prison again in , and returned to sheffield.
 things did not prosper with him there, and he went back to manchester. in
  he was caught in the act of burglary at a house in lower broughton.
 he admitted that at the time he was fuddled with whisky; otherwise his
 capture would have been more difficult and dangerous. usually a temperate
 man, peace realised on this occasion the value of sobriety even in
 burglary, and never after allowed intemperance to interfere with his
 success. a sentence of eight years' penal servitude at manchester assizes
 on december , , emphasised this wholesome lesson.
 whilst serving this sentence peace emulated jack sheppard in a daring
 attempt to escape from wakefield prison. being engaged on some repairs, he
 smuggled a small ladder into his cell. with the help of a saw made out of
 some tin, he cut a hole through the ceiling of the cell, and was about to
 get out on to the roof when a warder came in. as the latter attempted to
 seize the ladder peace knocked him down, ran along the wall of the prison,
 fell off on the inside owing to the looseness of the bricks, slipped into
 the governor's house where he changed his clothes, and there, for an hour
 and a half, waited for an opportunity to escape. this was denied him, and
 he was recaptured in the governor's bedroom. the prisons at millbank,
 chatham and gibraltar were all visited by peace before his final release
 in . at chatham he is said to have taken part in a mutiny and been
 flogged for his pains.
 on his liberation from prison peace rejoined his family in sheffield. he
 was now a husband and father. in  he had taken to wife a widow of the
 name of hannah ward. mrs. ward was already the mother of a son, willie.
 shortly after her marriage with peace she gave birth to a daughter, and
 during his fourth term of imprisonment presented him with a son. peace
 never saw this child, who died before his release. but, true to the family
 custom, on his return from prison the untimely death of little "john
 charles" was commemorated by the printing of a funeral card in his honour,
 bearing the following sanguine verses:
 "farewell, my dear son, by us all beloved,
 thou art gone to dwell in the mansions above.
 in the bosom of jesus who sits on the throne
 thou art anxiously waiting to welcome us home."
 whether from a desire not to disappoint little john charles, for some
 reason or other the next two or three years of peace's career would seem
 to have been spent in an endeavour to earn an honest living by picture
 framing, a trade in which peace, with that skill he displayed in whatever
 he turned his hand to, was remarkably proficient. in sheffield his
 children attended the sunday school. though he never went to church
 himself, he was an avowed believer in both god and the devil. as he said,
 however, that he feared neither, no great reliance could be placed on the
 restraining force of such a belief to a man of peace's daring spirit.
 there was only too good reason to fear that little john charles' period of
 waiting would be a prolonged one.
 in  peace moved from sheffield itself to the suburb of darnall. here
 peace made the acquaintance—a fatal acquaintance, as it turned out—of
 a mr. and mrs. dyson. dyson was a civil engineer. he had spent some years
 in america, where, in , he married.
 toward the end of  or the beginning of , he came to england with
 his wife, and obtained a post on the north eastern railway. he was a tall
 man, over six feet in height, extremely thin, and gentlemanly in his
 bearing. his engagement with the north eastern railway terminated abruptly
 owing to dyson's failing to appear at a station to which he had been sent
 on duty.
 it was believed at the time by those associated with dyson that this
 unlooked-for dereliction of duty had its cause in domestic trouble. since
 the year , the year in which peace came to darnall, the domestic peace
 of mr. dyson had been rudely disturbed by this same ugly little
 picture-framer who lived a few doors away from the dysons' house. peace
 had got to know the dysons, first as a tradesman, then as a friend. to
 what degree of intimacy he attained with mrs. dyson it is difficult to
 determine. in that lies the mystery of the case mrs. dyson is described as
 an attractive woman, "buxom and blooming"; she was dark-haired, and about
 twenty-five years of age. in an interview with the vicar of darnall a few
 days before his execution, peace asserted positively that mrs. dyson had
 been his mistress. mrs. dyson as strenuously denied the fact. there was no
 question that on one occasion peace and mrs. dyson had been photographed
 together, that he had given her a ring, and that he had been in the habit
 of going to music halls and public-houses with mrs. dyson, who was a woman
 of intemperate habits.
 peace had introduced mrs. dyson to his wife and daughter, and on one
 occasion was said to have taken her to his mother's house, much to the old
 lady's indignation. if there were not many instances of ugly men who have
 been notably successful with women, one might doubt the likelihood of mrs.
 dyson falling a victim to the charms of charles peace. but peace, for all
 his ugliness, could be wonderfully ingratiating when he chose. according
 to mrs. dyson, peace was a demon, "beyond the power of even a shakespeare
 to paint," who persecuted her with his attentions, and, when he found them
 rejected, devoted all his malignant energies to making the lives of her
 husband and herself unbearable. according to peace's story he was a
 slighted lover who had been treated by mrs. dyson with contumely and
 ingratitude.
 whether to put a stop to his wife's intimacy with peace, or to protect
 himself against the latter's wanton persecution, sometime about the end of
 june, , dyson threw over into the garden of peace's house a card, on
 which was written: "charles peace is requested not to interfere with my
 family." on july  peace met mr. dyson in the street, and tried to trip
 him up. the same night he came up to mrs. dyson, who was talking with some
 friends, and threatened in coarse and violent language to blow out her
 brains and those of her husband. in consequence of these incidents mr.
 dyson took out a summons against peace, for whose apprehension a warrant
 was issued. to avoid the consequences of this last step peace left darnall
 for hull, where he opened an eating-shop, presided over by mrs. peace.
 but he himself was not idle. from hull he went to manchester on business,
 and in manchester he committed his first murder. entering the grounds of a
 gentleman's home at whalley range, about midnight on august , he was seen
 by two policemen. one of them, constable cock, intercepted him as he was
 trying to escape.
 peace took out his revolver and warned cock to stand back. the policeman
 came on. peace fired, but deliberately wide of him. cock, undismayed, drew
 out his truncheon, and made for the burglar. peace, desperate, determined
 not to be caught, fired again, this time fatally. cock's comrade heard the
 shots, but before he could reach the side of the dying man, peace had made
 off. he returned to hull, and there learned shortly after, to his intense
 relief, that two brothers, john and william habron, living near the scene
 of the murder, had been arrested and charged with the killing of constable
 cock.
 if the dysons thought that they had seen the last of peace, they were soon
 to be convinced to the contrary. peace had not forgotten his friends at
 darnall. by some means or other he was kept informed of all their doings,
 and on one occasion was seen by mrs. dyson lurking near her home. to get
 away from him the dysons determined to leave darnall. they took a house at
 banner cross, another suburb of sheffield, and on october  moved into
 their new home. one of the first persons mrs. dyson saw on arriving at
 banner cross was peace himself. "you see," he said, "i am here to annoy
 you, and i'll annoy you wherever you go." later, peace and a friend passed
 mr. dyson in the street. peace took out his revolver. "if he offers to
 come near me," said he, "i will make him stand back." but mr. dyson took
 no notice of peace and passed on. he had another month to live.
 whatever the other motives of peace may have been—unreasoning
 passion, spite, jealousy, or revenge it must not be forgotten that dyson,
 by procuring a warrant against peace, had driven him from his home in
 sheffield. this peace resented bitterly. according to the statements of
 many witnesses, he was at this time in a state of constant irritation and
 excitement on the dyson's account. he struck his daughter because she
 alluded in a way he did not like to his relations with mrs. dyson. peace
 always believed in corporal chastisement as a means of keeping order at
 home. pleasant and entertaining as he could be, he was feared. it was very
 dangerous to incur his resentment. "be sure," said his wife, "you do
 nothing to offend our charley, or you will suffer for it." dyson beyond a
 doubt had offended "our charley." but for the moment peace was interested
 more immediately in the fate of john and william habron, who were about to
 stand their trial for the murder of constable cock at whalley range.
 the trial commenced at the manchester assizes before mr. justice (now
 lord) lindley on monday, november . john habron was acquitted.
 the case against william habron depended to a great extent on the fact
 that he, as well as his brother, had been heard to threaten to "do for"
 the murdered man, to shoot the "little bobby." cock was a zealous young
 officer of twenty-three years of age, rather too eager perhaps in the
 discharge of his duty. in july of  he had taken out summonses against
 john and william habron, young fellows who had been several years in the
 employment of a nurseryman in whalley range, for being drunk and
 disorderly. on july  william was fined five shillings, and on august ,
 the day of cock's murder, john had been fined half a sovereign. between
 these two dates the habrons had been heard to threaten to "do for" cock if
 he were not more careful. other facts relied upon by the prosecution were
 that william habron had inquired from a gunsmith the price of some
 cartridges a day or two before the murder; that two cartridge percussion
 caps had been found in the pocket of a waistcoat given to william habron
 by his employer, who swore that they could not have been there while it
 was in his possession; that the other constable on duty with cock stated
 that a man he had seen lurking near the house about twelve o'clock on the
 night of the murder appeared to be william habron's age, height and
 complexion, and resembled him in general appearance; and that the boot on
 habron's left foot, which was "wet and sludgy" at the time of his arrest,
 corresponded in certain respects with the footprints of the murderer. the
 prisoner did not help himself by an ineffective attempt to prove an alibi.
 the judge was clearly not impressed by the strength of the case for the
 prosecution. he pointed out to the jury that neither the evidence of
 identification nor that of the footprint went very far. as to the latter,
 what evidence was there to show that it had been made on the night of the
 murder? if it had been made the day before, then the defence had proved
 that it could not have been habron's. he called their attention to the
 facts that habron bore a good character, that, when arrested on the night
 of the murder, he was in bed, and that no firearms had been traced to him.
 in spite, however, of the summing-up the jury convicted william habron,
 but recommended him to mercy. the judge without comment sentenced him to
 death. the manchester guardian expressed its entire concurrence with the
 verdict of the jury. "few persons," it wrote, "will be found to dispute
 the justice of the conclusions reached." however, a few days later it
 opened its columns to a number of letters protesting against the
 unsatisfactory nature of the conviction. on december  a meeting of some
 forty gentlemen was held, at which it was resolved to petition mr. cross,
 the home secretary, to reconsider the sentence. two days before the day of
 execution habron was granted a respite, and later his sentence commuted to
 one of penal servitude for life. and so a tragic and irrevocable
 miscarriage of justice was happily averted.
 peace liked attending trials. the fact that in habron's case he was the
 real murderer would seem to have made him the more eager not to miss so
 unique an experience. accordingly he went from hull to manchester, and was
 present in court during the two days that the trial lasted. no sooner had
 he heard the innocent man condemned to death than he left manchester for
 sheffield—now for all he knew a double murderer.
 it is a question whether, on the night of november , peace met mrs.
 dyson at an inn in one of the suburbs of sheffield. in any case, the next
 morning, wednesday, the th, to his mother's surprise peace walked into
 her house. he said that he had come to sheffield for the fair. the
 afternoon of that day peace spent in a public-house at ecclesall,
 entertaining the customers by playing tunes on a poker suspended from a
 piece of strong string, from which he made music by beating it with a
 short stick. the musician was rewarded by drinks. it took very little
 drink to excite peace. there was dancing, the fun grew fast and furious,
 as the strange musician beat out tune after tune on his fantastic
 instrument.
 at six o'clock the same evening a thin, grey-haired, insignificant-looking
 man in an evident state of unusual excitement called to see the rev. mr.
 newman, vicar of ecclesall, near banner cross. some five weeks before,
 this insignificant-looking man had visited mr. newman, and made certain
 statements in regard to the character of a mr. and mrs. dyson who had come
 to live in the parish. the vicar had asked for proof of these statements.
 these proofs his visitor now produced. they consisted of a number of
 calling cards and photographs, some of them alleged to be in the
 handwriting of mrs. dyson, and showing her intimacy with peace. the man
 made what purported to be a confession to mr. newman. dyson, he said, had
 become jealous of him, whereupon peace had suggested to mrs. dyson that
 they should give her husband something to be jealous about. out of this
 proposal their intimacy had sprung. peace spoke of mrs. dyson in terms of
 forgiveness, but his wrath against dyson was extreme. he complained
 bitterly that by taking proceedings against him, dyson had driven him to
 break up his home and become a fugitive in the land. he should follow the
 dysons, he said, wherever they might go; he believed that they were at
 that moment intending to take further proceedings against him. as he left,
 peace said that he should not go and see the dysons that night, but would
 call on a friend of his, gregory, who lived next door to them in banner
 cross terrace. it was now about a quarter to seven.
 peace went to gregory's house, but his friend was not at home. the lure of
 the dysons was irresistible. a little after eight o'clock peace was
 watching the house from a passageway that led up to the backs of the
 houses on the terrace. he saw mrs. dyson come out of the back door, and go
 to an outhouse some few yards distant. he waited. as soon as she opened
 the door to come out, mrs. dyson found herself confronted by peace,
 holding his revolver in his hand. "speak," he said, "or i'll fire." mrs.
 dyson in terror went back. in the meantime dyson, hearing the disturbance,
 came quickly into the yard. peace made for the passage. dyson followed
 him. peace fired once, the shot striking the lintel of the passage
 doorway. dyson undaunted, still pursued. then peace, according to his
 custom, fired a second time, and dyson fell, shot through the temple. mrs.
 dyson, who had come into the yard again on hearing the first shot, rushed
 to her husband's side, calling out: "murder! you villain! you have shot my
 husband." two hours later dyson was dead.
 after firing the second shot peace had hurried down; the passage into the
 roadway. he stood there hesitating a moment, until the cries of mrs. dyson
 warned him of his danger. he crossed the road, climbed a wall, and made
 his way back to sheffield. there he saw his mother and brother, told them
 that he had shot mr. dyson, and bade them a hasty good-bye. he then walked
 to attercliffe railway station, and took a ticket for beverley. something
 suspicious in the manner of the booking-clerk made him change his place of
 destination. instead of going to beverley that night he got out of the
 train at normanton and went on to york. he spent the remainder of the
 night in the station yard. he took the first train in the morning for
 beverley, and from there travelled via collingham to hull. he went
 straight to the eating-house kept by his wife, and demanded some dinner.
 he had hardly commenced to eat it when he heard two detectives come into
 the front shop and ask his wife if a man called charles peace was lodging
 with her. mrs. peace said that that was her husband's name, but that she
 had not seen him for two months. the detectives proposed to search the
 house. some customers in the shop told them that if they had any business
 with mrs. peace, they ought to go round to the side door. the polite
 susceptibility of these customers gave peace time to slip up to a back
 room, get out on to an adjoining roof, and hide behind a chimney stack,
 where he remained until the detectives had finished an exhaustive search.
 so importunate were the officers in hull that once again during the day
 peace had to repeat this experience. for some three weeks, however, he
 contrived to remain in hull. he shaved the grey beard he was wearing at
 the time of dyson's murder, dyed his hair, put on a pair of spectacles,
 and for the first time made use of his singular power of contorting his
 features in such a way as to change altogether the character of his face.
 but the hue and cry after him was unremitting. there was a price of l
 on his head, and the following description of him was circulated by the
 police:
 "charles peace wanted for murder on the night of the th inst. he is thin
 and slightly built, from fifty-five to sixty years of age. five feet four
 inches or five feet high; grey (nearly white) hair, beard and whiskers. he
 lacks use of three fingers of left hand, walks with his legs rather wide
 apart, speaks somewhat peculiarly as though his tongue were too large for
 his mouth, and is a great boaster. he is a picture-frame maker. he
 occasionally cleans and repairs clocks and watches and sometimes deals in
 oleographs, engravings and pictures. he has been in penal servitude for
 burglary in manchester. he has lived in manchester, salford, and liverpool
 and hull."
 this description was altered later and peace's age given as forty-six. as
 a matter of fact he was only forty-four at this time, but he looked very
 much older. peace had lost one of his fingers. he said that it had been
 shot off by a man with whom he had quarrelled, but it was believed to be
 more likely that he had himself shot it off accidentally in handling one
 of his revolvers. it was to conceal this obvious means of identification
 that peace made himself the false arm which he was in the habit of
 wearing. this was of gutta percha, with a hole down the middle of it into
 which he passed his arm; at the end was a steel plate to which was fixed a
 hook; by means of this hook peace could wield a fork and do other
 dexterous feats.
 marked man as he was, peace felt it dangerous to stay longer in hull than
 he could help. during the closing days of the year  and the beginning
 of , peace was perpetually on the move. he left hull for doncaster,
 and from there travelled to london. on arriving at king's cross he took
 the underground railway to paddington, and from there a train to bristol.
 at the beginning of january he left bristol for bath, and from bath, in
 the company of a sergeant of police, travelled by way of didcot to oxford.
 the officer had in his custody a young woman charged with stealing l.
 peace and the sergeant discussed the case during the journey. "he seemed a
 smart chap," said peace in relating the circumstances, "but not smart
 enough to know me." from oxford he went to birmingham, where he stayed
 four or five days, then a week in derby, and on january th he arrived in
 nottingham.
 here peace found a convenient lodging at the house of one, mrs. adamson, a
 lady who received stolen goods and on occasion indicated or organised
 suitable opportunities for acquiring them.
 she lived in a low part of the town known as the marsh. it was at her
 house that peace met the woman who was to become his mistress and
 subsequently betray his identity to the police. her maiden name was susan
 gray.
 she was at this time about thirty-five years of age, described as "taking"
 in appearance, of a fair complexion, and rather well educated. she had led
 a somewhat chequered married life with a gentleman named bailey, from whom
 she continued in receipt of a weekly allowance until she passed under the
 protection of peace. her first meeting with her future lover took place on
 the occasion of peace inviting mrs. adamson to dispose of a box of cigars
 for him, which that good woman did at a charge of something like thirty
 per cent. at first peace gave himself out to mrs. bailey as a hawker, but
 before long he openly acknowledged his real character as an accomplished
 burglar. with characteristic insistence peace declared his passion for
 mrs. bailey by threatening to shoot her if she did not become his. anxious
 friends sent for her to soothe the distracted man. peace had been drowning
 care with the help of irish whiskey. he asked "his pet" if she were not
 glad to see him, to which the lady replied with possible sarcasm: "oh,
 particularly, very, i like you so much." next day peace apologised for his
 rude behaviour of the previous evening, and so melted the heart of mrs.
 bailey that she consented to become his mistress, and from that moment
 discarding the name of bailey is known to history as mrs. thompson.
 life in nottingham was varied pleasantly by burglaries carried out with
 the help of information supplied by mrs. adamson. in the june of 
 peace was nearly detected in stealing, at the request of that worthy, some
 blankets, but by flourishing his revolver he contrived to get away, and,
 soon after, returned for a season to hull. here this hunted murderer, with
 l reward on his head, took rooms for mrs. thompson and himself at the
 house of a sergeant of police. one day mrs. peace, who was still keeping
 her shop in hull, received a pencilled note saying, "i am waiting to see
 you just up anlaby road." she and her stepson, willie ward, went to the
 appointed spot, and there to their astonishment stood her husband, a
 distinguished figure in black coat and trousers, top hat, velvet
 waistcoat, with stick, kid gloves, and a pretty little fox terrier by his
 side. peace told them of his whereabouts in the town, but did not disclose
 to them the fact that his mistress was there also. to the police sergeant
 with whom he lodged, peace described himself as an agent. but a number of
 sensational and successful burglaries at the houses of town councillors
 and other well-to-do citizens of hull revealed the presence in their midst
 of no ordinary robber. peace had some narrow escapes, but with the help of
 his revolver, and on one occasion the pusillanimity of a policeman, he
 succeeded in getting away in safety. the bills offering a reward for his
 capture were still to be seen in the shop windows of hull, so after a
 brief but brilliant adventure peace and mrs. thompson returned to
 nottingham.
 here, as the result of further successful exploits, peace found a reward
 of l offered for his capture. on one occasion the detectives came into
 the room where peace and his mistress were in bed. after politely
 expressing his surprise at seeing "mrs. bailey" in such a situation, one
 of the officers asked peace his name. he gave it as john ward, and
 described himself as a hawker of spectacles. he refused to get up and
 dress in the presence of the detectives who were obliging enough to go
 downstairs and wait his convenience. peace seized the opportunity to slip
 out of the house and get away to another part of the town. from there he
 sent a note to mrs. thompson insisting on her joining him. he soon after
 left nottingham, paid another brief visit to hull, but finding that his
 wife's shop was still frequented by the police, whom he designated freely
 as "a lot of fools," determined to quit the north for good and begin life
 afresh in the ampler and safer field of london.
 peace's career in london extended over nearly two years, but they were
 years of copious achievement. in that comparatively short space of time,
 by the exercise of that art, to his natural gifts for which he had now
 added the wholesome tonic of experience, peace passed from a poor and
 obscure lodging in a slum in lambeth to the state and opulence of a
 comfortable suburban residence in peckham. these were the halcyon days of
 peace's enterprise in life. from no.  stangate street, lambeth, the
 dealer in musical instruments, as peace now described himself, sallied
 forth night after night, and in camberwell and other parts of south london
 reaped the reward of skill and vigilance in entering other people's houses
 and carrying off their property. though in the beginning there appeared to
 be but few musical instruments in stangate street to justify his reputed
 business, "mr. thompson," as he now called himself, explained that he was
 not wholly dependent on his business, as mrs. thompson "had money."
 so successful did the business prove that at the christmas of  peace
 invited his daughter and her betrothed to come from hull and spend the
 festive season with him. this, in spite of the presence of mrs. thompson,
 they consented to do. peace, in a top hat and grey ulster, showed them the
 sights of london, always inquiring politely of a policeman if he found
 himself in any difficulty. at the end of the visit peace gave his consent
 to his daughter's marriage with mr. bolsover, and before parting gave the
 young couple some excellent advice. for more reasons than one peace was
 anxious to unite under the same roof mrs. peace and mrs. thompson. things
 still prospering, peace found himself able to remove from lambeth to crane
 court, greenwich, and before long to take a couple of adjoining houses in
 billingsgate street in the same district. these he furnished in style. in
 one he lived with mrs. thompson, while mrs. peace and her son, willie,
 were persuaded after some difficulty to leave hull and come to london to
 dwell in the other.
 but greenwich was not to the taste of mrs. thompson. to gratify her wish,
 peace, some time in may, , removed the whole party to a house, no. ,
 east terrace, evelina road, peckham. he paid thirty pounds a year for it,
 and obtained permission to build a stable for his pony and trap. when
 asked for his references, peace replied by inviting the agent to dine with
 him at his house in greenwich, a proceeding that seems to have removed all
 doubt from the agent's mind as to the desirability of the tenant.
 this now famous house in peckham was of the ordinary type of suburban
 villa, with basement, ground floor, and one above; there were steps up to
 the front door, and a bow window to the front sitting-room. a garden at
 the back of the house ran down to the chatham and dover railway line. it
 was by an entrance at the back that peace drove his horse and trap into
 the stable which he had erected in the garden. though all living in the
 same house, mrs. peace, who passed as mrs. ward, and her son, willie,
 inhabited the basement, while peace and mrs. thompson occupied the best
 rooms on the ground floor. the house was fitted with venetian blinds. in
 the drawing-room stood a good walnut suite of furniture; a turkey carpet,
 gilded mirrors, a piano, an inlaid spanish guitar, and, by the side of an
 elegant table, the beaded slippers of the good master of the house
 completed the elegance of the apartment. everything confirmed mr.
 thompson's description of himself as a gentleman of independent means with
 a taste for scientific inventions. in association with a person of the
 name of brion, peace did, as a fact, patent an invention for raising
 sunken vessels, and it is said that in pursuing their project, the two men
 had obtained an interview with mr. plimsoll at the house of commons. in
 any case, the patent gazette records the following grant:
 " henry fersey brion,  philip road, peckham rye, london, s.e., and
 john thompson,  east terrace, evelina road, peckham rye, london, s.e.,
 for an invention for raising sunken vessels by the displacement of water
 within the vessels by air and gases."
 at the time of his final capture peace was engaged on other inventions,
 among them a smoke helmet for firemen, an improved brush for washing
 railway carriages, and a form of hydraulic tank. to the anxious policeman
 who, seeing a light in mr. thompson's house in the small hours of the
 morning, rang the bell to warn the old gentleman of the possible presence
 of burglars, this business of scientific inventions was sufficient
 explanation.
 socially mr. thompson became quite a figure in the neighbourhood. he
 attended regularly the sunday evening services at the parish church, and
 it must have been a matter of anxious concern to dear mr. thompson that
 during his stay in peckham the vicarage was broken into by a burglar and
 an unsuccessful attempt made to steal the communion plate which was kept
 there.
 mr. thompson was generous in giving and punctual in paying. he had his
 eccentricities. his love of birds and animals was remarkable. cats, dogs,
 rabbits, guinea-pigs, canaries, parrots and cockatoos all found
 hospitality under his roof. it was certainly eccentricity in mr. thompson
 that he should wear different coloured wigs; and that his dark complexion
 should suggest the use of walnut juice. his love of music was evinced by
 the number of violins, banjoes, guitars, and other musical instruments
 that adorned his drawing-room. tea and music formed the staple of the
 evening entertainments which mr. and mrs. thompson would give occasionally
 to friendly neighbours. not that the pleasures of conversation were
 neglected wholly in favour of art. the host was a voluble and animated
 talker, his face and body illustrating by appropriate twists and turns the
 force of his comments. the russo-turkish war, then raging, was a favourite
 theme of mr. thompson's. he asked, as we are still asking, what
 christianity and civilisation mean by countenancing the horrors of war. he
 considered the british government in the highest degree guilty in
 supporting the cruel turks, a people whose sobriety seemed to him to be
 their only virtue, against the christian russians. he was confident that
 our ministers would be punished for opposing the only power which had
 shown any sympathy with suffering races. about ten o'clock mr. thompson,
 whose health, he said, could not stand late hours, would bid his guests
 good night, and by half-past ten the front door of no. , east terrace,
 evelina road, would be locked and bolted, and the house plunged in
 darkness.
 not that it must be supposed that family life at no. , east terrace, was
 without its jars. these were due chiefly to the drunken habits of mrs.
 thompson. peace was willing to overlook his mistress' failing as long as
 it was confined to the house. but mrs. thompson had an unfortunate habit
 of slipping out in an intoxicated condition, and chattering with the
 neighbours. as she was the repository of many a dangerous secret the
 inconvenience of her habit was serious. peace was not the man to hesitate
 in the face of danger. on these occasions mrs. thompson was followed by
 peace or his wife, brought back home and soundly beaten. to hannah peace
 there must have been some satisfaction in spying on her successful rival,
 for, in her own words, peace never refused his mistress anything; he did
 not care what she cost him in dress; "she could swim in gold if she
 liked." mrs. thompson herself admitted that with the exception of such
 punishment as she brought on herself by her inebriety, peace was always
 fond of her, and treated her with great kindness. it was she to whom he
 would show with pride the proceeds of his nightly labours, to whom he
 would look for a smile when he returned home from his expeditions, haggard
 and exhausted
 through all dangers and difficulties the master was busy in the practice
 of his art. night after night, with few intervals of repose, he would
 sally forth on a plundering adventure. if the job was a distant one, he
 would take his pony and trap. peace was devoted to his pony, tommy, and
 great was his grief when at the end of six months' devotion to duty tommy
 died after a few days' sickness, during which his master attended him with
 unremitting care. tommy had been bought in greenwich for fourteen guineas,
 part of a sum of two hundred and fifty pounds which peace netted from a
 rich haul of silver and bank-notes taken from a house in denmark hill.
 besides the pony and trap, peace would take with him on these expeditions
 a violin case containing his tools; at other times they would be stuffed
 into odd pockets made for the purpose in his trousers. these tools
 consisted of ten in all—a skeleton key, two pick-locks, a
 centre-bit, gimlet, gouge, chisel, vice jemmy and knife; a portable
 ladder, a revolver and life preserver completed his equipment.
 the range of peace's activities extended as far as southampton, portsmouth
 and southsea; but the bulk of his work was done in blackheath, streatham,
 denmark hill, and other suburbs of south london. many dramatic stories are
 told of his exploits, but they rest for the most part on slender
 foundation. on one occasion, in getting on to a portico, he fell, and was
 impaled on some railings, fortunately in no vital part. his career as a
 burglar in london lasted from the beginning of the year  until
 october, . during that time this wanted man, under the very noses of
 the police, exercised with complete success his art as a burglar, working
 alone, depending wholly on his own mental and physical gifts, disposing in
 absolute secrecy of the proceeds of his work, and living openly the life
 of a respectable and industrious old gentleman.
 all the while the police were busily seeking charles peace, the murderer
 of mr. dyson. once or twice they came near to capturing him. on one
 occasion a detective who had known peace in yorkshire met him in
 farringdon road, and pursued him up the steps of holborn viaduct, but just
 as the officer, at the top of the steps, reached out and was on the point
 of grabbing his man, peace with lightning agility slipped through his
 fingers and disappeared. the police never had a shadow of suspicion that
 mr. thompson of peckham was charles peace of sheffield. they knew the
 former only as a polite and chatty old gentleman of a scientific turn of
 mind, who drove his own pony and trap, and had a fondness for music and
 keeping pet animals.
 peace made the mistake of outstaying his welcome in the neighbourhood of
 south-east london. perhaps he hardly realised the extent to which his fame
 was spreading. during the last three months of peace's career, blackheath
 was agog at the number of successful burglaries committed in the very
 midst of its peaceful residents. the vigilance of the local police was
 aroused, the officers on night duty were only too anxious to effect the
 capture of the mysterious criminal.
 about two o'clock in the morning of october , , a police constable,
 robinson by name, saw a light appear suddenly in a window at the back of a
 house in st. john's park, blackheath, the residence of a mr. burness. had
 the looked-for opportunity arrived? was the mysterious visitor, the
 disturber of the peace of blackheath, at his burglarious employment?
 without delay robinson summoned to his aid two of his colleagues. one of
 them went round to the front of the house and rang the bell, the other
 waited in the road outside, while robinson stayed in the garden at the
 back. no sooner had the bell rung than robinson saw a man come from the
 dining-room window which opened on to the garden, and make quickly down
 the path. robinson followed him. the man turned; "keep back!" he said, "or
 by god i'll shoot you!" robinson came on. the man fired three shots from a
 revolver, all of which passed close to the officer's head. robinson made
 another rush for him, the man fired another shot. it missed its mark. the
 constable closed with his would-be assassin, and struck him in the face.
 "i'll settle you this time," cried the man, and fired a fifth shot, which
 went through robinson's arm just above the elbow. but, in spite of his
 wound, the valiant officer held his prisoner, succeeded in flinging him to
 the ground, and catching hold of the revolver that hung round the
 burglar's wrist, hit him on the head with it. immediately after the other
 two constables came to the help of their colleague, and the struggling
 desperado was secured.
 little did the police as they searched their battered and moaning prisoner
 realise the importance of their capture. when next morning peace appeared
 before the magistrate at greenwich police court he was not described by
 name—he had refused to give any—but as a half-caste about
 sixty years of age, of repellant aspect. he was remanded for a week. the
 first clue to the identity of their prisoner was afforded by a letter
 which peace, unable apparently to endure the loneliness and suspense of
 prison any longer, wrote to his co-inventor mr. brion. it is dated
 november , and is signed "john ward." peace was disturbed at the absence
 of all news from his family. immediately after his arrest, the home in
 peckham had been broken up. mrs. thompson and mrs. peace, taking with them
 some large boxes, had gone first to the house of a sister of mrs.
 thompson's in nottingham, and a day or two later mrs. peace had left
 nottingham for sheffield. there she went to a house in hazel road,
 occupied by her son-in-law bolsover, a working collier.()
 () later, mrs. peace was arrested and charged with being in possession
of stolen property. she was taken to london and tried at the old bailey
before mr. commissioner kerr, but acquitted on the ground of her having
acted under the compulsion of her husband.
 it was no doubt to get news of his family that peace wrote to brion. but
 the letters are sufficiently ingenious. peace represents himself as a
 truly penitent sinner who has got himself into a most unfortunate and
 unexpected "mess" by giving way to drink. the spelling of the letters is
 exaggeratedly illiterate. he asks mr. brion to take pity on him and not
 despise him as "his own famery has don," to write him a letter to "hease
 his trobel hart," if possible to come and see him. mr. brion complied with
 the request of the mysterious "john ward," and on arriving at newgate
 where peace was awaiting trial, found himself in the presence of his
 friend and colleague, mr. thompson.
 in the meantime the police were getting hot on the scent of the identity
 of "john ward" with the great criminal who in spite of all their efforts
 had eluded them for two years. the honour and profit of putting the police
 on the right scent were claimed by mrs. thompson. to her peace had
 contrived to get a letter conveyed about the same time that he wrote to
 mr. brion. it is addressed to his "dearly beloved wife." he asks pardon
 for the "drunken madness" that has involved him in his present trouble,
 and gives her the names of certain witnesses whom he would wish to be
 called to prove his independent means and his dealings in musical
 instruments. it is, he writes, his first offence, and as he has "never
 been in prison before," begs her not to feel it a disgrace to come and see
 him there. but peace was leaning on a broken reed. loyalty does not appear
 to have been susan thompson's strong point. in her own words she "was not
 of the sentimental sort." the "traitress sue," as she is called by
 chroniclers of the time, had fallen a victim to the wiles of the police.
 since, after peace's arrest, she had been in possession of a certain
 amount of stolen property, it was easier no doubt to persuade her to be
 frank.
 in any case, we find that on february , , the day after peace had
 been sentenced to death for the murder of dyson, mrs. thompson appealed to
 the treasury for the reward of l offered for peace's conviction. she
 based her application on information which she said she had supplied to
 the police officers in charge of the case on november  in the previous
 year, the very day on which peace had first written to her from newgate.
 in reply to her letter the treasury referred "mrs. s. bailey, alias
 thompson," to the home office, but whether she received from that office
 the price of blood history does not relate.
 the police scouted the idea that any revelation of hers had assisted them
 to identify "john ward" with charles peace. they said that it was
 information given them in peckham, no doubt by mr. brion, who, on learning
 the deplorable character of his coadjutor, had placed himself unreservedly
 in their hands, which first set them on the track. from peckham they went
 to nottingham, where they no doubt came across sue thompson, and thence to
 sheffield, where on november  they visited the house in hazel road,
 occupied by mrs. peace and her daughter, mrs. bolsover. there they found
 two of the boxes which mrs. peace had brought with her from peckham.
 besides stolen property, these boxes contained evidence of the identity of
 ward with peace. a constable who had known peace well in sheffield was
 sent to newgate, and taken into the yard where the prisoners awaiting
 trial were exercising. as they passed round, the constable pointed to the
 fifth man: "that's peace," he said, "i'd know him anywhere." the man left
 the ranks and, coming up to the constable, asked earnestly, "what do you
 want me for?" but the governor ordered him to go on with his walk.
 it was as john ward, alias charles peace, that peace, on november ,
 , was put on his trial for burglary and the attempted murder of police
 constable robinson, at the old bailey before mr. justice hawkins. his age
 was given in the calendar as sixty, though peace was actually forty-six.
 the evidence against the prisoner was clear enough. all mr. montagu
 williams could urge in his defence was that peace had never intended to
 kill the officer, merely to frighten him. the jury found peace guilty of
 attempted murder. asked if he had anything to say why judgment should not
 be passed upon him, he addressed the judge. he protested that he had not
 been fairly dealt with, that he never intended to kill the prosecutor,
 that the pistol was one that went off very easily, and that the last shot
 had been fired by accident. "i really did not know," he said, "that the
 pistol was loaded, and i hope, my lord, that you will have mercy on me. i
 feel that i have disgraced myself, i am not fit either to live or die. i
 am not prepared to meet my god, but still i feel that my career has been
 made to appear much worse than it really is. oh, my lord, do have mercy on
 me; do give me one chance of repenting and of preparing to meet my god.
 do, my lord, have mercy on me; and i assure you that you shall never
 repent it. as you hope for mercy yourself at the hands of the great god,
 do have mercy on me, and give me a chance of redeeming my character and
 preparing myself to meet my god. i pray, and beseech you to have mercy
 upon me."
 peace's assumption of pitiable senility, sustained throughout the trial,
 though it imposed on sir henry hawkins, failed to melt his heart. he told
 peace that he did not believe his statement that he had fired the pistol
 merely to frighten the constable; had not robinson guarded his head with
 his arm he would have been wounded fatally, and peace condemned to death.
 he did not consider it necessary, he said, to make an inquiry into peace's
 antecedents; he was a desperate burglar, and there was an end of the
 matter. notwithstanding his age, mr. justice hawkins felt it his duty to
 sentence him to penal servitude for life. the severity of the sentence was
 undoubtedly a painful surprise to peace; to a man of sixty years of age it
 would be no doubt less terrible, but to a man of forty-six it was
 crushing.
 not that peace was fated to serve any great part of his sentence.
 with as little delay as possible he was to be called on to answer to the
 murder of arthur dyson. the buxom widow of the murdered man had been found
 in america, whither she had returned after her husband's death. she was
 quite ready to come to england to give evidence against her husband's
 murderer. on january , , peace was taken from pentonville prison,
 where he was serving his sentence, and conveyed by an early morning train
 to sheffield. there at the town hall he appeared before the stipendiary
 magistrate, and was charged with the murder of arthur dyson. when he saw
 mrs. dyson enter the witness box and tell her story of the crime, he must
 have realised that his case was desperate. her cross-examination was
 adjourned to the next hearing, and peace was taken back to london. on the
 nd, the day of the second hearing in sheffield, an enormous crowd had
 assembled outside the town hall. inside the court an anxious and expectant
 audiience{sic}, among them mrs. dyson, in the words of a contemporary
 reporter, "stylish and cheerful," awaited the appearance of the
 protagonist. great was the disappointment and eager the excitement when
 the stipendiary came into the court about a quarter past ten and stated
 that peace had attempted to escape that morning on the journey from london
 to sheffield, and that in consequence of his injuries the case would be
 adjourned for eight days.
 what had happened was this. peace had left king's cross by the . train
 that morning, due to arrive at sheffield at .. from the very
 commencement of the journey he had been wilful and troublesome. he kept
 making excuses for leaving the carriage whenever the train stopped. to
 obviate this nuisance the two warders, in whose charge he was, had
 provided themselves with little bags which peace could use when he wished
 and then throw out of the window. just after the train passed worksop,
 peace asked for one of the bags. when the window was lowered to allow the
 bag to be thrown away, peace with lightning agility took a flying leap
 through it. one of the warders caught him by the left foot. peace, hanging
 from the carriage, grasped the footboard with his hands and kept kicking
 the warder as hard as he could with his right foot. the other warder,
 unable to get to the window to help his colleague, was making vain efforts
 to stop the train by pulling the communication cord. for two miles the
 train ran on, peace struggling desperately to escape. at last he succeeded
 in kicking off his left shoe, and dropped on to the line. the train ran on
 another mile until, with the assistance of some gentlemen in other
 carriages, the warders were able to get it pulled up. they immediately
 hurried back along the line, and there, near a place called kineton park,
 they found their prisoner lying in the footway, apparently unconscious and
 bleeding from a severe wound in the scalp. a slow train from sheffield
 stopped to pick up the injured man. as he was lifted into the guard's van,
 he asked them to cover him up as he was cold. on arriving at sheffield,
 peace was taken to the police station and there made as comfortable as
 possible in one of the cells. even then he had energy enough to be
 troublesome over taking the brandy ordered for him by the surgeon, until
 one of the officers told "charley" they would have none of his
 hanky-panky, and he had got to take it. "all right," said peace, "give me
 a minute," after which he swallowed contentedly a couple of gills of the
 genial spirit.
 peace's daring feat was not, according to his own account, a mere attempt
 to escape from the clutches of the law; it was noble and roman in its
 purpose. this is what he told his stepson, willie ward: "i saw from the
 way i was guarded all the way down from london and all the way back, when
 i came for my first trial, that i could not get away from the warders, and
 i knew i could not jump from an express train without being killed. i took
 a look at darnall as i went down and as i went back, and after i was put
 in my cell, i thought it all over. i felt that i could not get away, and
 then i made up my mind to kill myself. i got two bits of paper and pricked
 on them the words, 'bury me at darnall. god bless you all!' with a bit of
 black dirt that i found on the floor of my cell i wrote the same words on
 another piece of paper, and then i hid them in my clothes. my hope was
 that, when i jumped from the train i should be cut to pieces under the
 wheels. then i should have been taken to the duke of york (a public-house
 at darnall) and there would have been an inquest over me. as soon as the
 inquest was over you would have claimed my body, found the pieces of
 paper, and then you would have buried me at darnall."
 this statement of peace is no doubt in the main correct. but it is
 difficult to believe that there was not present to his mind the sporting
 chance that he might not be killed in leaping from the train, in which
 event he would no doubt have done his best to get away, trusting to his
 considerable powers of ingenious disguise to elude pursuit. but such a
 chance was remote. peace had faced boldly the possibility of a dreadful
 death.
 with that strain of domestic sentiment, which would appear to have been a
 marked characteristic of his family, peace was the more ready to cheat the
 gallows in the hope of being by that means buried decently at darnall. it
 was at darnall that he had spent some months of comparative calm in his
 tempestuous career, and it was at darnall that he had first met mrs.
 dyson. another and more practical motive that may have urged peace to
 attempt to injure seriously, if not kill himself, was the hope of thereby
 delaying his trial. if the magisterial investigation in sheffield were
 completed before the end of january, peace could be committed for trial to
 the ensuing leeds assizes which commenced in the first week in february.
 if he were injured too seriously, this would not be possible. here again
 he was doomed to disappointment.
 peace recovered so well from the results of his adventure on the railway
 that the doctor pronounced him fit to appear for his second examination
 before the magistrate on january . to avoid excitement, both on the part
 of the prisoner and the public, the court sat in one of the corridors of
 the town hall. the scene is described as dismal, dark and cheerless. the
 proceedings took place by candlelight, and peace, who was seated in an
 armchair, complained frequently of the cold. at other times he moaned and
 groaned and protested against the injustice with which he was being
 treated. but the absence of any audience rather dashed the effect of his
 laments.
 the most interesting part of the proceedings was the cross-examination of
 mrs. dyson by mr. clegg, the prisoner's solicitor.
 its purpose was to show that mrs. dyson had been on more intimate terms
 with peace than she was ready to admit, and that dyson had been shot by
 peace in the course of a struggle, in which the former had been the
 aggressor.
 in the first part of his task mr. clegg met with some success. mrs. dyson,
 whose memory was certainly eccentric—she could not, she said,
 remember the year in which she had been married—was obliged to admit
 that she had been in the habit of going to peace's house, that she had
 been alone with him to public-houses and places of entertainment, and that
 she and peace had been photographed together during the summer fair at
 sheffield. she could not "to her knowledge" recollect having told the
 landlord of a public-house to charge her drink to peace.
 a great deal of mrs. dyson's cross-examination turned on a bundle of
 letters that had been found near the scene of dyson's murder on the
 morning following the crime. these letters consisted for the most part of
 notes, written in pencil on scraps of paper, purporting to have been sent
 from mrs. dyson to peace. in many of them she asks for money to get drink,
 others refer to opportunities for their meetings in the absence of dyson;
 there are kind messages to members of peace's family, his wife and
 daughter, and urgent directions to peace to hold his tongue and not give
 ground for suspicion as to their relations. this bundle of letters
 contained also the card which dyson had thrown into peace's garden
 requesting him not to interfere with his family. according to the theory
 of the defence, these letters had been written by mrs. dyson to peace, and
 went to prove the intimacy of their relations. at the inquest after her
 husband's murder, mrs. dyson had been questioned by the coroner about
 these letters. she denied that she had ever written to peace; in fact, she
 said, she "never did write." it was stated that dyson himself had seen the
 letters, and declared them to be forgeries written by peace or members of
 his family for the purpose of annoyance. nevertheless, before the
 sheffield magistrate mr. clegg thought it his duty to cross-examine mrs.
 dyson closely as to their authorship. he asked her to write out a passage
 from one of them: "you can give me something as a keepsake if you like,
 but i don't like to be covetous, and to take them from your wife and
 daughter. love to all!" mrs. dyson refused to admit any likeness between
 what she had written and the handwriting of the letter in question.
 another passage ran: "will see you as soon as i possibly can. i think it
 would be easier after you move; he won't watch so. the r—g fits the
 little finger. many thanks and love to—jennie (peace's daughter
 jane). i will tell you what i thought of when i see you about arranging
 matters. excuse this scribbling." in answer to mr. clegg, mrs. dyson
 admitted that peace had given her a ring, which she had worn for a short
 time on her little finger.
 another letter ran: "if you have a note for me, send now whilst he is out;
 but you must not venture, for he is watching, and you cannot be too
 careful. hope your foot is better. i went to sheffield yesterday, but i
 could not see you anywhere. were you out? love to jane." mrs. dyson denied
 that she had known of an accident which peace had had to his foot at this
 time. in spite of the ruling of the magistrate that mr. clegg had put
 forward quite enough, if true, to damage mrs. dyson's credibility, he
 continued to press her as to her authorship of these notes and letters,
 but mrs. dyson was firm in her repudiation of them. she was equally firm
 in denying that anything in the nature of a struggle had taken place
 between peace and her husband previous to his murder.
 at the conclusion of mrs. dyson's evidence the prisoner was committed to
 take his trial at the leeds assizes, which commenced the week following.
 peace, who had groaned and moaned and constantly interrupted the
 proceedings, protested his innocence, and complained that his witnesses
 had not been called. the apprehension with which this daring malefactor
 was regarded by the authorities is shown by this clandestine hearing of
 his case in a cold corridor of the town hall, and the rapidity with which
 his trial followed on his committal. there is an appearance almost of
 precipitation in the haste with which peace was bustled to his doom. after
 his committal he was taken to wakefield prison, and a few days later to
 armley jail, there to await his trial.
 this began on february , and lasted one day. mr. justice lopes, who had
 tried vainly to persuade the manchester grand jury to throw out the bill
 in the case of the brothers habron, was the presiding judge. mr. campbell
 foster, q.c., led for the prosecution. peace was defended by mr. frank
 lockwood, then rising into that popular success at the bar which some
 fifteen years later made him solicitor-general, and but for his premature
 death would have raised him to even higher honours in his profession.
 in addressing the jury, both mr. campbell foster and mr. lockwood took
 occasion to protest against the recklessness with which the press of the
 day, both high and low, had circulated stories and rumours about the
 interesting convict. as early as november in  one leading london daily
 newspaper had said that "it was now established beyond doubt that the
 burglar captured by police constable robinson was one and the same as the
 banner cross murderer." since then, as the public excitement grew and the
 facts of peace's extraordinary career came to light, the press had
 responded loyally to the demands of the greedy lovers of sensation, and
 piled fiction on fact with generous profusion. "never," said mr. lockwood,
 "in the whole course of his experience—and he defied any of his
 learned friends to quote an experience—had there been such an
 attempt made on the part of those who should be most careful of all others
 to preserve the liberties of their fellowmen and to preserve the dignity
 of the tribunals of justice to determine the guilt of a man." peace
 exclaimed "hear, hear!" as mr. lockwood went on to say that "for the sake
 of snatching paltry pence from the public, these persons had wickedly
 sought to prejudice the prisoner's life." allowing for mr. lockwood's zeal
 as an advocate, there can be no question that, had peace chosen or been in
 a position to take proceedings, more than one newspaper had at this time
 laid itself open to prosecution for contempt of court. the times was not
 far wrong in saying that, since muller murdered mr. briggs on the north
 london railway and the poisonings of william palmer, no criminal case had
 created such excitement as that of charles peace. the fact that property
 seemed to be no more sacred to him than life aggravated in a singular
 degree the resentment of a commercial people.
 the first witness called by the prosecution was mrs. dyson. she described
 how on the night of november , , she had come out of the outhouse in
 the yard at the back of her house, and found herself confronted by peace
 holding a revolver; how he said: "speak, or i'll fire!" and the sequence
 of events already related up to the moment when dyson fell, shot in the
 temple.
 mr. lockwood commenced his cross-examination of mrs. dyson by endeavouring
 to get from her an admission; the most important to the defence, that
 dyson had caught hold of peace after the first shot had been fired, and
 that in the struggle which ensued, the revolver had gone off by accident.
 but he was not very successful. he put it to mrs. dyson that before the
 magistrate at sheffield she had said: "i can't say my husband did not get
 hold of the prisoner." "put in the little word 'try,' please," answered
 mrs. dyson. in spite of mr. lockwood's questions, she maintained that,
 though her husband may have attempted to get hold of peace, he did not
 succeed in doing so. as she was the only witness to the shooting there was
 no one to contradict her statement.
 mr. lockwood fared better when he came to deal with the relations of mrs.
 dyson with peace previous to the crime. mrs. dyson admitted that in the
 spring of  her husband had objected to her friendship with peace, and
 that nevertheless, in the following summer, she and peace had been
 photographed together at the sheffield fair. she made a vain attempt to
 escape from such an admission by trying to shift the occasion of the
 summer fair to the previous year, , but mr. lockwood put it to her
 that she had not come to darnall, where she first met peace, until the end
 of that year. finally he drove her to say that she could not remember when
 she came to darnall, whether in , , , or . she admitted
 that she had accepted a ring from peace, but could not remember whether
 she had shown it to her husband. she had been perhaps twice with peace to
 the marquis of waterford public-house, and once to the star music hall.
 she could not swear one way or the other whether she had charged to
 peace's account drink consumed by her at an inn in darnall called the
 half-way house. confronted with a little girl and a man, whom mr. lockwood
 suggested she had employed to carry notes to peace, mrs. dyson said that
 these were merely receipts for pictures which he had framed for her. on
 the day before her husband's murder, mrs. dyson was at the stag hotel at
 sharrow with a little boy belonging to a neighbour. a man followed her in
 and sat beside her, and afterwards followed her out. in answer to mr.
 lockwood, mrs. dyson would "almost swear" the man was not peace; he had
 spoken to her, but she could not remember whether she had spoken to him or
 not. she denied that this man had said to her that he would come and see
 her the next night. as the result of a parting shot mr. lockwood obtained
 from mrs. dyson a reluctant admission that she had been "slightly
 inebriated" at the half-way house in darnall, but had not to her knowledge
 been turned out of the house on that account. "you may not have known you
 were inebriated?" suggested mr. lockwood. "i always know what i am doing,"
 was mrs. dyson's reply, to which an unfriendly critic might have replied
 that she did not apparently know with anything like certainty what she had
 been doing during the last three or four years. in commenting on the trial
 the following day, the times stigmatised as "feeble" the prevarications by
 which mrs. dyson tried to explain away her intimacy with peace. in this
 part of his cross-examination mr. lockwood had made it appear at least
 highly probable that there had been a much closer relationship between
 mrs. dyson and peace than the former was willing to acknowledge.
 the evidence of mrs. dyson was followed by that of five persons who had
 either seen peace in the neighbourhood of banner cross terrace on the
 night of the murder, or heard the screams and shots that accompanied it. a
 woman, mrs. gregory, whose house was between that of the dysons and the
 passage in which dyson was shot, said that she had heard the noise of the
 clogs mrs. dyson was wearing as she went across the yard. a minute later
 she heard a scream. she opened her back door and saw dyson standing by his
 own. she told him to go to his wife. she then went back into her house,
 and almost directly after heard two shots, followed by another scream, but
 no sound as of any scuffling.
 another witness was a labourer named brassington. he was a stranger to
 peace, but stated that about eight o'clock on the night of the murder a
 man came up to him outside the banner cross hotel, a few yards from
 dyson's house. he was standing under a gas lamp, and it was a bright
 moonlight night. the man asked him if he knew of any strange people who
 had come to live in the neighbourhood. brassington answered that he did
 not. the man then produced a bundle of letters which he asked brassington
 to read. but brassington declined, as reading was not one of his
 accomplishments. the man then said that "he would make it a warm 'un for
 those strange folks before morning—he would shoot both of them," and
 went off in the direction of dyson's house. brassington swore positively
 that peace was the stranger who had accosted him that night, and mr.
 lockwood failed to shake him in his evidence. nor could mr. lockwood
 persuade the surgeon who was called to dyson at the time of his death to
 admit that the marks on the nose and chin of the dead man could have been
 caused by a blow; they were merely abrasions of the skin caused by the
 wounded man falling to the ground.
 evidence was then given as to threats uttered by peace against the dysons
 in the july of , and as to his arrest at blackheath in the october of
 . the revolver taken from peace that night was produced, and it was
 shown that the rifling of the bullet extracted from dyson's head was the
 same as that of the bullet fired from the revolver carried by peace at the
 time of his capture.
 mr. campbell foster wanted to put in as evidence the card that dyson had
 flung into peace's garden at darnall requesting him not to interfere with
 his family. this card had been found among the bundle of letters dropped
 by peace near the scene of the murder. mr. lockwood objected to the
 admission of the card unless all the letters were admitted at the same
 time. the judge ruled that both the card and the letters were
 inadmissible, as irrelevant to the issue; mr. lockwood had, he said, very
 properly cross-examined mrs. dyson on these letters to test her
 credibility, but he was bound by her answers and could not contradict her
 by introducing them as evidence in the case.
 mr. lockwood in his address to the jury did his best to persuade them that
 the death of dyson was the accidental result of a struggle between peace
 and himself. he suggested that mrs. dyson had left her house that night
 for the purpose of meeting peace, and that dyson, who was jealous of his
 wife's intimacy with him, had gone out to find her; that dyson, seeing
 peace, had caught hold of him; and that the revolver had gone off
 accidentally as dyson tried to wrest it from his adversary. he repudiated
 the suggestion of mr. foster that the persons he had confronted with mrs.
 dyson in the course of his cross-examination had been hired for a paltry
 sum to come into court and lie.
 twice, both at the beginning and the end of his speech, mr. lockwood urged
 as a reason for the jury being tender in taking peace's life that he was
 in such a state of wickedness as to be quite unprepared to meet death.
 both times that his counsel put forward this curious plea, peace raised
 his eyes to heaven and exclaimed "i am not fit to die."
 mr. justice lopes in summing up described as an "absolute surmise" the
 theory of the accidental discharge of the pistol. he asked the jury to
 take peace's revolver in their hands and try the trigger, so as to see for
 themselves whether it was likely to go off accidentally or not. he pointed
 out that the pistol produced might not have been the pistol used at banner
 cross; at the same time the bullet fired in november, , bore marks
 such as would have been produced had it been fired from the pistol taken
 from peace at blackheath in october, . he said that mr. lockwood had
 been perfectly justified in his attempt to discredit the evidence of mrs.
 dyson, but the case did not rest on her evidence alone. in her evidence as
 to the threats uttered by peace in july, , mrs. dyson was corroborated
 by three other witnesses. in the judge's opinion it was clearly proved
 that no struggle or scuffle had taken place before the murder. if the
 defence, he concluded, rested on no solid foundation, then the jury must
 do their duty to the community at large and by the oath they had sworn.
 it was a quarter past seven when the jury retired. ten minutes later they
 came back into court with a verdict of guilty. asked if he had anything to
 say, peace in a faint voice replied, "it is no use my saying anything."
 the judge, declining very properly to aggravate the prisoner's feelings by
 "a recapitulation of any portion of the details of what i fear, i can only
 call your criminal career," passed on him sentence of death. peace
 accepted his fate with composure.
 before we proceed to describe the last days of peace on earth, let us
 finish with the two women who had succeeded mrs. peace in his ardent
 affections.
 a few days after peace's execution mrs. dyson left england for america,
 but before going she left behind her a narrative intended to contradict
 the imputations which she felt had been made against her moral character.
 an irishwoman by birth, she said that she had gone to america when she was
 fifteen years old.
 there she met and married dyson, a civil engineer on the atlantic and
 great western railway. theirs was a rough and arduous life. but mrs. dyson
 was thoroughly happy in driving her husband about in a buggy among bears
 and creeks. she did not know fear and loved danger: "my husband loved me
 and i loved him, and in his company and in driving him about in this wild
 kind of fashion i derived much pleasure." however, mr. dyson's health
 broke down, and he was obliged to return to england. it was at darnall
 that the fatal acquaintance with peace began. living next door but one to
 the dysons, peace took the opportunity of introducing himself, and mr.
 dyson "being a gentleman," took polite notice of his advances. he became a
 constant visitor at the house. but after a time peace began to show that
 he was not the gentleman mr. dyson was. he disgusted the latter by
 offering to show him improper pictures and "the sights of the town" of
 sheffield.
 the dysons tried to shake off the unwelcome acquaintance, but that was
 easier said than done. by this time peace had set his heart on making mrs.
 dyson leave her husband. he kept trying to persuade her to go to
 manchester with him, where he would take a cigar or picture shop, to which
 mrs. dyson, in fine clothes and jewelry, should lend the charm of her
 comely presence. he offered her a sealskin jacket, yards of silk, a gold
 watch. she should, he said, live in manchester like a lady, to which mrs.
 dyson replied coldly that she had always lived like one and should
 continue to do so quite independently of him. but peace would listen to no
 refusal, however decided its tone. dyson threw over the card into peace's
 garden. this only served to aggravate his determination to possess himself
 of the wife. he would listen at keyholes, leer in at the window, and
 follow mrs. dyson wherever she went. when she was photographed at the
 fair, she found that peace had stood behind her chair and by that means
 got himself included in the picture. at times he had threatened her with a
 revolver. on one occasion when he was more insulting than usual, mrs.
 dyson forgot her fear of him and gave him a thrashing. peace threatened
 "to make her so that neither man nor woman should look at her, and then he
 would have her all to himself." it was with some purpose of this kind,
 mrs. dyson suggested, that peace stole a photograph of herself out of a
 locket, intending to make some improper use of it. at last, in
 desperation, the dysons moved to banner cross. from the day of their
 arrival there until the murder, mrs. dyson never saw peace. she denied
 altogether having been in his company the night before the murder. the
 letters were "bare forgeries," written by peace or members of his family
 to get her into their power.
 against the advice of all her friends mrs. dyson had come back from
 america to give evidence against peace. to the detective who saw her at
 cleveland she said, "i will go back if i have to walk on my head all the
 way"; and though she little knew what she would have to go through in
 giving her evidence, she would do it again under the circumstances. "my
 opinion is," she said, "that peace is a perfect demon—not a man. i
 am told that since he has been sentenced to death he has become a changed
 character. that i don't believe. the place to which the wicked go is not
 bad enough for him. i think its occupants, bad as they might be, are too
 good to be where he is. no matter where he goes, i am satisfied that there
 will be hell. not even a shakespeare could adequately paint such a man as
 he has been. my lifelong regret will be that i ever knew him."
 with these few earnest words mrs. dyson quitted the shores of england,
 hardly clearing up the mystery of her actual relations with peace.
 a woman with whom mrs. dyson very much resented finding herself classed—inebriety
 would appear to have been their only common weakness—was mrs.
 thompson, the "traitress sue." in spite of the fact that on february 
 mrs. thompson had applied to the treasury for l, blood money due her
 for assisting the police in the identification of peace, she was at the
 same time carrying on a friendly correspondence with her lover and making
 attempts to see him. peace had written to her before his trial hoping she
 would not forsake him; "you have been my bosom friend, and you have
 ofttimes said you loved me, that you would die for me." he asked her to
 sell some goods which he had left with her in order to raise money for his
 defence. the traitress replied on january  that she had already sold
 everything and shared the proceeds with mrs. peace. "you are doing me
 great injustice," she wrote, "by saying that i have been out to 'work'
 with you. do not die with such a base falsehood on your conscience, for
 you know i am young and have my living and character to redeem. i pity you
 and myself to think we should have met." after his condemnation mrs.
 thompson made repeated efforts to see peace, coming to leeds for the
 purpose. peace wrote a letter on february  to his "poor sue," asking her
 to come to the prison. but, partly at the wish of peace's relatives and
 for reasons of their own, a permission given mrs. thompson by the
 authorities to visit the convict was suddenly withdrawn, and she never saw
 him again.
 in the lives of those famous men who have perished on the scaffold their
 behaviour during the interval between their condemnation and their
 execution has always been the subject of curiosity and interest.
 it may be said at once that nothing could have been more deeply religious,
 more sincerely repentant, more christian to all appearances than peace's
 conduct and demeanour in the last weeks of his life. he threw himself into
 the work of atonement with the same uncompromising zeal and energy that he
 had displayed as a burglar. by his death a truly welcome and effective
 recruit was lost to the ranks of the contrite and converted sinners.
 however powerless as a controlling force—and he admitted it—his
 belief in god and the devil may have been in the past, that belief was
 assured and confident, and in the presence of death proclaimed itself with
 vigour, not in words merely, but in deeds.
 in obedience to the wishes of his family, peace had refrained from seeing
 sue thompson. this was at some sacrifice, for he wished very much to see
 her and to the last, though he knew that she had betrayed him, sent her
 affectionate and forgiving messages. these were transmitted to sue by mr.
 brion. this disingenuous gentleman was a fellow-applicant with sue to the
 treasury for pecuniary recognition of his efforts in bringing about the
 identification of peace, and furnishing the police with information as to
 the convict's disposal of his stolen property. in his zeal he had even
 gone so far as to play the role of an accomplice of peace, and by this
 means discovered a place in petticoat lane where the burglar got rid of
 some of his booty.
 after peace's condemnation mr. brion visited him in armley jail. his
 purpose in doing so was to wring from his co-inventor an admission that
 the inventions which they had patented together were his work alone. peace
 denied this, but offered to sell his share for l. brion refused the
 offer, and persisted in his assertion that peace had got his name attached
 to the patents by undue influence, whatever that might mean. peace, after
 wrestling with the spirit, gave way. "very well, my friend," he said, "let
 it be as you say. i have not cheated you, heaven knows. but i also know
 that this infamy of mine has been the cause of bringing harm to you, which
 is the last thing i should have wished to have caused to my friend." a
 deed of gift was drawn up, making over to brion peace's share in their
 inventions; this peace handed to brion as the price of the latter's
 precious forgiveness and a token of the sincerity of his colleague's
 repentance. thus, as has often happened in this sad world, was
 disreputable genius exploited once again by smug mediocrity. mr. brion,
 having got all he wanted, left the prison, assuring the governor that
 peace's repentance was "all bunkum," and advising, with commendable
 anxiety for the public good, that the warders in the condemned cell should
 be doubled.
 peace had one act of atonement to discharge more urgent than displaying
 christian forbearance towards ignoble associates. that was the righting of
 william habron, who was now serving the third year of his life sentence
 for the murder of constable cock at whalley range. peace sent for the
 governor of the jail a few days before his execution and obtained from him
 the materials necessary for drawing up a plan. peace was quite an adept at
 making plans; he had already made an excellent one of the scene of dyson's
 murder. he now drew a plan of the place where cock had been shot, gave a
 detailed account of how he came by his death, and made a full confession
 of his own guilt.
 in the confession he described how, some days before the burglary, he had,
 according to his custom, "spotted" the house at whalley range. in order to
 do this he always dressed himself respectably, because he had found that
 the police never suspected anyone who wore good clothes. on the night of
 the crime he passed two policemen on the road to the house. he had gone
 into the grounds and was about to begin operations when he heard a rustle
 behind him and saw a policeman, whom he recognised as one of those he had
 met in the road, enter the garden. with his well-known agility peace
 climbed on to the wall, and dropped on to the other side, only to find
 himself almost in the arms of the second policeman. peace warned the
 officer to stand back and fired his revolver wide of him. but, as peace
 said, "these manchester policemen are a very obstinate lot." the constable
 took out his truncheon. peace fired again and killed him.
 soon after the murderer saw in the newspapers that two men had been
 arrested for the crime. "this greatly interested me," said peace. "i
 always had a liking to be present at trials, as the public no doubt know
 by this time." so he went to manchester assizes and saw william habron
 sentenced to death. "people will say," he said, "that i was a hardened
 wretch for allowing an innocent man to suffer for the crime of which i was
 guilty but what man would have given himself up under such circumstances,
 knowing as i did that i should certainly be hanged?" peace's view of the
 question was a purely practical one: "now that i am going to forfeit my
 own life and feel that i have nothing to gain by further secrecy, i think
 it is right in the sight of god and man to clear this innocent young man."
 it would have been more right in the sight of god and man to have done it
 before, but then peace admitted that during all his career he had allowed
 neither god nor man to influence his actions.
 how many men in the situation of peace at the time, with the certainty of
 death before him if he confessed, would have sacrificed themselves to save
 an innocent man? cold-blooded heroism of this kind is rare in the annals
 of crime. nor did peace claim to have anything of the hero about him.
 "lion-hearted i've lived,
 and when my time comes
 lion-hearted i'll die."
 though fond of repeating this piece of doggerel, peace would have been the
 last man to have attributed to himself all those qualities associated
 symbolically with the lion.
 a few days before his execution peace was visited in his prison by mr.
 littlewood, the vicar of darnall. mr. littlewood had known peace a few
 years before, when he had been chaplain at wakefield prison. "well, my old
 friend peace," he said as he entered the cell, "how are you to-day?" "'i
 am very poorly, sir," replied the convict, "but i am exceedingly pleased
 to see you." mr. littlewood assured peace that there was at any rate one
 person in the world who had deep sympathy with him, and that was himself.
 peace burst into tears. he expressed a wish to unburden himself to the
 vicar, but before doing so, asked for his assurance that he believed in
 the truth and sincerity of what he was about to say to him. he said that
 he preferred to be hanged to lingering out his life in penal servitude,
 that he was grieved and repentant for his past life. "if i could undo, or
 make amends for anything i have done, i would suffer my body as i now
 stand to be cut in pieces inch by inch. i feel, sir, that i am too bad to
 live or die, and having this feeling i cannot think that either you or
 anyone else would believe me, and that is the reason why i ask you so much
 to try to be assured that you do not think i am telling lies. i call my
 god to witness that all i am saying and wish to say shall be the truth—the
 whole truth—nothing but the truth." mr. littlewood said that, after
 carefully watching peace and having regard to his experience of some of
 the most hardened of criminals during his service in wakefield prison, he
 felt convinced that peace was in earnest and as sincere as any man could
 be; he spoke rationally, coherently, and without excitement.
 peace was determined to test the extent of the reverend gentleman's faith
 in his asseverations. "now, sir," he said, "i understand that you still
 have the impression that i stole the clock from your day-schools." mr.
 littlewood admitted that such was his impression. "i thought so," replied
 peace, "and this has caused me much grief and pain, for i can assure you i
 have so much respect for you personally that i would rather have given you
 a clock and much more besides than have taken it. at the time your clock
 was stolen i had reason for suspecting that it was taken by some colliers
 whom i knew." there was a pause. mr. littlewood thought that peace was
 going to give him the name of the colliers. but that was not peace's way.
 he said sharply: "do you now believe that i have spoken the truth in
 denying that i took your clock, and will you leave me to-day fully
 believing that i am innocent of doing that?" mr. littlewood looked at him
 closely and appeared to be deliberating on his reply. peace watched him
 intently. at last mr. littlewood said, "peace, i am convinced that you did
 not take the clock. i cannot believe that you dare deny it now in your
 position, if you really did." once more peace burst into tears, and was
 unable for some time to speak.
 having recovered his self-possession, peace turned to the serious business
 of confession. he dealt first with the murder of dyson.
 he maintained that his relations with mrs. dyson had been of an intimate
 character. he wanted to see her on the night of the crime in order to get
 her to induce her husband to withdraw the warrant which he had procured
 against him; he was tired, he said, of being hunted about from place to
 place. he intercepted mrs. dyson as she crossed the yard. instead of
 listening to him quietly mrs. dyson became violent and threatening in her
 language. peace took out his revolver, and, holding it close to her head,
 warned her that he was not to be trifled with. she refused to be warned.
 dyson, hearing the loud voices, came out of his house. peace tried to get
 away down the passage into banner cross road, but dyson followed and
 caught hold of him. in the struggle peace fired one barrel of his revolver
 wide. dyson seized the hand in which peace was holding the weapon. "then i
 knew," said peace, "i had not a moment to spare. i made a desperate
 effort, wrenched the arm from him and fired again. all that was in my head
 at the time was to get away. i never did intend, either there or anywhere
 else, to take a man's life; but i was determined that i should not be
 caught at that time, as the result, knowing what i had done before, would
 have been worse even than had i stayed under the warrant." if he had
 intended to murder dyson, peace pointed out that he would have set about
 it in quite a different and more secret way; it was as unintentional a
 thing as ever was done; mrs. dyson had committed the grossest perjury in
 saying that no struggle had taken place between her husband and himself.
 it is to be remembered that peace and mrs. dyson were the sole witnesses
 of what took place that night between the two men. in point of credibility
 there may be little to choose between them, but peace can claim for his
 account that it was the statement of a dying, and, to all appearances,
 sincerely repentant sinner.
 peace then repeated to mr. littlewood his confession of the killing of
 constable cock, and his desire that habron should be set free.() as to
 this part of his career peace indulged in some general reflections. "my
 great mistake, sir," he said, "and i can see it now as my end approaches,
 has been this—in all my career i have used ball cartridge. i can see
 now that in using ball cartridge i did wrong i ought to have used blank
 cartridge; then i would not have taken life." peace said that he hoped he
 would meet his death like a hero. "i do not say this in any kind of
 bravado. i do not mean such a hero as some persons will understand when
 they read this. i mean such a hero as my god might wish me to be. i am
 deeply grieved for all i have done, and would atone for it to the utmost
 of my power." to mr. littlewood the moment seemed convenient to suggest
 that as a practical means of atonement peace should reveal to him the
 names of the persons with whom he had disposed of the greater part of his
 stolen property. but in spite of much attempted persuasion by the reverend
 gentleman peace explained that he was a man and meant to be a man to the
 end.
 () william habron was subsequently given a free pardon and l by way
of compensation.
 earlier in their interview peace had expressed to mr. littlewood a hope
 that after his execution his name would never be mentioned again, but
 before they parted he asked mr. littlewood, as a favour, to preach a
 sermon on him after his death to the good people of darnall. he wished his
 career held up to them as a beacon, in order that all who saw might avoid
 his example, and so his death be of some service to society.
 before mr. littlewood left, peace asked him to hear him pray. having
 requested the warders to kneel down, peace began a prayer that lasted
 twenty minutes. he prayed for himself, his family, his victims, mr.
 littlewood, society generally, and all classes of the community. mr.
 littlewood described the prayer as earnest, fervent and fluent. at the end
 peace asked mr. littlewood if he ought to see mrs. dyson and beg her
 forgiveness for having killed her husband. mr. littlewood, believing
 erroneously that mrs. dyson had already left the country, told peace that
 he should direct all his attention to asking forgiveness of his maker. at
 the close of their interview peace was lifted into bed and, turning his
 face to the wall, wept.
 tuesday, february , was the day fixed for the execution of peace. as the
 time drew near, the convict's confidence in ultimate salvation increased.
 a dr. potter of sheffield had declared in a sermon that "all hope of
 peace's salvation was gone for ever." peace replied curtly, "well, dr.
 potter may think so, but i don't." though his health had improved, peace
 was still very feeble in body. but his soul was hopeful and undismayed. on
 the saturday before his death his brother and sister-in-law, a nephew and
 niece visited him for the last time. he spoke with some emotion of his
 approaching end. he said he should die about eight o'clock, and that at
 four o'clock an inquest would be held on his body; he would then be thrown
 into his grave without service or sermon of any kind. he asked his
 relatives to plant a flower on a certain grave in a cemetery in sheffield
 on the day of his execution. he was very weak, he said, but hoped he
 should have strength enough to walk to the scaffold. he sent messages to
 friends and warnings to avoid gambling and drinking. he begged his brother
 to change his manner of life and "become religious." his good counsel was
 not apparently very well received. peace's visitors took a depressing view
 of their relative's condition. they found him "a poor, wretched, haggard
 man," and, meeting mrs. thompson who was waiting outside the gaol for news
 of "dear jack," wondered how she could have taken up with such a man.
 when, the day before his execution, peace was visited for the last time by
 his wife, his stepson, his daughter, mrs. bolsover, and her husband, he
 was in much better spirits. he asked his visitors to restrain themselves
 from displays of emotion, as he felt very happy and did not wish to be
 disturbed. he advised them to sell or exhibit for money certain works of
 art of his own devising. among them was a design in paper for a monument
 to be placed over his grave. the design is elaborate but well and
 ingeniously executed; in the opinion of frith, the painter, it showed "the
 true feeling of an artist." it is somewhat in the style of the albert
 memorial, and figures of angels are prominent in the scheme. the whole
 conception is typical of the artist's sanguine and confident assurance of
 his ultimate destiny. a model boat and a fiddle made out of a hollow
 bamboo cane he wished also to be made the means of raising money. he was
 describing with some detail the ceremony of his approaching death and
 burial when he was interrupted by a sound of hammering. peace listened for
 a moment and then said, "that's a noise that would make some men fall on
 the floor. they are working at my own scaffold." a warder said that he was
 mistaken. "no, i am not," answered peace, "i have not worked so long with
 wood without knowing the sound of deals; and they don't have deals inside
 a prison for anything else than scaffolds." but the noise, he said, did
 not disturb him in the least, as he was quite prepared to meet his fate.
 he would like to have seen his grave and coffin; he knew that his body
 would be treated with scant ceremony after his death. but what of that? by
 that time his soul would be in heaven. he was pleased that one sinner who
 had seen him on his way from pentonville to sheffield, had written to tell
 him that the sight of the convict had brought home to him the sins of his
 own past life, and by this means he had found salvation.
 the time had come to say good-bye for the last time. peace asked his
 weeping relatives whether they had anything more that they wished to ask
 him. mrs. peace reminded him that he had promised to pray with them at the
 last. peace, ever ready, knelt with them and prayed for half an hour. he
 then shook hands with them, prayed for and blessed each one singly, and
 himself gave way to tears as they left his presence. to his wife as she
 departed peace gave a funeral card of his own designing. it ran:
 in
 memory
 of
 charles peace
 who was executed in
 armley prison
 tuesday february th,
  aged 
 for that i don but never
 intended.
 the same day there arrived in the prison one who in his own trade had
 something of the personality and assurance of the culprit he was to
 execute. william marwood—unlike his celebrated victim, he has his
 place in the dictionary of national biography—is perhaps the most
 remarkable of these persons who have held at different times the office of
 public executioner. as the inventor of the "long drop," he has done a
 lasting service to humanity by enabling the death-sentence passed by the
 judge to be carried out with the minimum of possible suffering. marwood
 took a lofty view of the office he held, and refused his assent to the
 somewhat hypocritical loathing, with which those who sanction and profit
 by his exertions are pleased to regard this servant of the law. "i am
 doing god's work," said marwood, "according to the divine command and the
 law of the british crown. i do it simply as a matter of duty and as a
 christian. i sleep as soundly as a child and am never disturbed by
 phantoms. where there is guilt there is bad sleeping, but i am conscious
 that i try to live a blameless life. detesting idleness, i pass my vacant
 time in business (he was a shoemaker at horncastle, in lincolnshire) and
 work in my shoeshop near the church day after day until such time as i am
 required elsewhere. it would have been better for those i executed if they
 had preferred industry to idleness."
 marwood had not the almost patriarchal air of benevolent respectability
 which his predecessor calcraft had acquired during a short experience as a
 family butler; but as an executioner that kindly old gentleman had been a
 sad bungler in his time compared with the scientific and expeditious
 marwood. the horncastle shoemaker was saving, businesslike, pious and
 thoughtful. like peace, he had interests outside his ordinary profession.
 he had at one time propounded a scheme for the abolition of the national
 debt, a man clearly determined to benefit his fellowmen in some way or
 other. a predilection for gin would seem to have been his only concession
 to the ordinary weakness of humanity. and now he had arrived in armley
 jail to exercise his happy dispatch on the greatest of the many criminals
 who passed through his hands, one who, in his own words, "met death with
 greater firmness" than any man on whom he had officiated during seven
 years of crown employment.
 the day of february the th broke bitterly cold. like charles i. before
 him, peace feared lest the extreme cold should make him appear to tremble
 on the scaffold. he had slept calmly till six o'clock in the morning. a
 great part of the two hours before the coming of the hangman peace spent
 in letter-writing. he wrote two letters to his wife, in one of which he
 copied out some verses he had written in woking prison on the death of
 their little boy john. in the second he expressed his satisfaction that he
 was to die now and not linger twenty years in prison. to his daughter,
 step-son and son-in-law he wrote letters of fervent, religious exhortation
 and sent them tracts and pictures which he had secured from
 well-intentioned persons anxious about his salvation. to an old friend,
 george goodlad, a pianist, who had apparently lived up to his name, he
 wrote: "you chose an honest industrious way through life, but i chose the
 one of dishonesty, villainy and sin"; let his fate, he said, be a warning.
 peace ate a hearty breakfast and awaited the coming of the executioner
 with calm. he had been troubled with an inconvenient cough the night
 before. "i wonder," he said to one of his warders, "if marwood could cure
 this cough of mine." he had got an idea into his head that marwood would
 "punish" him when he came to deal with him on the scaffold, and asked to
 see the hangman a few minutes before the appointed hour. "i hope you will
 not punish me. i hope you will do your work quickly," he said to marwood.
 "you shall not suffer pain from my hand," replied that worthy. "god bless
 you," exclaimed peace, "i hope to meet you all in heaven. i am thankful to
 say my sins are all forgiven." and so these two pious men—on the
 morning of an execution marwood always knelt down and asked god's blessing
 on the work he had to do—shook hands together and set about their
 business. firmly and fearlessly peace submitted himself to the necessary
 preparations. for one moment he faltered as the gallows came in sight, but
 recovered himself quickly.
 as marwood was about to cover his face, peace stopped him with some
 irritation of manner and said that he wished to speak to the gentlemen of
 the press who had been admitted to the ceremony. no one gainsaid him, and
 he thus addressed the reporters: "you gentlemen reporters, i wish you to
 notice the few words i am going to say. you know what my life has been. it
 has been base; but i wish you to notice, for the sake of others, how a man
 can die, as i am about to die, in fear of the lord. gentlemen, my heart
 says that i feel assured that my sins are forgiven me, that i am going to
 the kingdom of heaven, or else to the place prepared for those who rest
 until the great judgment day. i do not think i have any enemies, but if
 there are any who would be so, i wish them well. gentlemen, all and all, i
 wish them to come to the kingdom of heaven when they die, as i am going to
 die." he asked a blessing on the officials of the prison and, in
 conclusion, sent his last wishes and respects to his dear children and
 their mother. "i hope," he said, "no one will disgrace them by taunting
 them or jeering them on my account, but to have mercy upon them. god bless
 you, my dear children. good-bye, and heaven bless you. amen: oh, my lord
 god, have mercy upon me!"
 after the cap had been placed over his head peace asked twice very
 sharply, as a man who expected to be obeyed, for a drink of water. but
 this time his request was not compiled with. he died instantaneously and
 was buried in armley jail.
 had peace flourished in  instead of , his end might have been
 honourable instead of dishonourable. the war of to-day has no doubt saved
 many a man from a criminal career by turning to worthy account qualities
 which, dangerous in crime, are useful in war. absolute fearlessness,
 agility, resource, cunning and determination; all these are admirable
 qualities in the soldier; and all these charles peace possessed in a
 signal degree. but fate denied him opportunity, he became a burglar and
 died on the scaffold. years of prison life failed, as they did in those
 days, to make any impression for good on one resolute in whatever way he
 chose to go. peace was a born fighter. a detective who knew him and had on
 one occasion come near capturing him in london, said that he was a fair
 fighter, that he always gave fair warning to those on whom he fired, and
 that, being a dead shot, the many wide shots which he fired are to be
 reckoned proofs of this. peace maintained to the last that he had never
 intended to kill dyson. this statement ex-detective parrock believed, and
 that the fatal shot was fired over peace's shoulder as he was making off.
 though habitually sober, peace was made intoxicated now and then by the
 drink, stood him by those whom he used to amuse with his musical tricks
 and antics in public-houses. at such times he would get fuddled and
 quarrelsome. he was in such a frame of mind on the evening of dyson's
 murder. his visit to the vicar of ecclesall brought him little comfort or
 consolation. it was in this unsatisfactory frame of mind that he went to
 dyson's house. this much the ex-detective would urge in his favour. to his
 neighbours he was an awe-inspiring but kind and sympathetic man. "if you
 want my true opinion of him," says detective parrock, "he was a burglar to
 the backbone but not a murderer at heart. he deserved the fate that came
 to him as little as any who in modern times have met with a like one."
 those who are in the fighting line are always the most generous about
 their adversaries. parrock as a potential target for peace's revolver, may
 have erred on the side of generosity, but there is some truth in what he
 says.
 as peace himself admitted, his life had been base. he was well aware that
 he had misused such gifts as nature had bestowed on him. one must go back
 to mediaeval times to find the counterpart of this daring ruffian who,
 believing in personal god and devil, refuses until the end to allow either
 to interfere with his business in life. in this respect charles peace
 reminds us irresistibly of our angevin kings.
 there is only one criminal who vies with charley peace in that genial
 popular regard which makes charles "charley" and john "jack," and that is
 jack sheppard. what jack was to the eighteenth century, that charley was
 to the nineteenth. and each one is in a sense typical of his period. lecky
 has said that the eighteenth century is richer than any other in the
 romance of crime. i think it may fairly be said that in the nineteenth
 century the romance of crime ceased to be. in the eighteenth century the
 scenery and dresses, all the stage setting of crime make for romance; its
 literature is quaint and picturesque; there is something gay and debonair
 about the whole business.
 sheppard is typical of all this. there is a certain charm about the
 rascal; his humour is undeniable; he is a philosopher, taking all that
 comes with easy grace, even his betrayal by his brother and others who
 should have been loyal to him. jack sheppard has the good-humoured
 carelessness of that most engaging of all eighteenth century malefactors,
 deacon brodie. it is quite otherwise with charley peace. there is little
 enough gay or debonair about him. compared with sheppard, peace is as drab
 as the surroundings of mid-victorian crime are drab compared with the
 picturesqueness of eighteenth century england.
 crime in the nineteenth century becomes more scientific in its methods and
 in its detection also. the revolver places a more hasty, less decorous
 weapon than the old-fashioned pistol in the hands of the determined
 burglar. the literature of crime, such as it is, becomes vulgar and
 prosaic. peace has no charm about him, no gaiety, but he has the virtues
 of his defects. he, unlike sheppard, shuns company; he works alone, never
 depending on accomplices; a "tight cock," as sheppard would have phrased
 it, and not relying on a like quality of tightness in his fellows.
 sheppard is a slave to his women, edgeworth bess and mrs. maggot; mrs.
 peace and sue thompson are the slaves of peace. sheppard loves to stroll
 openly about the london streets in his fine suit of black, his ruffled
 shirt and his silver-hilted sword. peace lies concealed at peckham beneath
 the homely disguise of old mr. thompson. sheppard is an imp, peace a
 goblin. but both have that gift of personality which, in their own
 peculiar line, lifts them out from the ruck, and makes them jack and
 charley to those who like to know famous people by cheery nicknames.
 and so we must accept charles peace as a remarkable character, whose
 unquestioned gifts as a man of action were squandered on a criminal
 career; neither better nor worse than a great number of other persons,
 whose good fortune it has been to develop similar qualities under happier
 surroundings. there are many more complete villains than the ordinary
 criminal, who contrive to go through life without offending against the
 law. close and scientific investigation has shown that the average
 convicted criminal differs intellectually from the normal person only in a
 slightly lower level of intelligence, a condition that may well be
 explained by the fact that the convicted criminal has been found out.
 crime has been happily defined by a recent and most able investigator into
 the character of the criminal() as "an unusual act committed by a
 perfectly normal person." at the same time, according to the same
 authority, there is a type of normal person who tends to be convicted of
 crime, and he is differentiated from his fellows by defective physique and
 mental capacity and an increased possession of antisocial qualities.()
 () "the english convict," a statistical study, by charles goring, m.d.
his majesty's stationery office, .
 () murderers—at least those executed for their crimes—have not for
obvious reasons been made the subject of close scientific observation.
their mental capacity would in all probability be found to be rather
higher than that of less ambitious criminals.
 how does peace answer to the definition? though short in stature, his
 physical development left little to be desired: he was active, agile, and
 enjoyed excellent health at all times. for a man of forty-seven he had
 aged remarkably in appearance. that is probably to be accounted for by
 mental worry. with two murders on his conscience we know from sue thompson
 that all she learnt of his secrets was what escaped from him in his
 troubled dreams—peace may well have shown traces of mental anxiety.
 but in all other respects charles peace would seem to have been physically
 fit. in intellectual capacity he was undoubtedly above the average of the
 ordinary criminal. the facts of his career, his natural gifts, speak for
 themselves. of anti-social proclivities he no doubt possessed his share at
 the beginning, and these were aggravated, as in most cases they were in
 his day, by prison life and discipline.
 judged as scientifically as is possible where the human being is
 concerned, peace stands out physically and intellectually well above the
 average of his class, perhaps the most naturally gifted of all those who,
 without advantages of rank or education, have tried their hands at crime.
 ordinary crime for the most part would appear to be little better than the
 last resort of the intellectually defective, and a poor game at that. the
 only interesting criminals are those worthy of something better. peace was
 one of these. if his life may be said to point a moral, it is the very
 simple one that crime is no career for a man of brains.
 the career of robert butler
 there is a report of butler's trial published in dunedin. it gives in full
 the speeches and the cross-examination of the witnesses, but not in all
 cases the evidence-in-chief. by the kindness of a friend in new zealand i
 obtained a copy of the depositions taken before the magistrate; with this
 i have been able to supplement the report of the trial. a collection of
 newspaper cuttings furnished me with the details of the rest of butler's
 career.
 on the evening of march , , mr. william munday, a highly respected
 citizen of the town of tooringa, in queensland, was walking to the
 neighbouring town of toowong to attend a masonic gathering. it was about
 eight o'clock, the moon shining brightly. nearing toowong, mr. munday saw
 a middle-aged man, bearded and wearing a white overcoat, step out into the
 moonlight from under the shadow of a tree. as mr. munday advanced, the man
 in the white coat stood directly in his way. "out with all you have, and
 quick about it," he said. instead of complying with this peremptory
 summons, mr. munday attempted to close with him. the man drew back
 quickly, whipped out a revolver, fired, and made off as fast as he could.
 the bullet, after passing through mr. munday's left arm, had lodged in the
 stomach. the unfortunate gentleman was taken to a neighbouring hospital
 where, within a few hours, he was dead.
 in the meantime a vigorous search was made for his assailant. late the
 same night constable hennessy, riding a bicycle, saw a man in a white coat
 who seemed to answer to the description of the assassin. he dismounted,
 walked up to him and asked him for a match. the man put his hand inside
 his coat. "what have you got there?" asked the constable. "i'll—soon
 show you," replied the man in the white coat, producing suddenly a large
 revolver. but hennessy was too quick for him. landing him one under the
 jaw, he sent him to the ground and, after a sharp struggle, secured him.
 constable hennessy little knew at the time that his capture in queensland
 of the man in the white coat was almost as notable in the annals of crime
 as the affray at blackheath on an autumn night in , when constable
 robinson grappled successfully, wounded as he was, with charles peace.
 the man taken by hennessy gave the name of james wharton, and as james
 wharton he was hanged at brisbane. but before his death it was ascertained
 beyond doubt, though he never admitted it himself, that wharton was none
 other than one robert butler, whose career as a criminal and natural
 wickedness may well rank him with charles peace in the hierarchy of
 scoundrels. like peace, butler was, in the jargon of crime, a "hatter," a
 "lone hand," a solitary who conceived and executed his nefarious designs
 alone; like peace, he supplemented an insignificant physique by a liberal
 employment of the revolver; like peace, he was something of a musician,
 the day before his execution he played hymns for half an hour on the
 prison organ; like peace, he knew when to whine when it suited his
 purpose; and like peace, though not with the same intensity, he could be
 an uncomfortably persistent lover, when the fit was on him. both men were
 cynics in their way and viewed their fellow-men with a measure of
 contempt. but here parallel ends. butler was an intellectual, inferior as
 a craftsman to peace, the essentially practical, unread, naturally gifted
 artist. butler was a man of books. he had been schoolmaster, journalist.
 he had studied the lives of great men, and as a criminal, had devoted
 especial attention to those of frederick the great and napoleon. butler's
 defence in the dunedin murder trial was a feat of skill quite beyond the
 power of peace. peace was a religious man after the fashion of the
 mediaeval tyrant, butler an infidel. peace, dragged into the light of a
 court of justice, cut a sorry figure; here butler shone. peace escaped a
 conviction for murder by letting another suffer in his place; butler
 escaped a similar experience by the sheer ingenuity of his defence. peace
 had the modesty and reticence of the sincere artist; butler the loquacious
 vanity of the literary or forensic coxcomb. lastly, and it is the supreme
 difference, butler was a murderer by instinct and conviction, as lacenaire
 or ruloff; "a man's life," he said, "was of no more importance than a
 dog's; nature respects the one no more than the other, a volcanic eruption
 kills mice and men with the one hand. the divine command, 'kill, kill and
 spare not,' was intended not only for joshua, but for men of all time; it
 is the example of our rulers, our fredericks and napoleons."
 butler was of the true prussian mould. "in crime," he would say, "as in
 war, no half measures. let us follow the example of our rulers whose
 orders in war run, 'kill, burn and sink,' and what you cannot carry away,
 destroy.'" here is the gospel of frightfulness applied almost
 prophetically to crime. to butler murder is a principle of warfare; to
 peace it was never more than a desperate resort or an act the outcome of
 ungovernable passion.
 ireland can claim the honour of butler's birth. it took place at kilkenny
 about . at an early age he left his native land for australia, and
 commenced his professional career by being sentenced under the name of
 james wilson—the same initials as those of james wharton of
 queensland—to twelve months' imprisonment for vagrancy. of the
 sixteen years he passed in victoria he spent thirteen in prison, first for
 stealing, then in steady progression for highway robbery and burglary.
 side by side with the practical and efficient education in crime furnished
 by the victorian prisons of that day, butler availed himself of the
 opportunity to educate his mind. it was during this period that he found
 inspiration and encouragement in the study of the lives of frederick and
 napoleon, besides acquiring a knowledge of music and shorthand.
 when in  butler quitted australia for new zealand, he was sufficiently
 accomplished to obtain employment as a schoolmaster.
 at cromwell, otago, under the name of "c. j. donelly, esq.," butler opened
 a "commercial and preparatory academy," and in a prospectus that recalls
 mr. squeers' famous advertisement of dotheboys hall, announced that the
 programme of the academy would include "reading, taught as an art and upon
 the most approved principles of elocution, writing, arithmetic, euclid,
 algebra, mensuration, trigonometry, book-keeping, geography, grammar,
 spelling and dictation, composition, logic and debate, french, latin,
 shorthand, history, music, and general lectures on astronomy, natural
 philosophy, geology, and other subjects." the simpler principles of these
 branches of learning were to be "rendered intelligible, and a firm
 foundation laid for the acquirement of future knowledge." unfortunately a
 suspicion of theft on butler's part cut short the fulfilment of this
 really splendid programme, and butler left cromwell hurriedly for the
 ampler field of dunedin. there, less than a fortnight after his
 arrivel{sic}, he was sentenced to four years' hard labour for several
 burglaries committed in and about that city.
 on the th of february, , butler was released from prison. with that
 consummate hypocrisy which was part of the man, he had contrived to enlist
 the sympathies of the governor of the dunedin jail, who gave him, on his
 departure, a suit of clothes and a small sum of money. a detective of the
 name of bain tried to find him employment. butler wished to adopt a
 literary career. he acted as a reporter on the dunedin evening star, and
 gave satisfaction to the editor of that newspaper. an attempt to do some
 original work, in the shape of "prison sketches," for another newspaper,
 was less successful. bain had arranged for the publication of the articles
 in the sunday advertiser, but when the time came to deliver his
 manuscript, butler failed to appear. bain, whose duty it was to keep an
 eye on butler, found him in the street looking wild and haggard. he said
 that he had found the work "too much for his head," that he had torn up
 what he had written, that he had nowhere to go, and had been to the end of
 the jetty with the intention of drowning himself. bain replied somewhat
 caustically that he thought it a pity he had not done so, as nothing would
 have given him greater joy than going to the end of the jetty and
 identifying his body. "you speak very plainly," said butler. "yes, and
 what is more, i mean what i say," replied bain. butler justified bain's
 candour by saying that if he broke out again, he would be worse than the
 most savage tiger ever let loose on the community. as a means of obviating
 such an outbreak, butler suggested that, intellectual employment having
 failed, some form of manual labour should be found him. bain complied with
 butler's request, and got him a job at levelling reclaimed ground in the
 neighbourhood of dunedin. on wednesday, march , butler started work, but
 after three hours of it relinquished the effort. bain saw butler again in
 dunedin on the evening of saturday, march , and made an appointment to
 meet him at half-past eight that night. butler did not keep the
 appointment. bain searched the town for him, but he was nowhere to be
 found.
 about the same time butler had some talk with another member of the
 dunedin police force, inspector mallard. they discussed the crimes of
 charles peace and other notable artists of that kind. butler remarked to
 mallard how easy it would be to destroy all traces of a murder by fire,
 and asked the inspector whether if he woke up one morning to find some
 brutal murder had been committed, he would not put it down to him. "no,
 butler," replied the inspector, "the first thing i should do would be to
 look for suspicious circumstances, and most undoubtedly, if they pointed
 to you, you would be looked after."
 in the early morning of this saturday, march , the house of a mr.
 stamper, a solicitor of dunedin, had been broken into, and some articles
 of value, among them a pair of opera glasses, stolen. the house had been
 set on fire, and burned to the ground. on the morning of the following
 day, sunday, the th, dunedin was horrified by the discovery of a far
 more terrible crime, tigerish certainly in its apparent ferocity. in a
 house in cumberland street, a young married couple and their little baby
 were cruelly murdered and un{sic}{an??} unsuccessful attempt made to fire
 the scene of the crime.
 about half-past six on sunday morning a man of the name of robb, a
 carpenter, on getting out of bed, noticed smoke coming from the house of a
 neighbor of his, mr. j. m. dewar, who occupied a small one-floored cottage
 standing by itself in cumberland street, a large and broad thoroughfare on
 the outskirts of the town. dewar was a butcher by trade, a young man, some
 eighteen months married, and father of a baby girl. robb, on seeing smoke
 coming from dewar's house, woke his son, who was a member of the fire
 brigade. the latter got up, crossed the street, and going round to the
 back door, which he found wide open, entered the house. as he went along
 the passage that separated the two front rooms, a bedroom and
 sitting-room, he called to the inmates to get up. he received no answer,
 but as he neared the bedroom he heard a "gurgling" sound. crawling on his
 hands and knees he reached the bedroom door, and two feet inside it his
 right hand touched something. it was the body of a woman; she was still
 alive, but in a dying condition. robb dragged her across the passage into
 the sitting-room. he got some water, and extinguished the fire in the
 bedroom. on the bed lay the body of dewar. to all appearances he had been
 killed in his sleep. by his side was the body of the baby, suffocated by
 the smoke. near the bed was an axe belonging to dewar, stained with blood.
 it was with this weapon, apparently, that mr. and mrs. dewar had been
 attacked. under the bed was a candlestick belonging also to the dewars,
 which had been used by the murderer in setting fire to the bed. the front
 window of the sitting-room was open, there were marks of boot nails on the
 sill, and on the grass in front of the window a knife was found. an
 attempt had been made to ransack a chest of drawers in the bedroom, but
 some articles of jewellery lying in one of the drawers, and a ring on the
 dressing-table had been left untouched. as far as was known, mr. and mrs.
 dewar were a perfectly happy and united couple. dewar had been last seen
 alive about ten o'clock on the saturday night getting off a car near his
 home. at eleven a neighbour had noticed a light in the dewars' house.
 about five o'clock on the sunday morning another neighbour had been
 aroused from his sleep by the sound as of something falling heavily. it
 was a wild and boisterous night. thinking the noise might be the slamming
 of his stable door, he got up and went out to see that it was secure. he
 then noticed that a light was burning in the bedroom window of the dewars'
 cottage.
 nothing more was known of what had occurred that morning until at
 half-past six robb saw the smoke coming from dewars' house. mrs. dewar,
 who alone could have told something, never recovered consciousness and
 died on the day following the crime. three considerable wounds sufficient
 to cause death had been inflicted on the unfortunate woman's head, and
 five of a similar character on that of her husband. at the head of the
 bed, which stood in the corner of the room, there was a large smear of
 blood on the wall just above the door; there were spots of blood all over
 the top of the bed, and some smaller ones that had to all appearances
 spurted on to the panel of the door nearest to the bed.
 the investigation of this shocking crime was placed in the hands of
 detective bain, whose duty it had been to keep an eye on robert butler,
 but he did not at first associate his interesting charge with the
 commission of the murder. about half-past six on sunday evening bain
 happened to go to a place called the scotia hotel, where the landlord
 informed him that one of his servants, a girl named sarah gillespie, was
 very anxious to see him. her story was this: on the morning of thursday,
 march , robert butler had come to the hotel; he was wearing a dark
 lavender check suit and carried a top coat and parcel. butler had stayed
 in the hotel all thursday and slept there that night. he had not slept in
 the hotel on the friday night, and sarah gillespie had not seen him again
 until he came into the house about five and twenty minutes to seven on
 sunday morning. the girl noticed that he was pale and excited, seemed
 afraid and worried, as if someone were coming after him. after giving her
 some money for the landlord, he went upstairs, fetched his top coat, a
 muffler, and his parcel. before leaving he said he would have a pint of
 beer, as he had not breakfasted. he then left, presumably to catch an
 early train.
 butler was next seen a few minutes later at a shop near the hotel, where
 he bought five tins of salmon, and about the same time a milk-boy saw him
 standing on the kerb in cumberland street in a stooping position, his head
 turned in the direction of dewars' house. a little after ten the same
 night butler entered a hotel at a place called blueskin, some twelve miles
 distant from dunedin. he was wearing an overcoat and a light muffler. he
 sat down at a table in the dining-room and seemed weary and sleepy.
 someone standing at the bar said "what a shocking murder that was in
 cumberland street!" butler started up, looked steadily from one to the
 other of the two men who happened to be in the room, then sat down again
 and, taking up a book, appeared to be reading. more than once he put down
 the book and kept shifting uneasily in his chair. after having some supper
 he got up, paid his reckoning, and left the hotel.
 at half-past three the following morning, about fifteen miles from
 dunedin, on the road to waikouaiti, two constables met a man whom they
 recognised as butler from a description that had been circulated by the
 police. the constables arrested and searched him. they found on him a pair
 of opera glasses, the property of mr. stamper, whose house had been
 burgled and burned down on the morning of the th. of this crime butler
 acknowledged himself to be the perpetrator. besides the opera glasses the
 constables took from butler two tins of salmon, a purse containing four
 shillings and sixpence, a pocket knife, a box of matches, a piece of
 candle, and a revolver and cartridges. the prisoner was carrying a top
 coat, and was dressed in a dark coat and grey trousers, underneath which
 he was wearing a white shirt, an under flannel and a rob roy crimean
 shirt. one of the constables noticed that there were marks of blood on his
 shirt. another singular feature in butler's attire was the fact that the
 outer soles of his boots had been recently removed. when last seen in
 dunedin butler had been wearing a moustache; he was now clean shaven.
 the same evening a remarkable interview took place in the lock-up at
 waikouaiti between butler and inspector mallard. mallard, who had some
 reason for suspecting butler, bearing in mind their recent conversation,
 told the prisoner that he would be charged with the murder in cumberland
 street. for a few seconds, according to mallard, the prisoner seemed
 terribly agitated and appeared to be choking. recovering himself somewhat,
 he said, "if for that, you can get no evidence against me; and if i am
 hanged for it, i shall be an innocent man, whatever other crimes i may
 have committed." mallard replied, "there is evidence to convict you—the
 fire was put out." butler than{sic} said that he would ask mallard a
 question, but, after a pause, decided not to do so. mallard, after
 examining butler's clothes, told him that those were not the clothes in
 which he had left the scotia hotel. butler admitted it, and said he had
 thrown those away in the north east valley. mallard alluded to the
 disappearance of the prisoner's moustache. butler replied that he had cut
 it off on the road. mallard noticed then the backs of butler's hands were
 scratched, as if by contact with bushes. butler seemed often on the point
 of asking questions, but would then stop and say "no, i won't ask you
 anything." to the constables who had arrested him butler remarked, "you
 ought to remember me, because i could have shot you if i had wished." when
 mallard later in the evening visited butler again, the prisoner who was
 then lying down said, "i want to speak to you. i want to ask the press not
 to publish my career. give me fair play. i suppose i shall be convicted
 and you will see i can die like a man."
 a few days after butler's arrest a ranger on the town belt, a hill
 overlooking dunedin, found a coat, a hat and silk striped cravat, and a
 few days later a pair of trousers folded up and placed under a bush. these
 articles of clothing were identified as those which butler had been seen
 wearing on the saturday and sunday morning. they were examined. there were
 a number of bloodstains on them, not one of them larger in size than a
 pea, some almost invisible. on the front of the trousers about the level
 of the groin there were blood spots on both sides. there was blood on the
 fold of the left breast of the coat and on the lining of the cuff of the
 right arm. the shirt butler was wearing at the time of his arrest was
 examined also. there were small spots of blood, about fourteen altogether,
 on the neck and shoulder bands, the right armpit, the left sleeve, and on
 both wristbands. besides the clothes, a salmon tin was found on the town
 belt, and behind a seat in the botanical gardens, from which a partial
 view of the dewars' house in cumberland street could be obtained, two more
 salmon tins were found, all three similar to the five purchased by butler
 on the sunday morning, two of which had been in his possession at the time
 of his arrest.
 such were the main facts of the case which butler had to answer when, a
 few weeks later, he was put on his trial before the supreme court at
 dunedin. the presiding judge was mr. justice williams, afterwards sir
 joshua williams and a member of the privy council. the crown prosecutor,
 mr. haggitt, conducted the case for the crown, and butler defended
 himself.
 to a man of butler's egregious vanity his trial was a glorious opportunity
 for displaying his intellectual gifts, such as they were. one who had
 known him in prison about this time describes him as a strange compound of
 vanity and envy, blind to his own faults and envious of the material
 advantages enjoyed by others. self-willed and arrogant, he could bully or
 whine with equal effect. despising men, he believed that if a man did not
 possess some requisite quality, he had only to ape it, as few would
 distinguish between the real and the sham.
 but with all these advantages in the struggle for life, it is certain that
 butler's defence would have been far less effective had be{sic} been
 denied all professional aid. as a matter of fact, throughout his trial
 butler was being advised by three distinguished members of the new zealand
 bar, now judges of the supreme court, who though not appearing for him in
 court, gave him the full benefit of their assistance outside it. at the
 same time butler carried off the thing well. where imagination was
 required, butler broke down; he could not write sketches of life in
 prison; that was too much for his pedestrian intellect. but given the
 facts of a case, dealing with a transaction of which he alone knew the
 real truth, and aided by the advice and guidance of trained intellects,
 butler was unquestionably clever and shrewd enough to make the best use of
 such advantages in meeting the case against him.
 thus equipped for the coming struggle, this high-browed ruffian, with his
 semi-intellectual cast of countenance, his jerky restless posturing, his
 splay-footed waddle, "like a lame muscovy duck," in the graphic words of
 his gaol companion, stood up to plead for his life before the supreme
 court at dunedin.
 it may be said at the outset that butler profited greatly by the
 scrupulous fairness shown by the crown prosecutor. mr. haggitt extended to
 the prisoner a degree of consideration and forbearance, justified
 undoubtedly towards an undefended prisoner. but, as we have seen, butler
 was not in reality undefended. at every moment of the trial he was in
 communication with his legal advisers, and being instructed by them how to
 meet the evidence given against him. under these circumstances the
 unfailing consideration shown him by the crown prosecutor seems almost
 excessive. from the first moment of the trial butler was fully alive to
 the necessities of his situation. he refrained from including in his
 challenges of the jury the gentleman who was afterwards foreman; he knew
 he was all right, he said, because he parted his hair in the middle, a
 "softy," in fact. he did not know in all probability that one gentleman on
 the jury had a rooted conviction that the murder of the dewars was the
 work of a criminal lunatic. there was certainly nothing in butler's
 demeanour or behaviour to suggest homicidal mania.
 the case against butler rested on purely circumstantial evidence.
 no new facts of importance were adduced at the trial. the stealing of
 dewar's wages, which had been paid to him on the saturday, was the motive
 for the murder suggested by the crown. the chief facts pointing to
 butler's guilt were: his conversation with mallard and bain previous to
 the crime; his demeanour after it; his departure from dunedin; the removal
 of his moustache and the soles of his boots; his change of clothes and the
 bloodstains found upon them, added to which was his apparent inability to
 account for his movements on the night in question.
 such as the evidence was, butler did little to shake it in
 cross-examination. his questions were many of them skilful and pointed,
 but on more than one occasion the judge intervened to save him from the
 danger common to all amateur cross-examiners, of not knowing when to stop.
 he was most successful in dealing with the medical witnesses. butler had
 explained the bloodstains on his clothes as smears that had come from
 scratches on his hands, caused by contact with bushes. this explanation
 the medical gentlemen with good reason rejected. but they went further,
 and said that these stains might well have been caused by the spurting and
 spraying of blood on to the murderer as he struck his victims. butler was
 able to show by the position of the bloodstains on the clothes that such
 an explanation was open to considerable doubt.
 butler's speech in his defence lasted six hours, and was a creditable
 performance. its arrangement is somewhat confused and repetitious, some
 points are over-elaborated, but on the whole he deals very successfully
 with most of the evidence given against him and exposes the unquestionable
 weakness of the crown case. at the outset he declared that he had taken
 his innocence for his defence. "i was not willing," he said, "to leave my
 life in the hands of a stranger. i was willing to incur all the
 disadvantages which the knowledge of the law might bring upon me. i was
 willing, also, to enter on this case without any experience whatever of
 that peculiarly acquired art of cross-examination. i fear i have done
 wrong. if i had had the assistance of able counsel, much more light would
 have been thrown on this case than has been." as we have seen, butler
 enjoyed throughout his trial the informal assistance of three of the most
 able counsel in new zealand, so that this heroic attitude of conscious
 innocence braving all dangers loses most of its force. without such
 assistance his danger might have been very real.
 a great deal of the evidence as to his conduct and demeanour at the time
 of the murder butler met by acknowledging that it was he who had broken
 into mr. stamper's house on the saturday morning, burgled it and set it on
 fire. his consciousness of guilt in this respect was, he said, quite
 sufficient to account for anything strange or furtive in his manner at
 that time. he was already known to the police; meeting bain on the
 saturday night, he felt more than ever sure that he was susspected{sic} of
 the robbery at mr. stamper's; he therefore decided to leave dunedin as
 soon as possible. that night, he said, he spent wandering about the
 streets half drunk, taking occasional shelter from the pouring rain, until
 six o'clock on the sunday morning, when he went to the scotia hotel. a
 more detailed account of his movements on the night of the dewars' murder
 he did not, or would not, give.
 when he comes to the facts of the murder and his theories as to the nature
 and motive of the crime—theories which he developed at rather
 unnecessary length for the purpose of his own defence—his speech is
 interesting. it will be recollected that on the discovery of the murder, a
 knife was found on the grass outside the house. this knife was not the
 property of the dewars. in butler's speech he emphasised the opinion that
 this knife had been brought there by the murderer: "horrible though it may
 be, my conclusion is that he brought it with the intention of cutting the
 throats of his victims, and that, finding they lay in rather an untoward
 position, he changed his mind, and, having carried out the object with
 which he entered the house, left the knife and, going back, brought the
 axe with which he effected his purpose. what was the purpose of the
 murderer? was it the robbery of dewar's paltry wages? was it the act of a
 tiger broken loose on the community? an act of pure wanton devilry? or was
 there some more reasonable explanation of this most atrocious crime?"
 butler rejected altogether the theory of ordinary theft. no thief of
 ambitious views, he said, would pitch upon the house of a poor journeyman
 butcher. the killing of the family appeared to him to be the motive: "an
 enemy hath done this." the murderer seems to have had a knowledge of the
 premises; he enters the house and does his work swiftly and promptly, and
 is gone. "we cannot know," butler continues, "all the passages in the
 lives of the murdered man or woman. what can we know of the hundred spites
 and jealousies or other causes of malice which might have caused the
 crime? if you say some obscure quarrel, some spite or jealousy is not
 likely to have been the cause of so dreadful a murder, you cannot revert
 to the robbery theory without admitting a motive much weaker in all its
 utter needlessness and vagueness. the prominent feature of the murder,
 indeed the only feature, is its ruthless, unrelenting, determined
 vindictiveness. every blow seemed to say, 'you shall die you shall not
 live.'"
 whether butler were the murderer of the dewars or not, the theory that
 represented them as having been killed for the purpose of robbery has its
 weak side all the weaker if butler, a practical and ambitious criminal,
 were the guilty man.
 in , two years after butler's trial, there appeared in a new zealand
 newspaper, society, published in christchurch, a series of prison
 "portraits," written evidently by one who had himself undergone a term of
 imprisonment. one of the "portraits" was devoted to an account of butler.
 the writer had known butler in prison. according to the story told him by
 butler, the latter had arrived in dunedin with a quantity of jewellery he
 had stolen in australia. this jewellery he entrusted to a young woman for
 safe keeping. after serving his first term of two years' imprisonment in
 dunedin, butler found on his release that the young woman had married a
 man of the name of dewar. butler went to mrs. dewar and asked for the
 return of his jewellery; she refused to give it up. on the night of the
 murder he called at the house in cumberland street and made a last appeal
 to her, but in vain. he determined on revenge. during his visit to mrs.
 dewar he had had an opportunity of seeing the axe and observing the best
 way to break into the house. he watched the husband's return, and decided
 to kill him as well as his wife on the chance of obtaining his week's
 wages. with the help of the knife which he had found in the backyard of a
 hotel he opened the window. the husband he killed in his sleep, the woman
 waked with the first blow he struck her. he found the jewellery in a
 drawer rolled up in a pair of stockings. he afterwards hid it in a
 well-marked spot some half-hour before his arrest.
 a few years after its appearance in society, this account of butler was
 reproduced in an auckland newspaper. bain, the detective, wrote a letter
 questioning the truth of the writer's statements. he pointed out that when
 butler first came to dunedin he had been at liberty only a fortnight
 before serving his first term of imprisonment, very little time in which
 to make the acquaintance of a woman and dispose of the stolen jewellery.
 he asked why, if butler had hidden the jewellery just before his arrest,
 he had not also hidden the opera-glasses which he had stolen from mr.
 stamper's house. neither of these comments is very convincing. a fortnight
 seems time enough in which a man of butler's character might get to know a
 woman and dispose of some jewellery; while, if butler were the murderer of
 mr. dewar as well as the burglar who had broken into stamper's house, it
 was part of his plan to acknowledge himself guilty of the latter crime and
 use it to justify his movements before and after the murder. bain is more
 convincing when he states at the conclusion of his letter that he had
 known mrs. dewar from childhood as a "thoroughly good and true woman,"
 who, as far as he knew, had never in her life had any acquaintance with
 butler.
 at the same time, the account given by butler's fellow-prisoner, in which
 the conduct of the murdered woman is represented as constituting the
 provocation for the subsequent crime, explains one peculiar circumstance
 in connection with the tragedy, the selection of this journeyman butcher
 and his wife as the victims of the murderer. it explains the theory, urged
 so persistently by butler in his speech to the jury, that the crime was
 the work of an enemy of the dewars, the outcome of some hidden spite, or
 obscure quarrel; it explains the apparent ferocity of the murder, and the
 improbability of a practical thief selecting such an unprofitable couple
 as his prey. the rummaged chest of drawers and the fact that some trifling
 articles of jewellery were left untouched on the top of them, are
 consistent with an eager search by the murderer for some particular
 object. against this theory of revenge is the fact that butler was a
 malignant ruffian and liar in any case, that, having realised very little
 in cash by the burglary at stamper's house, he would not be particular as
 to where he might get a few shillings more, that he had threatened to do a
 tigerish deed, and that it is characteristic of his vanity to try to
 impute to his crime a higher motive than mere greed or necessity.
 butler showed himself not averse to speaking of the murder in cumberland
 street to at least one of those, with whom he came in contact in his later
 years. after he had left new zealand and returned to australia, he was
 walking in a street in melbourne with a friend when they passed a lady
 dressed in black, carrying a baby in her arms. the baby looked at the two
 men and laughed. butler frowned and walked rapidly away. his companion
 chaffed him, and asked whether it was the widow or the baby that he was
 afraid of. butler was silent, but after a time asked his companion to come
 into some gardens and sit down on one of the seats, as he had something
 serious to say to him. for a while butler sat silent. then he asked the
 other if he had ever been in dunedin. "yes," was the reply. "look here,"
 said butler, "you are the only man i ever made any kind of confidant of.
 you are a good scholar, though i could teach you a lot." after this
 gracious compliment he went on: "i was once tried in dunedin on the charge
 of killing a man, woman and child, and although innocent, the crime was
 nearly brought home to me. it was my own ability that pulled me through.
 had i employed a professional advocate, i should not have been here to-day
 talking to you." after describing the murder, butler said: "trying to fire
 the house was unnecessary, and killing the baby was unnecessary and cruel.
 i respect no man's life, for no man respects mine. a lot of men i have
 never injured have tried to put a rope round my neck more than once. i
 hate society in general, and one or two individuals in particular. the man
 who did that murder in dunedin has, if anything, my sympathy, but it seems
 to me he need not have killed that child." his companion was about to
 speak. butler stopped him. "now, don't ever ask me such a silly question
 as that," he said. "what?" asked his friend. "you were about to ask me if
 i did that deed," replied butler, "and you know perfectly well that,
 guilty or innocent, that question would only be answered in one way." "i
 was about to ask nothing of the kind," said the other, "for you have
 already told me that you were innocent." "good!" said butler, "then let
 that be the end of the subject, and never refer to it again, except,
 perhaps, in your own mind, when you can, if you like, remember that i said
 the killing of the child was unnecessary and cruel."
 having developed to the jury his theory of why the crime was committed,
 butler told them that, as far as he was concerned, there were four points
 against him on which the crown relied to prove his guilt. firstly, there
 was the fact of his being in the neighbourhood of the crime on the sunday
 morning; that, he said, applied to scores of other people besides himself.
 then there was his alleged disturbed appearance and guilty demeanour. the
 evidence of that was, he contended, doubtful in any case, and referable to
 another cause; as also his leaving dunedin in the way and at the time he
 did. he scouted the idea that murderers are compelled by some invisible
 force to betray their guilt. "the doings of men," he urged, "and their
 success are regulated by the amount of judgment that they possess, and,
 without impugning or denying the existence of providence, i say this is a
 law that holds good in all cases, whether for evil or good. murderers, if
 they have the sense and ability and discretion to cover up their crime,
 will escape, do escape, and have escaped. many people, when they have
 gravely shaken their heads and said 'murder will out,' consider they have
 done a great deal and gone a long way towards settling the question. well,
 this, like many other stock formulas of old world wisdom, is not true. how
 many murders are there that the world has never heard of, and never will?
 how many a murdered man, for instance, lies among the gum-trees of
 victoria, or in the old abandoned mining-shafts on the diggings, who is
 missed by nobody, perhaps, but a pining wife at home, or helpless
 children, or an old mother? but who were their murderers? where are they?
 god knows, perhaps, but nobody else, and nobody ever will." the fact, he
 said, that he was alleged to have walked up cumberland street on the
 sunday morning and looked in the direction of the dewars' house was,
 unless the causes of superstition and a vague and incomplete reasoning
 were to be accepted as proof, evidence rather of his innocence than his
 guilt. he had removed the soles of his boots, he said, in order to ease
 his feet in walking; the outer soles had become worn and ragged, and in
 lumps under his feet. he denied that he had told bain, the detective, that
 he would break out as a desperate tiger let loose on the community; what
 he had said was that he was tired of living the life of a prairie dog or a
 tiger in the jungle.
 butler was more successful when he came to deal with the bloodstains on
 his clothes. these, he said, were caused by the blood from the scratches
 on his hands, which had been observed at the time of his arrest. the
 doctors had rejected this theory, and said that the spots of blood had
 been impelled from the axe or from the heads of the victims as the
 murderer struck the fatal blow. butler put on the clothes in court, and
 was successful in showing that the position and appearance of certain of
 the blood spots was not compatible with such a theory. "i think," he said,
 "i am fairly warranted in saying that the evidence of these gentlemen is,
 not to put too fine a point on it, worth just nothing at all."
 butler's concluding words to the jury were brief but emphatic: "i stand in
 a terrible position. so do you. see that in your way of disposing of me
 you deliver yourselves of your responsibilities."
 in the exercise of his forbearance towards an undefended prisoner, mr.
 haggitt did not address the jury for the crown. at four o'clock the judge
 commenced his summing-up. mr. justice williams impressed on the jury that
 they must be satisfied, before they could convict the prisoner, that the
 circumstances of the crime and the prisoner's conduct were inconsistent
 with any other reasonable hypothesis than his guilt. there was little or
 no evidence that robbery was the motive of the crime. the circumstance of
 the prisoner being out all saturday night and in the neighbourhood of the
 crime on sunday morning only amounted to the fact that he had an
 opportunity shared by a great number of other persons of committing the
 murder. the evidence of his agitation and demeanour at the time of his
 arrest must be accepted with caution. the evidence of the blood spots was
 of crucial importance; there was nothing save this to connect him directly
 with the crime. the jury must be satisfied that the blood on the clothes
 corresponded with the blood marks which, in all probability, would be
 found on the person who committed the murder. in regard to the medical
 testimony some caution must be exercised. where medical gentlemen had made
 observations, seen with their own eyes, the direct inference might be
 highly trustworthy, but, when they proceeded to draw further inferences,
 they might be in danger of looking at facts through the spectacles of
 theory; "we know that people do that in other things besides science—politics,
 religion, and so forth." taking the crown evidence, at its strongest,
 there was a missing link; did the evidence of the bloodstains supply it?
 these bloodstains were almost invisible. could a person be reasonably
 asked to explain how they came where they did? could they be accounted for
 in no other reasonable way than that the clothes had been worn by the
 murderer of the dewars?
 in spite of a summing-up distinctly favourable to the prisoner, the jury
 were out three hours. according to one account of their proceedings, told
 to the writer, there was at first a majority of the jurymen in favour of
 conviction. but it was saturday night; if they could not come to a
 decision they were in danger of being locked up over sunday. for this
 reason the gentleman who held an obstinate and unshaken belief that the
 crime was the work of a homicidal maniac found an unexpected ally in a
 prominent member of a church choir who was down to sing a solo in his
 church on sunday, and was anxious not to lose such an opportunity for
 distinction. whatever the cause, after three hours' deliberation the jury
 returned a verdict of "not guilty." later in the session butler pleaded
 guilty to the burglary at mr. stamper's house, and was sentenced to
 eighteen years' imprisonment. the severity of this sentence was not, the
 judge said, intended to mark the strong suspicion under which butler
 laboured of being a murderer as well as a burglar.
 the ends of justice had been served by butler's acquittal. but in the
 light of after events, it is perhaps unfortunate that the jury did not
 stretch a point and so save the life of mr. munday of toowong. butler
 underwent his term of imprisonment in littleton jail. there his reputation
 was most unenviable. he is described by a fellow prisoner as ill-tempered,
 malicious, destructive, but cowardly and treacherous. he seems to have
 done little or no work; he looked after the choir and the library, but was
 not above breaking up the one and smashing the other, if the fit seized
 him.
 in  butler was released from prison. the news of his release was
 described as falling like a bombshell among the peaceful inhabitants of
 dunedin. in the colony of victoria, where butler had commenced his career,
 it was received with an apprehension that was justified by subsequent
 events. it was believed that on his release the new zealand authorities
 had shipped butler off to rio. but it was not long before he made his way
 once more to australia. from the moment of his arrival in melbourne he was
 shadowed by the police. one or two mysterious occurrences soon led to his
 arrest. on june  he was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment under
 the criminal influx act, which makes it a penal offence for any convict to
 enter victoria for three years after his release from prison. not content
 with this, the authorities determined to put butler on trial on two
 charges of burglary and one of highway robbery, committed since his return
 to the colony. to one charge of burglary, that of breaking into a
 hairdresser's shop and stealing a wig, some razors and a little money,
 butler pleaded guilty.
 but the charge of highway robbery, which bore a singular resemblance to
 the final catastrophe in queensland, he resisted to the utmost, and showed
 that his experience in the supreme court at dunedin had not been lost on
 him. at half-past six one evening in a suburb of melbourne an elderly
 gentleman found himself confronted by a bearded man, wearing a long
 overcoat and a boxer hat and flourishing a revolver, who told him abruptly
 to "turn out his pockets." the old man did ashe was told. the robber then
 asked for his watch and chain, saying "business must be done." the old
 gentleman mildly urged that this was a dangerous business. on being
 assured that the watch was a gold one, the robber appeared willing to risk
 the danger, and departed thoroughly satisfied. the old gentleman
 afterwards identified butler as the man who had taken his watch. another
 elderly man swore that he had seen butler at the time of the robbery in
 the possession of a fine gold watch, which he said had been sent him from
 home. but the watch had not been found in butler's possession.
 on june  butler was put on his trial in the melbourne criminal court
 before mr. justice holroyd, charged with robbery under arms. his
 appearance in the dock aroused very considerable interest. "it was the
 general verdict," wrote one newspaper, "that his intellectual head and
 forehead compared not unfavourably with those of the judge." he was
 decently dressed and wore pince-nez, which he used in the best
 professional manner as he referred to the various documents that lay in
 front of him. he went into the witness-box and stated that the evening of
 the crime he had spent according to his custom in the public library.
 for an hour and a half he addressed the jury. he disputed the possibility
 of his identification by his alleged victim. he was "an old gentleman of
 sedentary pursuits and not cast in the heroic mould." such a man would be
 naturally alarmed and confused at meeting suddenly an armed robber. now,
 under these circumstances, could his recognition of a man whose face was
 hidden by a beard, his head by a boxer hat, and his body by a long
 overcoat, be considered trustworthy? and such recognition occurring in the
 course of a chance encounter in the darkness, that fruitful mother of
 error? the elderly gentleman had described his moustache as a slight one,
 but the jury could see that it was full and overhanging. he complained
 that he had been put up for identification singly, not with other men,
 according to the usual custom; the police had said to the prosecutor: "we
 have here a man that we think robbed you, and, if he is not the man, we
 shall be disappointed," to which the prosecutor had replied: "yes, and if
 he is not the man, i shall be disappointed too." for the elderly person
 who had stated that he had seen a gold watch in butler's possession the
 latter had nothing but scorn. he was a "lean and slippered pantaloon in
 shakespeare's last stage"; and he, butler, would have been a lunatic to
 have confided in such a man.
 the jury acquitted butler, adding as a rider to their verdict that there
 was not sufficient evidence of identification. the third charge against
 butler was not proceeded with. he was put up to receive sentence for the
 burglary at the hairdresser's shop. butler handed to the judge a written
 statement which mr. justice holroyd described as a narrative that might
 have been taken from those sensational newspapers written for
 nursery-maids, and from which, he said, he could not find that butler had
 ever done one good thing in the whole course of his life. of that life of
 fifty years butler had spent thirty-five in prison. the judge expressed
 his regret that a man of butler's knowledge, information, vanity, and
 utter recklessness of what evil will do, could not be put away somewhere
 for the rest of his life, and sentenced him to fifteen years' imprisonment
 with hard labour. "an iniquitous and brutal sentence!" exclaimed the
 prisoner. after a brief altercation with the judge, who said that he could
 hardly express the scorn he felt for such a man, butler was removed. the
 judge subsequently reduced the sentence to one of ten years. chance or
 destiny would seem implacable in their pursuit of mr. william munday of
 toowong.
 butler after his trial admitted that it was he who had robbed the old
 gentleman of his watch, and described to the police the house in which it
 was hidden. when the police went there to search they found that the house
 had been pulled down, but among the debris they discovered a brown paper
 parcel containing the old gentleman's gold watch and chain, a
 five-chambered revolver, a keen-edged butcher's knife, and a mask.
 butler served his term of imprisonment in victoria, "an unmitigated
 nuisance" to his custodians. on his release in , he made, as in
 dunedin, an attempt to earn a living by his pen. he contributed some
 articles to a melbourne evening paper on the inconveniences of prison
 discipline, but he was quite unfitted for any sustained effort as a
 journalist. according to his own account, with the little money he had
 left he made his way to sydney, thence to brisbane. he was half-starved,
 bewildered, despairing; in his own words, "if a psychological camera could
 have been turned on me it would have shown me like a bird fascinated by a
 serpent, fascinated and bewildered by the fate in front, behind, and
 around me." months of suffering and privation passed, months of tramping
 hundreds of miles with occasional breakdowns, months of hunger and
 sickness; "my actions had become those of a fool; my mind and will had
 become a remnant guided or misguided by unreasoning impulse."
 it was under the influence of such an impulse that on march  butler had
 met and shot mr. munday at toowong. on may  he was arraigned at brisbane
 before the supreme court of queensland. but the butler who stood in the
 dock of the brisbane criminal court was very different from the butler who
 had successfully defended himself at dunedin and melbourne. the spirit had
 gone out of him; it was rather as a suppliant, represented by counsel,
 that he faced the charge of murder. his attitude was one of humble and
 appropriate penitence. in a weak and nervous voice he told the story of
 his hardships since his release from his victorian prison; he would only
 urge that the shooting of mr. munday was accidental, caused by munday
 picking up a stone and attacking him. when about to be sentenced to death
 he expressed great sorrow and contrition for his crime, for the poor wife
 and children of his unfortunate victim. his life, he said, was a poor
 thing, but he would gladly give it fifty times over.
 the sentence of death was confirmed by the executive on june . to a
 freethought advocate who visited him shortly before his execution, butler
 wrote a final confession of faith: "i shall have to find my way across the
 harbour bar without the aid of any pilot. in these matters i have for many
 years carried an exempt flag, and, as it has not been carried through
 caprice or ignorance, i am compelled to carry it to the last. there is an
 impassable bar of what i honestly believe to be the inexorable logic of
 philosophy and facts, history and experience of the nature of the world,
 the human race and myself, between me and the views of the communion of
 any religious organisation. so instead of the 'depart christian soul' of
 the priest, i only hope for the comfort and satisfaction of the last
 friendly good-bye of any who cares to give it."
 from this positive affirmation of unbelief butler wilted somewhat at the
 approach of death. the day before his execution he spent half an hour
 playing hymns on the church organ in the prison; and on the scaffold,
 where his agitation rendered him almost speechless, he expressed his
 sorrow for what he had done, and the hope that, if there were a heaven,
 mercy would be shown him.
 m. derues
 the last word on derues has been said by m. georges claretie in his
 excellent monograph, "derues l'empoisonneur," paris. . there is a full
 account of the case in vol. v. of fouquier, "causes celebres."
 m. etienne saint-faust de lamotte, a provincial nobleman of ancient
 lineage and moderate health, ex-equerry to the king, desired in the year
  to dispose of a property in the country, the estate of buisson-souef
 near villeneuve-le-roi, which he had purchased some ten years before out
 of money acquired by a prudent marriage.
 with an eye to the main chance m. de lamotte had in  ran away with the
 daughter of a wealthy citizen of rheims, who was then staying with her
 sister in paris. they lived together in the country for some time, and a
 son was born to them, whom the father legitimised by subsequently marrying
 the mother. for a few years m. and mme. de lamotte dwelt happily together
 at buisson-souef. but as their boy grew up they became anxious to leave
 the country and return to paris, where m. de lamotte hoped to be able to
 obtain for his son some position about the court of louis xvi. and so it
 was that in may, , m. de lamotte gave a power of attorney to his wife
 in order that she might go to paris and negotiate for the sale of
 buisson-souef. the legal side of the transaction was placed in the hands
 of one jolly, a proctor at the chatelet in paris.
 now the proctor jolly had a client with a great desire to acquire a place
 in the country, m. derues de cyrano de bury, lord of candeville, herchies,
 and other places. here was the very man to comply with the requirements of
 the de lamottes, and such a pleasing, ready, accommodating gentleman into
 the bargain! very delicate to all appearances, strangely pale, slight,
 fragile in build, with his beardless chin and feminine cast of feature,
 there was something cat-like in the soft insinuating smile of this
 seemingly most amiable, candid and pious of men. always cheerful and
 optimistic, it was quite a pleasure to do business with m. derues de
 cyrano de bury. the de lamottes after one or two interviews were delighted
 with their prospective purchaser. everything was speedily settled. m.
 derues and his wife, a lady belonging to the distinguished family of
 nicolai, visited buisson-souef. they were enchanted with what they saw,
 and their hosts were hardly less enchanted with their visitors. by the end
 of december, , the purchase was concluded. m. derues was to give
 , livres (about l,) for the estate, the payments to be made by
 instalments, the first of , livres to be paid on the actual signing
 of the contract of sale, which, it was agreed, was to be concluded not
 later than the first of june, . in the meantime, as an earnest of good
 faith, m. derues gave mme. de lamotte a bill for , livres to fall due
 on april , .
 what could be more satisfactory? that m. derues was a substantial person
 there could be no doubt. through his wife he was entitled to a sum of
 , livres as her share of the property of a wealthy kinsman, one
 despeignes-duplessis, a country gentleman, who some four years before had
 been found murdered in his house under mysterious circumstances. the
 liquidation of the duplessis inheritance, as soon as the law's delay could
 be overcome, would place the derues in a position of affluence fitting a
 cyrano de bury and a nicolai.
 at this time m. derues was in reality far from affluent. in point of fact
 he was insolvent. nor was his lineage, nor that of his wife, in any way
 distinguished. he had no right to call himself de cyrano de bury or lord
 of candeville. his wife's name was nicolais, not nicolai—a very
 important difference from the genealogical point of view. the duplessis
 inheritance, though certainly existent, would seem to have had little more
 chance of realisation than the mythical crawford millions of madame
 humbert. and yet, crippled with debt, without a penny in the world, this
 daring grocer of the rue beaubourg, for such was m. derues' present
 condition in life, could cheerfully and confidently engage in a
 transaction as considerable as the purchase of a large estate for ,
 livres! the origin of so enterprising a gentleman is worthy of attention.
 antoine francois derues was born at chartres in ; his father was a
 corn merchant. his parents died when he was three years old. for some time
 after his birth he was assumed to be a girl; it was not until he was
 twelve years old that an operation determined his sex to be masculine.
 apprenticed by his relatives to a grocer, derues succeeded so well in the
 business that he was able in  to set up on his own account in paris,
 and in  he married. among the grocer's many friends and acquaintances
 this marriage created something of a sensation, for derues let it be known
 that the lady of his choice was of noble birth and an heiress. the first
 statement was untrue. the lady was one marie louise nicolais, daughter of
 a non-commissioned artillery officer, turned coachbuilder. but by
 suppressing the s at the end of her name, which derues was careful also to
 erase in his marriage contract, the ambitious grocer was able to describe
 his wife as connected with the noble house of nicolai, one of the most
 distinguished of the great french families.
 there was more truth in the statement that mme. derues was an heiress. a
 kinsman of her mother, beraud by name, had become the heir to a certain
 marquis desprez. beraud was the son of a small merchant. his mother had
 married a second time, the husband being the marquis desprez, and through
 her beraud had inherited the marquis' property. according to the custom of
 the time, beraud, on coming into his inheritance, took a title from one of
 his estates and called himself thenceforth the lord of
 despeignes-duplessis. a rude, solitary, brutal man, devoted to sport, he
 lived alone in his castle of candeville, hated by his neighbours, a terror
 to poachers. one day he was found lying dead in his bedroom; he had been
 shot in the chest; the assassin had escaped through an open window.
 the mystery of beraud's murder was never solved. his estate of ,
 livres was divided among three cousins, of whom the mother of mme. derues
 was one. mme. derues herself was entitled to a third of his mother's share
 of the estate, that is, one-ninth of the whole. but in  derues
 acquired the rest of the mother's share on condition that he paid her an
 annual income of , livres. thus on the liquidation of the duplessis
 inheritance mme. derues would be entitled nominally to some , livres,
 about l, in english money. but five years had passed since the death
 of despeignes-duplessis, and the estate was still in the slow process of
 legal settlement. if derues were to receive the full third of the
 duplessis inheritance—a very unlikely supposition after four years
 of liquidation—, livres would not suffice to pay his ordinary
 debts quite apart from the purchase money of buisson-souef. his financial
 condition was in the last degree critical. not content with the modest
 calling of a grocer, derues had turned money-lender, a money-lender to
 spendthrift and embarrassed noblemen. derues dearly loved a lord; he
 wanted to become one himself; it delighted him to receive dukes and
 marquises at the rue beaubourg, even if they came there with the avowed
 object of raising the wind. the smiling grocer, in his everlasting bonnet
 and flowered dressing-gown a la j. j. rousseau, was ever ready to oblige
 the needy scion of a noble house. what he borrowed at moderate interest
 from his creditors he lent at enhanced interest to the quality. duns and
 bailiffs jostled the dukes and marquises whose presence at the rue
 beaubourg so impressed the wondering neighbours of the facile grocer.
 this aristocratic money-lending proved a hopeless trade; it only plunged
 derues deeper and deeper into the mire of financial disaster. the noblemen
 either forgot to pay while they were alive, or on their death were found
 to be insolvent. derues was driven to ordering goods and merchandise on
 credit, and selling them at a lower price for ready money. victims of this
 treatment began to press him seriously for their money or their goods.
 desperately he continued to fence them off with the long expected windfall
 of the duplessis inheritance.
 paris was getting too hot for him. gay and irrepressible as he was, the
 strain was severe. if he could only find some retreat in the country where
 he might enjoy at once refuge from his creditors and the rank and
 consequence of a country gentleman! nothing—no fear, no
 disappointment, no disaster—could check the little grocer's ardent
 and overmastering desire to be a gentleman indeed, a landed proprietor, a
 lord or something or other. at the beginning of  he had purchased a
 place near rueil from a retired coffeehouse-keeper, paying , livres on
 account, but the non-payment of the rest of the purchase-money had
 resulted in the annulment of the contract. undefeated, derues only
 determined to fly the higher. having failed to pay , livres for a
 modest estate near rueil, he had no hesitation in pledging himself to pay
 , livres for the lordly domain of buisson-souef. so great were his
 pride and joy on the conclusion of the latter bargain that he amused
 himself by rehearsing on paper his future style and title: "antoine
 francois de cyrano derues de bury, seigneur de buisson-souef et valle
 profonde." he is worthy of thackeray's pen, this little grocer-snob, with
 his grand and ruinous acquaintance with the noble and the great, his
 spurious titles, his unwearied climbing of the social ladder.
 the confiding, if willing, dupe of aristocratic impecuniosity, derues was
 a past master of the art of duping others. from the moment of the purchase
 of buisson-souef all his art was employed in cajoling the trusting and
 simple de lamottes. legally buisson-souef was his from the signing of the
 agreement in december, . his first payment was due in april, .
 instead of making it, derues went down to buisson-souef with his little
 girl, and stayed there as the guests of the de lamottes for six months.
 his good humour and piety won all hearts. the village priest especially
 derived great satisfaction from the society of so devout a companion. he
 entertained his good friends, the merry little man, by dressing up as a
 woman, a role his smooth face and effeminate features well fitted him to
 play. if business were alluded to, the merry gentleman railed at the delay
 and chicanery of lawyers; it was that alone that postponed the liquidation
 of the duplessis inheritance; as soon as the lawyers could be got rid of,
 the purchase-money of his new estate would be promptly paid up. but as
 time went on and no payment was forthcoming the de lamottes began to feel
 a little uneasy. as soon as derues had departed in november m. de lamotte
 decided to send his wife to paris to make further inquiries and, if
 possible, bring their purchaser up to the scratch. mme. de lamotte had
 developed into a stout, indolent woman, of the mrs. bloss type, fond of
 staying in bed and taking heavy meals. her son, a fat, lethargic youth of
 fourteen, accompanied his mother.
 on hearing of mme. de lamotte's contemplated visit to paris, derues was
 filled with alarm. if she were living free and independent in paris she
 might find out the truth about the real state of his affairs, and then
 good-bye to buisson-souef and landed gentility! no, if mme. de lamotte
 were to come to paris, she must come as the guest of the derues, a
 pleasant return for the hospitality accorded to the grocer at
 buisson-souef. the invitation was given and readily accepted; m. de
 lamotte still had enough confidence in and liking for the derues to be
 glad of the opportunity of placing his wife under their roof. and so it
 was that on december , , mme. de lamotte arrived at paris and took
 up her abode at the house of the derues in the rue beaubourg her son she
 placed at a private school in a neighbouring street.
 to derues there was now one pressing and immediate problem to be solved—how
 to keep buisson-souef as his own without paying for it? to one less
 sanguine, less daring, less impudent and desperate in his need, the
 problem would have appeared insoluble.
 but that was by no means the view of the cheery and resourceful grocer. he
 had a solution ready, well thought out and bearing to his mind the stamp
 of probability. he would make a fictitious payment of the purchase-money
 to mme. de lamotte. she would then disappear, taking her son with her. her
 indiscretion in having been the mistress of de lamotte before she became
 his wife, would lend colour to his story that she had gone off with a
 former lover, taking with her the money which derues had paid her for
 buisson-souef. he would then produce the necessary documents proving the
 payment of the purchase-money, and buisson-souef would be his for good and
 all.
 the prime necessity to the success of this plan was the disappearance,
 willing or unwilling, of mme. de lamotte and her son. the former had
 settled down quite comfortably beneath the hospitable roof of the derues,
 and under the soothing influence of her host showed little vigour in
 pressing him for the money due to herself and her husband. she had already
 spent a month in quietly enjoying paris and the society of her friends
 when, towards the end of january, , her health and that of her son
 began to fail. mme. de lamotte was seized with sickness and internal
 trouble. though derues wrote to her husband that his wife was well and
 their business was on the point of conclusion, by the th of january mme.
 de lamotte had taken to her bed, nursed and physicked by the ready derues.
 on the st the servant at the rue beaubourg was told that she could go to
 her home at montrouge, whither derues had previously sent his two
 children. mme. derues, who was in an interesting condition, was sent out
 for an hour by her husband to do some shopping. derues was alone with his
 patient.
 in the evening a friend, one bertin, came to dine with derues. bertin was
 a short, hustling, credulous, breathless gentleman, always in a hurry,
 with a great belief in the abilities of m. derues. he found the little man
 in excellent spirits. bertin asked if he could see mme. de lamotte. mme.
 derues said that that was impossible, but that her husband had given her
 some medicine which was working splendidly. the young de lamotte called to
 see his mother. derues took him into her room; in the dim light the boy
 saw her sleeping, and crept out quietly for fear of disturbing her. the
 derues and their friends sat down to dinner. derues kept jumping up and
 running into the sick room, from which a horrible smell began to pervade
 the house. but derues was radiant at the success of his medicine. "was
 there ever such a nurse as i am?" he exclaimed. bertin remarked that he
 thought it was a woman's and not a man's place to nurse a lady under such
 distressing circumstances. derues protested that it was an occupation he
 had always liked. next day, february , the servant was still at
 montrouge; mme. derues was again sent out shopping; again derues was alone
 with his patient. but she was a patient no longer; she had become a
 corpse. the highly successful medicine administered to the poor lady by
 her jolly and assiduous nurse had indeed worked wonders.
 derues had bought a large leather trunk. it is possible that to derues
 belongs the distinction of being the first murderer to put that harmless
 and necessary article of travel to a criminal use. he was engaged in his
 preparations for coffining mme. de lamotte, when a female creditor knocked
 insistently at the door. she would take no denial. clad in his bonnet and
 gown, derues was compelled to admit her. she saw the large trunk, and
 suspected a bolt on the part of her creditor. derues reassured her; a
 lady, he said, who had been stopping with them was returning to the
 country. the creditor departed. later in the day derues came out of the
 house and summoned some porters. with their help the heavy trunk was taken
 to the house of a sculptor, a friend of derues, who agreed to keep it in
 his studio until derues could take it down to his place in the country.
 bertin came in to dinner again that evening, and also the young de
 lamotte. derues was gayer than ever, laughing and joking with his guests.
 he told the boy that his mother had quite recovered and gone to versailles
 to see about finding him some post at the court. "we'll go and see her
 there in a day or two," he said, "i'll let you know when."
 on the following day a smartly dressed, dapper, but very pale little
 gentleman, giving the name of ducoudray, hired a vacant cellar in a house
 in the rue de la mortellerie. he had, he said, some spanish wine he wanted
 to store there, and three or four days later m. ducoudray deposited in
 this cellar a large grey trunk. a few days after he employed a man to dig
 a large hole in the floor of the cellar, giving as his reason for such a
 proceeding that "there was no way of keeping wine like burying it." while
 the man worked at the job, his genial employer beguiled his labours with
 merry quips and tales, which he illustrated with delightful mimicry. the
 hole dug, the man was sent about his business. "i will bury the wine
 myself," said his employer, and on one or two occasions m. ducoudray was
 seen by persons living in the house going in and out of his cellar, a
 lighted candle in his hand. one day the pale little gentleman was observed
 leaving the cellar, accompanied by a porter carrying a large trunk, and
 after that the dwellers in the rue de la mortellerie saw the pale little
 gentleman no more.
 a few days later m. derues sent down to his place at buisson-souef a large
 trunk filled with china. it was received there by m. de lamotte. little
 did the trusting gentleman guess that it was in this very trunk that the
 body of his dear wife had been conveyed to its last resting place in the
 cellar of m. ducoudray in the rue de la mortellerie. nor had m.
 mesvrel-desvergers, importunate creditor of m. derues, guessed the
 contents of the large trunk that he had met his debtor one day early in
 february conveying through the streets of paris. creditors were always
 interrupting derues at inconvenient moments. m. mesvrel-desvergers had
 tapped derues on the shoulder, reminded him forcibly of his liability
 towards him, and spoken darkly of possible imprisonment. derues pointed to
 the trunk. it contained, he said, a sample of wine; he was going to order
 some more of it, and he would then be in a position to pay his debt. but
 the creditor, still doubting, had m. derues followed, and ascertained that
 he had deposited his sample of wine at a house in the rue de la
 mortellerie.
 on wednesday, february , a m. beaupre of commercy arrived at versailles
 with his nephew, a fat boy, in reality some fourteen years of age, but
 given out as older. they hired a room at the house of a cooper named
 pecquet. m. beaupre was a very pale little gentleman, who seemed in
 excellent spirits, in spite of the fact that his nephew was clearly
 anything but well. indeed, so sick and ailing did he appear to be that
 mme. pecquet suggested that his uncle should call in a doctor. but m.
 beaupre said that that was quite unnecessary; he had no faith in doctors;
 he would give the boy a good purge. his illness was due, he said, to a
 venereal disorder and the drugs which he had been taking in order to cure
 it; it was a priest the boy needed rather than a doctor. on the thursday
 and friday the boy's condition showed little improvement; the vomiting
 continued. but on saturday m. beaupre declared himself as highly delighted
 with the success of his medicine. the same night the boy was dead. the
 priest, urgently sent for by his devout uncle, arrived to find a corpse.
 on the following day "louis anotine beaupre, aged twenty-two and a half,"
 was buried at versailles, his pious uncle leaving with the priest six
 livres to pay for masses for the repose of his erring nephew's soul.
 the same evening m. derues who, according to his own account, had left
 paris with the young de lamotte in order to take the boy to his mother in
 versailles, returned home to the rue beaubourg. as usual, bertin dropped
 in to dinner. he found his host full of merriment, singing in the
 lightness of his heart. indeed, he had reason to be pleased, for at last,
 he told his wife and his friend, buisson-souef was his. he had seen mme.
 de lamotte at versailles and paid her the full purchase-money in good,
 sounding gold. and, best joke of all, mme. de lamotte had no sooner
 settled the business than she had gone off with a former lover, her son
 and her money, and would in all probability never be heard of again. the
 gay gentleman laughingly reminded his hearers that such an escapade on the
 part of mme. de lamotte was hardly to be wondered at, when they
 recollected that her son had been born out of wedlock.
 to all appearances mme. de lamotte had undoubtedly concluded the sale of
 buisson-souef to derues and received the price of it before disappearing
 with her lover. derues had in his possession a deed of sale signed by mme.
 de lamotte and acknowledging the payment to her by derues of ,
 livres, which he had borrowed for that purpose from an advocate of the
 name of duclos. as a fact the loan from duclos to derues was fictitious. a
 legal document proving the loan had been drawn up, but the cash which the
 notary had demanded to see before executing the document had been borrowed
 for a few hours. duclos, a provincial advocate, had acted in good faith,
 in having been represented to him that such fictitious transactions were
 frequently used in paris for the purpose of getting over some temporary
 financial difficulty. on the th of february the deed of the sale of
 buisson-souef had been brought by a woman to the office of a scrivener
 employed by derues; it was already signed, but the woman asked that
 certain blanks should be filled in and that the document should be dated.
 she was told that the date should be that of the day on which the parties
 had signed it. she gave it as february . a few days later derues called
 at the office and was told of the lady's visit. "ah!" he said, "it was
 mme. de lamotte herself, the lady who sold me the estate."
 in the meantime derues, through his bustling and ubiquitous friend bertin,
 took good care that the story of mme. de lamotte's sale of buisson-souef
 and subsequent elopement should be spread sedulously abroad. by bertin it
 was told to m. jolly, the proctor in whose hands the de lamottes had
 placed the sale of buisson-souef. it was m. jolly who had in the first
 instance recommended to them his client derues as a possible purchaser.
 the proctor, who knew mme. de lamotte to be a woman devoted to her husband
 and her home, was astonished to hear of her infidelity, more especially as
 the story told by derues represented her as saying in very coarse terms
 how little she cared for her husband's honour. he was surprised, too, that
 she should not have consulted him about the conclusion of the business
 with derues, and that derues himself should have been able to find so
 considerable a sum of money as , livres. but, said m. jolly, if he
 were satisfied that mme. de lamotte had taken away the money with her,
 then he would deliver up to derues the power of attorney which m. de
 lamotte had left with him in , giving his wife authority to carry out
 the sale of buisson-souef. mme. de lamotte, being a married woman, the
 sale of the property to derues would be legally invalid if the husband's
 power of attorney were not in the hands of the purchaser.
 to derues, on the eve of victory, the statement of jolly in regard to the
 power of attorney was a serious reverse. he had never thought of such an
 instrument, or he would have persuaded mme. de lamotte to have gotten
 permission of it before her disappearance. now he must try to get it from
 jolly himself. on the th of february he once again raised from a
 friendly notary a few thousand livres on the duplessis inheritance, and
 deposited the deed of sale of buisson-souef as further security. his
 pocket full of gold, he went straight to the office of jolly. to the
 surprise of the proctor derues announced that he had come to pay him 
 livres which he owed him, and apologised for the delay. taking the gold
 coins from his pockets he filled his three-cornered hat with considerably
 more than the sum due, and held it out invitingly to m. jolly. then he
 proceeded to tell him of his dealings with mme. de lamotte. she had
 offered, he said, to get the power of attorney for him, but he, trusting
 in her good faith, had said that there was no occasion for hurry; and
 then, faithless, ungrateful woman that she was, she had gone off with his
 money and left him in the lurch. "but," he added, "i trust you absolutely,
 m. jolly, you have all my business in your hands, and i shall be a good
 client in the future. you have the power of attorney—you will give
 it to me?" and he rattled the coins in his hat. "i must have it," he went
 on, "i must have it at any price at any price," and again the coins danced
 in his hat, while his eyes looked knowingly at the proctor. m. jolly saw
 his meaning, and his surprise turned to indignation. he told derues
 bluntly that he did not believe his story, that until he was convinced of
 its truth he would not part with the power of attorney, and showed the
 confounded grocer the door.
 derues hastened home filled with wrath, and took counsel with his friend
 bertin. bertin knew something of legal process; they would try whether the
 law could not be invoked to compel jolly to surrender the power of
 attorney. bertin went off to the civil lieutenant and applied for an order
 to oblige m. jolly to give up the document in question. an order was made
 that jolly must either surrender it into the hands of derues or appear
 before a referee and show cause why he should not comply with the order.
 jolly refused still to give it up or allow a copy of it to be made, and
 agreed to appear before the referee to justify his action. in the meantime
 derues, greatly daring, had started for buisson-souef to try what "bluff"
 could do in this serious crisis in his adventure.
 at buisson-souef poor m. de lamotte waited, puzzled and distressed, for
 news from his wife. on saturday, th, the day after the return of derues
 from versailles, he heard from mme. derues that his wife had left paris
 and gone with her son to versailles. a second letter told him that she had
 completed the sale of buisson-souef to derues, and was still at versailles
 trying to obtain some post for the boy. on february  mme. derues wrote
 again expressing surprise that m. de lamotte had not had any letter from
 his wife and asking if he had received some oysters which the derues had
 sent him. the distracted husband was in no mood for oysters. "do not send
 me oysters," he writes, "i am too ill with worry. i thank you for all your
 kindness to my son. i love him better than myself, and god grant he will
 be good and grateful." the only reply he received from the derues was an
 assurance that he would see his wife again in a few days.
 the days passed, but mme. de lamotte made no sign. about four o'clock on
 the afternoon of february , derues, accompanied by the parish priest of
 villeneuvele-roi, presented himself before m. de lamotte at buisson-souef.
 for the moment m. de lamotte was rejoiced to see the little man; at last
 he would get news of his wife. but he was disappointed. derues could tell
 him only what he had been told already, that his wife had sold their
 estate and gone away with the money.
 m. de lamotte was hardly convinced. how, he asked derues, had he found the
 , livres to buy buisson-souef, he who had not a halfpenny a short
 time ago? derues replied that he had borrowed it from a friend; that there
 was no use in talking about it; the place was his now, his alone, and m.
 de lamotte had no longer a right to be there; he was very sorry, poor dear
 gentleman, that his wife had gone off and left him without a shilling, but
 personally he would always be a friend to him and would allow him ,
 livres a year for the rest of his life. in the meantime, he said, he had
 already sold forty casks of the last year's vintage, and would be obliged
 if m. de lamotte would see to their being sent off at once.
 by this time the anger and indignation of m. de lamotte blazed forth. he
 told derues that his story was a pack of lies, that he was still master at
 buisson-souef, and not a bottle of wine should leave it. "you are
 torturing me," he exclaimed, "i know something has happened to my wife and
 child. i am coming to paris myself, and if it is as i fear, you shall
 answer for it with your head!" derues, undismayed by this outburst,
 re-asserted his ownership and departed in defiant mood, leaving on the
 premises a butcher of the neighbourhood to look after his property.
 but things were going ill with derues. m. de lamotte meant to show fight;
 he would have powerful friends to back him; class against class, the
 little grocer would be no match for him. it was immediate possession of
 buisson-souef that derues wanted, not lawsuits; they were expensive and
 the results uncertain. he spoke freely to his friends of the difficulties
 of the situation.
 what could he do? the general opinion seemed to be that some fresh news of
 mme. de lamotte—her reappearance, perhaps—would be the only
 effective settlement of the dispute. he had made mme. de lamotte
 disappear, why should he not make her reappear? he was not the man to
 stick at trifles. his powers of female impersonation, with which he had
 amused his good friends at buisson-souef, could now be turned to practical
 account. on march  he left paris again.
 on the evening of march  a gentleman, m. desportes of paris, hired a room
 at the hotel blanc in lyons. on the following day he went out early in the
 morning, leaving word that, should a lady whom he was expecting, call to
 see him, she was to be shown up to his room. the same morning a gentleman,
 resembling m. desportes of paris, bought two lady's dresses at a shop in
 lyons.
 the same afternoon a lady dressed in black silk, with a hood well drawn
 over her eyes, called at the office of m. pourra, a notary.
 the latter was not greatly attracted by his visitor, whose nose struck him
 as large for a woman. she said that she had spent her youth in lyons, but
 her accent was distinctly parisian. the lady gave her name as madame de
 lamotte, and asked for a power of attorney by which she could give her
 husband the interest due to her on a sum of , livres, part of the
 purchase-money of the estate of buisson-souef, which she had recently
 sold. as mme. de lamotte represented herself as having been sent to m.
 pourra by a respectable merchant for whom he was in the habit of doing
 business, he agreed to draw up the necessary document, accepting her
 statement that she and her husband had separate estates. mme. de lamotte
 said that she would not have time to wait until the power of attorney was
 ready, and therefore asked m. pourra to send it to the parish priest at
 villeneuvele-roi; this he promised to do. mme. de-lamotte had called twice
 during the day at the hotel blanc and asked for m. desportes of paris, but
 he was not at home. while derues, alias desportes, alias mme. de lamotte,
 was masquerading in lyons, events had been moving swiftly and unfavourably
 in paris. sick with misgiving and anxiety, m. de lamotte had come there to
 find, if possible, his wife and child. by a strange coincidence he
 alighted at an inn in the rue de la mortellerie, only a few yards from the
 wine-cellar in which the corpse of his ill-fated wife lay buried. he lost
 no time in putting his case before the lieutenant of police, who placed
 the affair in the hands of one of the magistrates of the chatelet, then
 the criminal court of paris. at first the magistrate believed that the
 case was one of fraud and that mme. de lamotte and her son were being kept
 somewhere in concealment by derues. but as he investigated the
 circumstances further, the evidence of the illness of the mother and son,
 the date of the disappearance of mme. de lamotte, and her reputed
 signature to the deed of sale on february , led him to suspect that he
 was dealing with a case of murder.
 when derues returned to paris from lyons, on march , he found that the
 police had already visited the house and questioned his wife, and that he
 himself was under close surveillance. a day or two later the advocate,
 duclos, revealed to the magistrate the fictitious character of the loan of
 , livres, which derues alleged that he had paid to mme. de lamotte
 as the price of buisson-souef. when the new power of attorney purporting
 to be signed by mme. de lamotte arrived from lyons, and the signature was
 compared with that on the deed of sale of buisson-souef to derues, both
 were pronounced to be forgeries. derues was arrested and lodged in the
 prison of for l'eveque.
 the approach of danger had not dashed the spirits of the little man, nor
 was he without partisans in paris. opinion in the city was divided as to
 the truth of his account of mme. de lamotte's elopement. the nobility were
 on the side of the injured de lamotte, but the bourgeoisie accepted the
 grocer's story and made merry over the deceived husband. interrogated,
 however, by the magistrate of the chatelet, derues' position became more
 difficult. under the stress of close questioning the flimsy fabric of his
 financial statements fell to pieces like a house of cards. he had to admit
 that he had never paid mme. de lamotte , livres; he had paid her
 only , livres in gold; further pressed he said that the , livres
 had been made up partly in gold, partly in bills; but where the gold had
 come from, or on whom he had drawn the bills, he could not explain. still
 his position was not desperate; and he knew it. in the absence of mme. de
 lamotte he could not be charged with fraud or forgery; and until her body
 was discovered, it would be impossible to charge him with murder.
 a month passed; mme. derues, who had made a belated attempt to follow her
 husband's example by impersonating mme. de lamotte in paris, had been
 arrested and imprisoned in the grand chatelet; when, on april ,
 information was received by the authorities which determined them to
 explore the wine-cellar in the rue de la mortellerie. whether the woman
 who had let the cellar to derues, or the creditor who had met him taking
 his cask of wine there, had informed the investigating magistrate, seems
 uncertain. in any case, the corpse of the unhappy lady was soon brought to
 light and derues confronted with it. at first he said that he failed to
 recognise it as the remains of mme. de lamotte, but he soon abandoned that
 rather impossible attitude. he admitted that he had given some harmless
 medicine to mme. de lamotte during her illness, and then, to his horror,
 one morning had awakened to find her dead. a fear lest her husband would
 accuse him of having caused her death had led him to conceal the body, and
 also that of her son who, he now confessed, had died and been buried by
 him at versailles. on april  the body of the young de lamotte was
 exhumed. both bodies were examined by doctors, and they declared
 themselves satisfied that mother and son had died "from a bitter and
 corrosive poison administered in some kind of drink." what the poison was
 they did not venture to state, but one of their number, in the light of
 subsequent investigation, arrived at the conclusion that derues had used
 in both cases corrosive sublimate. how or where he had obtained the poison
 was never discovered.
 justice moved swiftly in paris in those days. the preliminary
 investigation in derues' case was ended on april . two days later his
 trial commenced before the tribunal of the chatelet.
 it lasted one day. the judges had before them the depositions taken by the
 examining magistrate. both derues and his wife were interrogated. he
 maintained that he had not poisoned either mme. de lamotte or her son; his
 only crime, he said, lay in having concealed their deaths. mme; derues
 said: "it is buisson-souef that has ruined us! i always told my husband
 that he was mad to buy these properties—i am sure my husband is not
 a poisoner—i trusted my husband and believed every word he said."
 the court condemned derues to death, but deferred judgment in his wife's
 case on the ground of her pregnancy.
 and now the frail, cat-like little man had to brace himself to meet a
 cruel and protracted execution. but sanguine to the last, he still hoped.
 an appeal lay from the chatelet to the parliament of paris. it was heard
 on march . derues was brought to the palais de justice. the room in which
 he waited was filled with curious spectators, who marvelled at his
 coolness and impudence. he recognised among them a benedictine monk of his
 acquaintance. "my case," he called out to him, "will soon be over; we'll
 meet again yet and have a good time together." one visitor, wishing not to
 appear too curious, pretended to be looking at a picture. "come, sir,"
 said derues, "you haven't come here to see the pictures, but to see me.
 have a good look at me. why study copies of nature when you can look at
 such a remarkable original as i?" but there were to be no more days of
 mirth and gaiety for the jesting grocer. his appeal was rejected, and he
 was ordered for execution on the morrow.
 at six o'clock on the morning of may  derues returned to the palais de
 justice, there to submit to the superfluous torments of the question
 ordinary and extraordinary. though condemned to death, torture was to be
 applied in the hope of wringing from the prisoner some sort of confession.
 the doctors declared him too delicate to undergo the torture of pouring
 cold water into him, which his illustrious predecessor, mme. de
 brinvilliers, had suffered; he was to endure the less severe torture of
 the "boot."
 his legs were tightly encased in wood, and wedges were then hammered in
 until the flesh was crushed and the bones broken. but never a word of
 confession was wrung from the suffering creature. four wedges constituting
 the ordinary torture he endured; at the third of the extraordinary he
 fainted away. put in the front of a fire the warmth restored him. again he
 was questioned, again he asserted his wife's innocence and his own.
 at two o'clock in the afternoon derues was recovered sufficiently to be
 taken to notre dame. there, in front of the cathedral, candle in hand and
 rope round his neck, he made the amende honorable. but as the sentence was
 read aloud to the people derues reiterated the assertion of his innocence.
 from notre dame he was taken to the hotel de ville. a condemned man had
 the right to stop there on his way to execution, to make his will and last
 dying declarations. derues availed himself of this opportunity to protest
 solemnly and emphatically his wife's absolute innocence of any complicity
 in whatever he had done. "i want above all," he said, "to state that my
 wife is entirely innocent. she knew nothing. i used fifty cunning devices
 to hide everything from her. i am speaking nothing but the truth, she is
 wholly innocent—as for me, i am about to die." his wife was allowed
 to see him; he enjoined her to bring up their children in the fear of god
 and love of duty, and to let them know how he had died. once again, as he
 took up the pen to sign the record of his last words, he re-asserted her
 innocence.
 of the last dreadful punishment the offending grocer was to be spared
 nothing. for an aristocrat like mme. de brinvilliers beheading was
 considered indignity enough. but derues must go through with it all; he
 must be broken on the wheel and burnt alive and his ashes scattered to the
 four winds of heaven; there was to be no retentum for him, a clause
 sometimes inserted in the sentence permitting the executioner to strangle
 the broken victim before casting him on to the fire. he must endure all to
 the utmost agony the law could inflict. it was six o'clock when derues
 arrived at the place de greve, crowded to its capacity, the square itself,
 the windows of the houses; places had been bought at high prices, stools,
 ladders, anything that would give a good view of the end of the now famous
 poisoner.
 pale but calm, derues faced his audience. he was stripped of all but his
 shirt; lying flat on the scaffold, his face looking up to the sky, his
 head resting on a stone, his limbs were fastened to the wheel. then with a
 heavy bar of iron the executioner broke them one after another, and each
 time he struck a fearful cry came from the culprit. the customary three
 final blows on the stomach were inflicted, but still the little man lived.
 alive and broken, he was thrown on to the fire. his burnt ashes, scattered
 to the winds, were picked up eagerly by the mob, reputed, as in england
 the pieces of the hangman's rope, talismans.
 some two months after the execution of her husband mme. derues was
 delivered in the conciergerie of a male child; it is hardly surprising, in
 face of her experiences during her pregnancy, that it was born an idiot.
 in january, , the judges of the parliament, by a majority of one,
 decided that she should remain a prisoner in the conciergerie for another
 year, while judgment in her case was reserved. in the following august she
 was charged with having forged the signature of mme. de lamotte on the
 deeds of sale. in february, , the two experts in handwriting to whom
 the question had been submitted decided in her favour, and the charge was
 abandoned.
 but mme. derues had a far sterner, more implacable and, be it added, more
 unscrupulous adversary than the law in m. de lamotte.
 not content with her husband's death, m. de lamotte believed the wife to
 have been his partner in guilt, and thirsted for revenge.
 to accomplish it he even stooped to suborn witnesses, but the conspiracy
 was exposed, and so strong became the sympathy with the accused woman that
 a young proctor of the parliament published a pamphlet in her defence,
 asking for an immediate inquiry into the charges made against her, charges
 that had in no instance been proved.
 at last, in march, , the parliament decided to finish with the affair.
 in secret session the judges met, examined once more all the documents in
 the case, listened to a report on it from one of their number,
 interrogated the now weary, hopeless prisoner, and, by a large majority,
 condemned her to a punishment that fell only just short of the supreme
 penalty. on the grounds that she had wilfully and knowingly participated
 with her husband in the fraudulent attempt to become possessed of the
 estate of buisson-souef, and was strongly suspected of having participated
 with him in his greater crime, she was sentenced to be publicly flogged,
 branded on both shoulders with the letter v (voleuse) and imprisoned for
 life in the salpetriere prison. on march , in front of the conciergerie
 mme. derues underwent the first part of her punishment. the same day her
 hair was cut short, and she was dressed in the uniform of the prison in
 which she was to pass the remainder of her days.
 paris had just begun to forget mme. derues when a temporary interest
 was-excited in her fortunes by the astonishing intelligence that, two
 months after her condemnation, she had been delivered of a child in her
 new prison. its fatherhood was never determined, and, taken from her
 mother, the child died in fifteen days. was its birth the result of some
 passing love affair, or some act of drunken violence on the part of her
 jailors, or had the wretched woman, fearing a sentence of death, made an
 effort to avert once again the supreme penalty? history does not relate.
 ten years passed. a fellow prisoner in the salpetriere described mme.
 derues as "scheming, malicious, capable of anything." she was accused of
 being violent, and of wishing to revenge herself by setting fire to paris.
 at length the revolution broke on france, the bastille fell, and in that
 same year an old uncle of mme. derues, an ex-soldier of louis xv., living
 in brittany, petitioned for his niece's release. he protested her
 innocence, and begged that he might take her to his home and restore her
 to her children. for three years he persisted vainly in his efforts. at
 last, in the year , it seemed as if they might be crowned with
 success. he was told that the case would be re-examined; that it was
 possible that the parliament had judged unjustly. this good news came to
 him in march. but in september of that year there took place those
 shocking massacres in the paris prisons, which rank high among the
 atrocities of the revolution. at four o'clock on the afternoon of
 september , the slaughterers visited the salpetriere prison, and fifth
 among their victims fell the widow of derues.
 dr. castaing
 there are two reports of the trial of castaing: "proces complet d'edme
 samuel castaing," paris, ; "affaire castaing," paris, .
 edme castaing, born at alencon in , was the youngest of the three sons
 of an inspector-general in the department of woods and forests. his elder
 brother had entered the same service as his father, the other brother was
 a staff-captain of engineers. without being wealthy, the family,
 consisting of m. and mme. castaing and four children, was in comfortable
 circumstances. the young edme was educated at the college of angers—the
 alma mater of barre and lebiez—where, intelligent and hard working,
 he carried off many prizes. he decided to enter the medical profession,
 and at the age of nineteen commenced his studies at the school of medicine
 in paris. for two years he worked hard and well, living within the modest
 allowance made him by his father. at the end of that time this young man
 of two or three-and-twenty formed a passionate attachment for a lady, the
 widow of a judge, and the mother of three children. of the genuine depth
 and sincerity of this passion for a woman who must have been considerably
 older than himself, there can be no doubt. henceforth the one object in
 life to castaing was to make money enough to relieve the comparative
 poverty of his adored mistress, and place her and her children beyond the
 reach of want. in  castaing became a duly qualified doctor, and by
 that time had added to the responsibilities of his mistress and himself by
 becoming the father of two children, whom she had brought into the world.
 the lady was exigent, and castaing found it difficult to combine his work
 with a due regard to her claims on his society. nor was work plentiful or
 lucrative. to add to his embarrassments castaing, in , had backed a
 bill for a friend for  francs. to meet it when it fell due two years
 later was impossible, and desperate were the efforts made by castaing and
 his mother to put off the day of reckoning. his father, displeased with
 his son's conduct, would do nothing to help him. but his mother spared no
 effort to extricate him from his difficulties. she begged a highly placed
 official to plead with the insistent creditor, but all in vain. there
 seemed no hope of a further delay when suddenly, in the october of ,
 castaing became the possessor of , francs. how he became possessed
 of this considerable sum of money forms part of a strange and mysterious
 story.
 among the friends of castaing were two young men of about his own age,
 auguste and hippolyte ballet. auguste, the elder, had the misfortune a few
 days after his birth to incur his mother's lasting dislike. the nurse had
 let the child fall from her arms in the mother's presence, and the shock
 had endangered mme. ballet's life. from that moment the mother took a
 strong aversion to her son; he was left to the charge of servants; his
 meals were taken in the kitchen. as soon as he was five years old he was
 put out to board elsewhere, while his brother hippolyte and his sister
 were well cared for at home. the effect of this unjust neglect on the
 character of auguste ballet was, as may be imagined, had; he became
 indolent and dissipated. his brother hippolyte, on the other hand, had
 justified the affectionate care bestowed on his upbringing; he had grown
 into a studious, intelligent youth of a refined and attractive
 temperament. unhappily, early in his life he had developed consumption, a
 disease he inherited from his mother. as he grew older his health grew
 steadily worse until, in , his friends were seriously alarmed at his
 condition. it became so much graver that, in the august of that year, the
 doctors recommended him to take the waters at enghien. in september he
 returned to paris apparently much better, but on october  he was seized
 with sudden illness, and three days later he was dead.
 a few years before the death of hippolyte his father and mother had died
 almost at the same time. m. ballet had left to each of his sons a fortune
 of some , francs. though called to the bar, both auguste and
 hippolyte ballet were now men of independent means. after the death of
 their parents, whatever jealousy auguste may have felt at the unfair
 preference which his mother had shown for her younger son, had died down.
 at the time of hippolyte's death the brothers were on good terms, though
 the more prudent hippolyte disapproved of his elder brother's
 extravagance.
 of hippolyte ballet dr. castaing had become the fast friend. apart from
 his personal liking for castaing, it was a source of comfort to hippolyte,
 in his critical state of health, to have as his friend one whose medical
 knowledge was always at his service.
 about the middle of august, , hippolyte, on the advice of his doctors,
 went to enghien to take the waters. there castaing paid him frequent
 visits. he returned to paris on september , and seemed to have benefited
 greatly by the cure. on tuesday, october , he saw his sister, mme.
 martignon, and her husband; he seemed well, but said that he was having
 leeches applied to him by his friend castaing. on the wednesday evening
 his sister saw him again, and found him well and with a good appetite. on
 the thursday, after a night disturbed by severe attacks of vomiting, his
 condition seemed serious. his brother-in-law, who visited him, found that
 he had taken to his bed, his face was swollen, his eyes were red. his
 sister called in the evening, but could not see him. the servants told her
 that her brother was a little better but resting, and that he did not wish
 to be disturbed; they said that dr. castaing had been with him all day.
 on friday castaing himself called on the martignons, and told them that
 hippolyte had passed a shockingly bad night. madame martignon insisted on
 going to nurse her brother herself, but castaing refused positively to let
 her see him; the sight of her, he said, would be too agitating to the
 patient. later in the day mme. martignon went to her brother's house. in
 order to obey dr. castaing's injunctions, she dressed herself in some of
 the clothes of the servant victoire, in the hope that if she went into his
 bedroom thus disguised, hippolyte would not recognise her. but even this
 subterfuge was forbidden by castaing, and mme. martignon had to content
 herself with listening in an adjoining room for the sound of her brother's
 voice. at eight o'clock that evening the martignons learnt that hippolyte
 was better, but at ten o'clock they received a message that he was dying,
 and that his brother auguste had been sent for. mme. martignon was
 prostrated with grief, but her husband hastened to his brother-in-law's
 house. there he found castaing, who said that the death agony of his
 friend was so dreadful that he had not the strength to remain in the room
 with the dying man. another doctor was sent for, but at ten o'clock the
 following morning, after protracted suffering, hippolyte ballet passed
 away.
 a post-mortem was held on his body. it was made by drs. segalas and
 castaing. they stated that death was due to pleurisy aggravated by the
 consumptive condition of the deceased, which, however serious, was not of
 itself likely to have been so rapidly fatal in its consequences.
 hippolyte had died, leaving a fortune of some , francs. in the
 previous september he had spoken to the notary lebret, a former clerk of
 his father's, of his intention of making a will. he had seen that his
 brother auguste was squandering his share of their inheritance; he told
 lebret that whatever he might leave to auguste should not be placed at his
 absolute disposal. to his servant victoire, during his last illness,
 hippolyte had spoken of a will he had made which he wished to destroy. if
 hippolyte had made such a will, did he destroy it before his death? in any
 case, no trace of it was ever found after his death. he was presumed to
 have died intestate, and his fortune was divided, three-quarters of it
 going to his brother auguste, the remaining quarter to his sister, mme.
 martignon.
 on the day of hippolyte's death auguste ballet wrote from his brother's
 house to one prignon: "with great grief i have to tell you that i have
 just lost my brother; i write at the same time to say that i must have
 , francs to-day if possible. i have the greatest need of it. destroy
 my letter, and reply at once. m. sandrie will, i am sure, accommodate me.
 i am at my poor brother's house, from which i am writing." prignon did as
 he was asked, but it was two days before the stockbroker, sandrie, could
 raise the necessary sum. on october  he sold out sufficient of auguste's
 stock to realise , francs, and the following day gave prignon an
 order on the bank of france for that amount. the same day prignon took the
 order to auguste. accompanied by castaing and jean, auguste's black
 servant, auguste and prignon drove to the bank. there the order was
 cashed. prignon's part of the business was at an end. he said good-bye to
 auguste outside the bank. as the latter got into his cabriolet, carrying
 the bundle of notes, prignon heard him say to castaing: "there are the
 , francs."
 why had auguste ballet, after his brother's death, such urgent need of
 , francs? if the statements of auguste made to other persons are to
 be believed, he had paid the , francs which he had raised through
 prignon to lebret, his father's former clerk, who would seem to have acted
 as legal and financial adviser to his old master's children. according to
 auguste's story, his sister, mme. martignon, had offered lebret ,
 francs to preserve a copy of a will made by hippolyte, leaving her the
 bulk of his fortune. castaing, however, had ascertained that lebret would
 be willing, if auguste would outbid his sister and pay , francs, to
 destroy the will so that, hippolyte dying intestate, auguste would take
 the greater part of his brother's fortune. auguste agreed to accept
 lebret's terms, raised the necessary sum, and handed over the money to
 castaing, who, in turn, gave it to lebret, who had thereupon destroyed the
 copy of the will. castaing, according to the evidence of auguste's
 mistress, an actress of the name of percillie, had spoken in her presence
 of having himself destroyed one copy of hippolyte's will before his death,
 and admitted having arranged with lebret after hippolyte's death for the
 destruction of the other copy.
 how far was the story told by auguste, and repeated in somewhat different
 shape by castaing to other persons, true? there is no doubt that after the
 visit to the bank of france with prignon on october , auguste and
 castaing drove together to lebret's office. the negro servant said that on
 arriving there one of them got out of the cab and went up to lebret's
 house, but which of the two he would not at first say positively. later he
 swore that it was auguste ballet. whatever happened on that visit to
 lebret's—and it was the theory of the prosecution that castaing and
 not auguste had gone up to the office—the same afternoon auguste
 ballet showed his mistress the seals of the copy of his brother's will
 which lebret had destroyed, and told her that lebret, all through the
 business, had refused to deal directly with him, and would only act
 through the intermediary of castaing.
 did lebret, as a fact, receive the , francs? a close examination of
 his finances showed no trace of such a sum. castaing, on the other hand,
 on october , , had given a stockbroker a sum of , francs to
 invest in securities; on the th of the same month he had lent his mother
 , francs; and on the th had given his mistress , francs. of how
 this large sum of money had come to castaing at a time when he was
 practically insolvent he gave various accounts. his final version was that
 in the will destroyed by auguste, hippolyte ballet had left him an income
 for life equivalent to a capital of , francs, and that auguste had
 given him that sum out of respect for his brother's wishes. if that
 explanation were true, it was certainly strange that shortly after his
 brother's death auguste ballet should have expressed surprise and
 suspicion to a friend on hearing that castaing had been buying stock to
 the value of , francs. if he had given castaing , francs for
 himself, there was no occasion for surprise or suspicion at his investing
 ,. that auguste had paid out , francs to some one in october the
 state of his finances at his death clearly proved. according to the theory
 of the prosecution, auguste believed that he had paid that money to lebret
 through the intermediary of castaing, and not to castaing himself. hence
 his surprise at hearing that castaing, whom he knew to be impecunious, was
 investing such a sum as , francs.
 no money had ever reached lebret. his honesty and good faith were
 demonstrated beyond any shadow of a doubt; no copy of any will of
 hippolyte ballet had ever been in his possession. but castaing had shown
 auguste ballet a copy of his brother's will, the seals of which auguste
 had shown to his mistress. in all probability, and possibly at the
 instigation of castaing, hippolyte ballet had made a will, leaving the
 greater part of his property to his sister. somehow or other castaing had
 got possession of this will. on his death castaing had invented the story
 of mme. martignon's bribe to lebret, and so persuaded auguste to outbid
 her. he had ingeniously kept auguste and lebret apart by representing
 lebret as refusing to deal direct with auguste, and by these means had
 secured to his own use the sum of , francs, which auguste believed
 was being paid to lebret as the price of his alleged destruction of his
 brother's will. the plot was ingenious and successful. to lebret and the
 martignons castaing said that hippolyte had made a will in mme.
 martignon's favour, but had destroyed it himself some days before his
 death. the martignons expressed themselves as glad that hippolyte had done
 so, for they feared lest such a will should have provoked resentment
 against them on the part of auguste. by keeping auguste and lebret apart,
 castaing prevented awkward explanations. the only possible danger of
 discovery lay in auguste's incautious admissions to his mistress and
 friends; but even had the fact of the destruction of the will come to the
 ears of the martignons, it is unlikely that they would have taken any
 steps involving the disgrace of auguste.
 castaing had enriched himself considerably by the opportune death of his
 friend hippolyte. it might be made a matter of unfriendly comment that, on
 the first day of may preceding that sad event, castaing had purchased ten
 grains of acetate of morphia from a chemist in paris, and on september ,
 less than a month before hippolyte's death, he had purchased another ten
 grains of acetate of morphia from the same chemist. the subject of poisons
 had always been a favourite branch of castaing's medical studies,
 especially vegetable poisons; morphia is a vegetable poison.
 castaing's position relative to auguste ballet was now a strong one. they
 were accomplices in the unlawful destruction of hippolyte's will. auguste
 believed it to be in his friend's power to ruin him at any time by
 revealing his dealings with lebret. but, more than that, to auguste, who
 believed that his , francs had gone into lebret's pocket, castaing
 could represent himself as so far unrewarded for his share in the
 business; lebret had taken all the money, while he had received no
 recompense of any kind for the trouble he had taken and the risk he was
 encountering on his friend's behalf. whatever the motive, from fear or
 gratitude, auguste ballet was persuaded to make a will leaving dr. edme
 samuel castaing the whole of his fortune, subject to a few trifling
 legacies. but auguste's feelings towards his sole legatee were no longer
 cordial. to one or two of his friends he expressed his growing distaste
 for castaing's society.
 dr. castaing can hardly have failed to observe this change. he knew
 auguste to be reckless and extravagant with his money; he learnt that he
 had realised another , francs out of his securities, and that he
 kept the money locked up in a drawer in his desk. if auguste's fortune
 were dissipated by extravagance, or he revoked his will, castaing stood to
 lose heavily. as time went on castaing felt less and less sure that he
 could place much reliance on the favourable disposition or thrift of
 auguste. the latter had fallen in love with a new mistress; he began to
 entertain expensively; even if he should not change his mind and leave his
 money away from castaing, there might very soon be no money to leave. at
 the end of may, , castaing consulted a cousin of his, malassis, a
 notary's clerk, as to the validity of a will made by a sick man in favour
 of his medical attendant. he said that he had a patient gravely ill who,
 not wishing to leave his money to his sister, whom he disliked, intended
 to leave it to him. malassis reassured him as to the validity of such a
 will, and gave him the necessary instructions for preparing it. on may 
 castaing sent malassis the will of auguste ballet with the following note,
 "i send you the will of m. ballets examine it and keep it as his
 representative." the will was dated december , , and made castaing
 sole legatee. on the same day that the will was deposited with malassis,
 castaing and auguste ballet started to-gether on a little two days' trip
 into the country. to his friends auguste seemed in the best of health and
 spirits; so much so that his housekeeper remarked as he left how well he
 was looking, and castaing echoed her remark, saying that he looked like a
 prince!
 during the afternoon the two friends visited saint germain, then returned
 to paris, and at seven o'clock in the evening arrived at the tete noire
 hotel at saint cloud, where they took a double-bedded room, castaing
 paying five francs in advance. they spent the following day, friday, may
 , in walking about the neighbourhood, dined at the hotel at seven, went
 out again and returned about nine o'clock. soon after their return
 castaing ordered some warmed wine to be sent up to the bedroom. it was
 taken up by one of the maid-servants. two glasses were mixed with lemon
 and sugar which castaing had brought with him. both the young men drank of
 the beverage. auguste complained that it was sour, and thought that he had
 put too much lemon in it. he gave his glass to the servant to taste, who
 also found the drink sour. shortly after she left the room and went
 upstairs to the bedside of one of her fellow-servants who was ill.
 castaing, for no apparent reason, followed her up and stayed in the room
 for about five minutes. auguste spent a bad night, suffering from internal
 pains, and in the morning his legs were so swollen that he could not put
 on his boots.
 castaing got up at four o'clock that morning and asked one of the servants
 to let him out. two hours later he drove up in a cabriolet to the door of
 a chemist in paris, and asked for twelve grains of tartar emetic, which he
 wanted to mix in a wash according to a prescription of dr. castaing. but
 he did not tell the chemist that he was dr. castaing himself. an hour
 later castaing arrived at the shop of another chemist, chevalier, with
 whom he had already some acquaintance; he had bought acetate of morphia
 from him some months before, and had discussed with him then the effects
 of vegetable poisons. on this particular morning he bought of his
 assistant thirty-six grains of acetate of morphia, paying, as a medical
 man, three francs fifty centimes for it instead of the usual price of four
 francs. later in the morning castaing returned to saint cloud, a distance
 of ten miles from paris, and said that he had been out for a long walk. he
 found auguste ill in bed. castaing asked for some cold milk, which was
 taken up to the bedroom by one of the servants. shortly after this
 castaing went out again. during his absence auguste was seized with
 violent pains and sickness. when castaing returned he found his friend in
 the care of the people of the hotel. he told them to throw away the matter
 that had been vomited, as the smell was offensive, and auguste told them
 to do as his friend directed. castaing proposed to send for a doctor from
 paris, but auguste insisted that a local doctor should be called in at
 once.
 accordingly dr. pigache of saint cloud was summoned. he arrived at the
 hotel about eleven o'clock. before seeing the patient castaing told the
 doctor that he believed him to be suffering from cholera. pigache asked to
 see the matter vomited but was told that it had been thrown away. he
 prescribed a careful diet, lemonade and a soothing draught.
 dr. pigache returned at three o'clock, when he found that the patient had
 taken some lemonade, but, according to castaing, had refused to take the
 draught. he called again that afternoon. ballet was much better; he said
 that he would be quite well if he could get some sleep, and expressed a
 wish to return to paris. dr. pigache dissuaded him from this and left,
 saying that he would come again in the evening. castaing said that that
 would be unnecessary, and it was agreed that pigache should see the
 patient again at eight o'clock the next morning. during the afternoon
 castaing sent a letter to paris to jean, auguste's negro servant, telling
 him to take the two keys of his master's desk to his cousin malassis. but
 the negro distrusted castaing. he knew of the will which his master had
 made in the doctor's favour. rather than compromise himself by any
 injudicious act, he brought the keys to saint cloud and there handed them
 over to castaing.
 when jean arrived his master complained to him of feeling very ill. jean
 said that he hoped he would be well enough to go back to paris the
 following day, to which auguste replied, "i don't think so. but if i am
 lucky enough to get away to-morrow, i shall leave fifty francs for the
 poor here." about eleven o'clock that night castaing, in jean's presence,
 gave the sick man a spoonful of the draught prescribed by dr. pigache.
 four or five minutes later auguste was seized with terrible convulsions,
 followed by unconsciousness. dr. pigache was sent for. he found ballet
 lying on his back unconscious, his throat strained, his mouth shut and his
 eyes fixed; the pulse was weak, his body covered with cold sweat; and
 every now and then he was seized with strong convulsions. the doctor asked
 castaing the cause of the sudden change in ballet's condition. castaing
 replied that it had commenced shortly after he had taken a spoonful of the
 draught which the doctor had prescribed for him. dr. pigache bled the
 patient and applied twenty leeches. he returned about six; ballet was
 sinking, and castaing appeared to be greatly upset. he told the doctor
 what an unhappy coincidence it was that he should have been present at the
 deathbeds of both hippolyte and his brother auguste; and that the position
 was the more distressing for him as he was the sole heir to auguste's
 fortune. to m. pelletan, a professor of medicine, who had been sent for to
 st. cloud in the early hours of sunday morning, castaing appeared to be in
 a state of great grief and agitation; he was shedding tears. pelletan was
 from the first impressed by the suspicious nature of the case, and pointed
 out to castaing the awkwardness of his situation as heir to the dying man.
 "you're right," replied castaing, "my position is dreadful, horrible. in
 my great grief i had never thought of it till now, but now you make me see
 it clearly. do you think there will be an investigation?" pelletan
 answered that he should be compelled to ask for a post-mortem. "ah! you
 will be doing me the greatest service," said castaing, "i beg you to
 insist on a post-mortem. you will be acting as a second father to me in
 doing so." the parish priest was sent for to administer extreme unction to
 the dying man. to the parish clerk who accompanied the priest castaing
 said, "i am losing a friend of my childhood," and both priest and clerk
 went away greatly edified by the sincere sorrow and pious demeanour of the
 young doctor. about mid-day on sunday, june , auguste ballet died.
 during the afternoon castaing left the hotel for some hours, and that same
 afternoon a young man about twenty-five years of age, short and fair, left
 a letter at the house of malassis. the letter was from castaing and said,
 "my dear friend, ballet has just died, but do nothing before to-morrow,
 monday. i will see you and tell you, yes or no, whether it is time to act.
 i expect that his brother-in-law, m. martignon, whose face is pock-marked
 and who carries a decoration, will call and see you. i have said that i
 did not know what dispositions ballet may have made, but that before his
 death he had told me to give you two little keys which i am going to
 deliver to you myself to-morrow, monday. i have not said that we are
 cousins, but only that i had seen you once or twice at ballet's, with whom
 you were friendly. so say nothing till i have seen you, but whatever you
 do, don't say you are a relative of mine." when he returned to the hotel
 castaing found martignon, lebret, and one or two friends of auguste
 already assembled. it was only that morning that martignon had received
 from castaing any intimation of his brother-in-law's critical condition.
 from the first castaing was regarded with suspicion; the nature of the
 illness, the secrecy maintained about it by castaing, the coincidence of
 some of the circumstances with those of the death of hippolyte, all
 combined to excite suspicion. asked if auguste had left a will castaing
 said no; but the next day he admitted its existence, and said that it was
 in the hands of malassis.
 monday, june , was the day fixed for the post-mortem; it was performed in
 the hotel at saint cloud. castaing was still in the hotel under
 provisional arrest. while the post-mortem was going on his agitation was
 extreme; he kept opening the door of the room in which he was confined, to
 hear if possible some news of the result. at last m. pelletan obtained
 permission to inform him of the verdict of the doctors. it was favourable
 to castaing; no trace of death by violence or poison had been discovered.
 the medical men declared death to be due to an inflammation of the
 stomach, which could be attributed to natural causes; that the
 inflammation had subsided; that it had been succeeded by cerebral
 inflammation, which frequently follows inflammation of the stomach, and
 may have been aggravated in this case by exposure to the sun or by
 over-indulgence of any kind.
 castaing expected, as a result of the doctors' report, immediate release.
 in this he was disappointed; he was placed under stricter arrest and taken
 to paris, where a preliminary investigation commenced, lasting five
 months. during the early part of his imprisonment castaing feigned
 insanity, going to disgusting lengths in the hope of convincing those
 about him of the reality of his madness. but after three days of futile
 effort he gave up the attempt, and turned his attention to more practical
 means of defence. in the prison at versailles, whither he had been removed
 from paris, he got on friendly terms with a prisoner, one goupil, who was
 awaiting trial for some unimportant offence. to goupil castaing described
 the cruelty of his position and the causes that had led to his wrongful
 arrest. he admitted his unfortunate possession of the poison, and said
 that the , francs which he had invested he had inherited from an
 uncle. through goupil he succeeded in communicating with his mother in the
 hope that she would use her influence to stifle some of the more serious
 evidence against him. through other prisoners he tried to get at the
 chemists from whom he had bought acetate of morphia, and persuade them to
 say that the preparation of morphia which he had purchased was harmless.
 the trial of castaing commenced before the paris assize court on november
 , . he was charged with the murder of hippolyte ballet, the
 destruction of a document containing the final dispositions of hippolyte's
 property, and with the murder of auguste ballet. the three charges were to
 be tried simultaneously. the act of accusation in castaing's case is a
 remarkable document, covering a hundred closely-printed pages. it is a
 well-reasoned, graphic and unfair statement of the case for the
 prosecution. it tells the whole story of the crime, and inserts everything
 that can possibly prejudice the prisoner in the eyes of the jury. as an
 example, it quotes against castaing a letter of his mistress in which, in
 the course of some quarrel, she had written to him saying that his mother
 had said some "horrible things" (des horreurs) of him; but what those
 "horrible things" were was not revealed, nor were they ever alluded to
 again in the course of the trial, nor was his mistress called as a
 witness, though payments of money by castaing to her formed an important
 part of the evidence against him. again, the evidence of goupil, his
 fellow prisoner, as to the incriminating statements made to him by
 castaing is given in the act of accusation, but goupil himself was not
 called at the trial.
 during the reading of the act of accusation by the clerk of the court
 castaing listened calmly. only when some allusion was made to his mistress
 and their children did he betray any sign of emotion. as soon as the
 actual facts of the case were set out he was all attention, making notes
 busily. he is described as rather attractive in appearance, his face long,
 his features regular, his forehead high, his hair, fair in colour, brushed
 back from the brows; he wore rather large side-whiskers. one of the
 witnesses at saint cloud said that castaing looked more like a priest than
 a doctor; his downcast eyes, gentle voice, quiet and unassuming demeanour,
 lent him an air of patience and humility.
 the interrogatory of castaing by the presiding judge lasted all the
 afternoon of the first day of the trial and the morning of the second. the
 opening part of it dealt with the murder of hippolyte ballet, and elicited
 little or nothing that was fresh. beyond the purchase of acetate of
 morphia previous to hippolyte's death, which castaing reluctantly
 admitted, there was no serious evidence against him, and before the end of
 the trial the prosecution abandoned that part of the charge.
 questioned by the president as to the destruction of hippolyte ballet's
 will, castaing admitted that he had seen a draft of a will executed by
 hippolyte in favour of his sister, but he denied having told auguste that
 lebret had in his possession a copy which he was prepared to destroy for
 , francs. asked to explain the assertion of mlle. percillie,
 auguste's mistress, that statements to this effect had been made in her
 presence by both auguste ballet and himself, he said that it was not true;
 that he had never been to her house. "what motive," he was asked, "could
 mlle. percillie have for accusing you?" "she hated me," was the reply,
 "because i had tried to separate auguste from her." castaing denied that
 he had driven with auguste to lebret's office on october . asked to
 explain his sudden possession of , francs at a moment when he was
 apparently without a penny, he repeated his statement that auguste had
 given him the capital sum as an equivalent for an income of , francs
 which his brother had intended to leave him. "why, when first asked if you
 had received anything from auguste, did you say you had received nothing?"
 was the question.
 "it was a thoughtless statement," was the answer. "why," pursued the
 president, "should you not have admitted at once a fact that went to prove
 your own good faith? if, however, this fact be true, it does not explain
 the mysterious way in which auguste asked prignon to raise for him ,
 francs; and unless those , francs were given to you, it is
 impossible to account for them. it is important to your case that you
 should give the jury a satisfactory explanation on this point." castaing
 could only repeat his previous explanations.
 the interrogatory was then directed to the death of auguste ballet.
 castaing said that auguste ballet had left him all his fortune on account
 of a disagreement with his sister. asked why, after auguste's death, he
 had at first denied all knowledge of the will made in his favour and
 deposited by him with malassis, he could give no satisfactory reason.
 coming to the facts of the alleged poisoning of auguste ballet, the
 president asked castaing why, shortly after the warm wine was brought up
 on the night of may , he went up to the room where one of the servants
 of the hotel was lying sick. castaing replied that he was sent for by the
 wife of the hotel-keeper. this the woman denied; she said that she did not
 even know that he was a doctor. "according to the prosecution," said the
 judge, "you left the room in order to avoid drinking your share of the
 wine." castaing said that he had drunk half a cupful of it. the judge
 reminded him that to one of the witnesses castaing had said that he had
 drunk only a little.
 a ridiculous statement made by castaing to explain the purchase of morphia
 and antimony in paris on may  was brought up against him. shortly after
 his arrest castaing had said that the cats and dogs about the hotel had
 made such a noise on the night of may  that they had disturbed the rest
 of auguste, who, in the early morning, had asked castaing to get some
 poison to kill them. he had accordingly gone all the way, about ten miles,
 to paris at four in the morning to purchase antimony and morphia to kill
 cats and dogs. all the people of the hotel denied that there had been any
 such disturbance on the night in question. castaing now said that he had
 bought the poisons at auguste's request, partly to kill the noisy cats and
 dogs, and partly for the purpose of their making experiments on animals.
 asked why he had not given this second reason before, he said that as
 auguste was not a medical man it would have been damaging to his
 reputation to divulge the fact of his wishing to make unauthorised experiments
 on animals. "why go to paris for the poison?" asked the judge, "there was
 a chemist a few yards from the hotel. and when in paris, why go to two
 chemists?" to all these questions castaing's answers were such as to lead
 the president to express a doubt as to whether they were likely to
 convince the jury. castaing was obliged to admit that he had allowed, if
 not ordered, the evacuations of the sick man to be thrown away. he stated
 that he had thrown away the morphia and antimony, which he had bought in
 paris, in the closets of the hotel, because, owing to the concatenation of
 circumstances, he thought that he would be suspected of murder. in reply
 to a question from one of the jury, castaing said that he had mixed the
 acetate of morphia and tartar emetic together before reaching saint cloud,
 but why he had done so he could not explain.
 the medical evidence at the trial was favourable to the accused. orfila,
 the famous chemist of that day, said that, though the symptoms in auguste
 ballet's case might be attributed to poisoning by acetate of morphia or
 some other vegetable poison, at the same time they could be equally well
 attributed to sudden illness of a natural kind. the liquids, taken from
 the stomach of ballet, had yielded on analysis no trace of poison of any
 sort. the convulsive symptoms present in ballet's case were undoubtedly a
 characteristic result of a severe dose of acetate of morphia.() castaing
 said that he had mixed the acetate of morphia and tartar emetic together,
 but in any case no trace of either poison was found in auguste's body, and
 his illness might, from all appearances, have been occasioned by natural
 causes. some attempt was made by the prosecution to prove that the
 apoplexy to which hippolyte ballet had finally succumbed, might be
 attributed to a vegetable poison; one of the doctors expressed an opinion
 favourable to that conclusion "as a man but not as a physician." but the
 evidence did not go further.
 () it was asserted some years later by one medical authority in
palmer's case that it might have been morphia and not strychnine that
had caused the tetanic symptoms which preceded cook's death.
 to the young priest-like doctor the ordeal of his trial was a severe one.
 it lasted eight days. it was only at midday on the sixth day that the
 evidence was concluded. not only was castaing compelled to submit to a
 long interrogatory by the president, but, after each witness had given his
 or her evidence, the prisoner was called on to refute or explain any
 points unfavourable to him. this he did briefly, with varying success; as
 the trial went on, with increasing embarrassment. a great deal of the
 evidence given against castaing was hearsay, and would have been
 inadmissible in an english court of justice. statements made by auguste to
 other persons about castaing were freely admitted. but more serious was
 the evidence of mlle. percillie, auguste's mistress. she swore that on one
 occasion in her presence castaing had reproached auguste with ingratitude;
 he had complained that he had destroyed one copy of hippolyte ballet's
 will, and for auguste's sake had procured the destruction of the other,
 and that yet, in spite of all this, auguste hesitated to entrust him with
 , francs. asked what he had to say to this statement castaing denied
 its truth. he had, he said, only been in mlle. percillie's house once, and
 then not with auguste ballet. mlle. percillie adhered to the truth of her
 evidence, and the president left it to the jury to decide between them.
 a mme. durand, a patient of castaing, gave some curious evidence as to a
 story told her by the young doctor. he said that a friend of his,
 suffering from lung disease, had been persuaded into making a will in his
 sister's favour. the sister had offered a bribe of , francs to her
 brother's lawyer to persuade him to make such a will, and paid one of his
 clerks , francs for drawing it up. castaing, in his friend's interest,
 and in order to expose the fraud, invited the clerk to come and see him.
 his friend, hidden in an alcove in the room, overheard the conversation
 between castaing and the clerk, and so learnt the details of his sister's
 intrigue. he at once destroyed the will and became reconciled with his
 brother, whom he had been about to disinherit. after his death the
 brother, out of gratitude, had given castaing , francs.
 president: castaing, did you tell this story to mme. durand?
 castaing: i don't recollect.
 avocat-general: but mme. durand says that you did.
 castaing: i don't recollect.
 president: you always say that you don't recollect; that is no answer.
 have you, yes or no, made such a statement to mme. durand?
 castaing: i don't recollect; if i had said it, i should recollect it.
 another lady whom castaing had attended free of charge swore, with a good
 deal of reluctance, that castaing had told her a somewhat similar story as
 accounting for his possession of , francs.
 witnesses were called for the defence who spoke to the diligence and good
 conduct of castaing as a medical student; and eighteen, whom he had
 treated free of expense, testified to his kindness and generosity. "all
 these witnesses," said the president, "speak to your generosity; but, for
 that very reason, you must have made little profit out of your profession,
 and had little opportunity for saving anything," to which castaing
 replied: "these are not the only patients i attended; i have not called
 those who paid me for my services." at the same time castaing found it
 impossible to prove that he had ever made a substantial living by the
 exercise of his profession.
 one of the medical witnesses called for the defence, m. chaussier, had
 volunteered the remark that the absence of any trace of poison in the
 portions of auguste ballet's body submitted to analysis, constituted an
 absence of the corpus delicti. to this the president replied that that was
 a question of criminal law, and no concern of his. but in his speech for
 the prosecution the avocat-general dealt with the point raised at some
 length—a point which, if it had held good as a principle of english
 law, would have secured the acquittal of so wicked a poisoner as palmer.
 he quoted from the famous french lawyer d'aguesseau: "the corpus delicti
 is no other thing than the delictum itself; but the proofs of the delictum
 are infinitely variable according to the nature of things; they may be
 general or special, principal or accessory, direct or indirect; in a word,
 they form that general effect (ensemble) which goes to determine the
 conviction of an honest man." if such a contention as m. chaussier's were
 correct, said the avocat-general, then it would be impossible in a case of
 poisoning to convict a prisoner after his victim's death, or, if his
 victim survived, to convict him of the attempt to poison. he reminded the
 jury of that paragraph in the code of criminal procedure which instructed
 them as to their duties: "the law does not ask you to give the reasons
 that have convinced you; it lays down no rules by which you are to decide
 as to the fullness or sufficiency of proof... it only asks you one
 question: 'have you an inward conviction?'" "if," he said, "the actual
 traces of poison are a material proof of murder by poison, then a new
 paragraph must be added to the criminal code—'since, however,
 vegetable poisons leave no trace, poisoning by such means may be committed
 with impunity.'" to poisoners he would say in future: "bunglers that you
 are, don't use arsenic or any mineral poison; they leave traces; you will
 be found out. use vegetable poisons; poison your fathers, poison your
 mothers, poison all your families, and their inheritance will be yours—fear
 nothing; you will go unpunished! you have committed murder by poisoning,
 it is true; but the corpus delicti will not be there because it can't be
 there!" this was a case, he urged, of circumstantial evidence. "we have,"
 he said, "gone through a large number of facts. of these there is not one
 that does not go directly to the proof of poisoning, and that can only be
 explained on the supposition of poisoning; whereas, if the theory of the
 defence be admitted, all these facts, from the first to the last, become
 meaningless and absurd. they can only be refuted by arguments or
 explanations that are childish and ridiculous."
 castaing was defended by two advocates—roussel, a schoolfellow of
 his, and the famous berryer, reckoned by some the greatest french orator
 since mirabeau. both advocates were allowed to address the jury. roussel
 insisted on the importance of the corpus delicti. "the delictum," he said,
 "is the effect, the guilty man merely the cause; it is useless to deal
 with the cause if the effect is uncertain," and he cited a case in which a
 woman had been sent for trial, charged with murdering her husband; the
 moral proof of her guilt seemed conclusive, when suddenly her husband
 appeared in court alive and well. the advocate made a good deal of the
 fact that the remains of the draught prescribed by dr. pigache, a spoonful
 of which castaing had given to auguste ballet, had been analysed and
 showed no trace of poison. against this the prosecution set the evidence
 of the chemist at saint cloud, who had made up the prescription. he said
 that the same day he had made up a second prescription similar to that of
 dr. pigache, but not made out for auguste ballet, which contained, in
 addition to the other ingredients, acetate of morphia. the original of
 this prescription he had given to a friend of castaing, who had come to
 his shop and asked him for it a few days after ballet's death. it would
 seem therefore that there had been two bottles of medicine, one of which
 containing morphia had disappeared.
 m. roussel combatted the suggestion that the family of castaing were in a
 state of indigence. he showed that his father had an income of ,
 francs, while his two brothers were holding good positions, one as an
 officer in the army, the other as a government official. the mistress of
 castaing he represented as enjoying an income of , francs. he
 protested against the quantity of hearsay evidence that had been admitted
 into the case. "in england," he said, "when a witness is called, he is
 asked 'what have you seen?' if he can only testify to mere talk, and
 hearsay, he is not heard." he quoted the concluding paragraph of the will
 of auguste ballet as showing his friendly feeling towards castaing: "it is
 only after careful reflection that i have made this final disposition of
 my property, in order to mark the sincere friendship which i have never
 for one moment ceased to feel for mm. castaing, briant and leuchere, in
 order to recognise the faithful loyalty of my servants, and deprive m. and
 mme. martignon, my brother-in-law and sister, of all rights to which they
 might be legally entitled on my death, fully persuaded in soul and
 conscience that, in doing so, i am giving to each their just and proper
 due." "is this," asked m. roussel, "a document wrested by surprise from a
 weak man, extorted by trickery? is he not acting in the full exercise of
 his faculties? he forgets no one, and justifies his conduct."
 when m. roussel came to the incident of the noisy cats and dogs at saint
 cloud, he was as ingenious as the circumstances permitted: "a serious
 charge engrosses public attention; men's minds are concentrated on the
 large, broad aspects of the case; they are in a state of unnatural
 excitement. they see only the greatness, the solemnity of the accusation,
 and then, suddenly, in the midst of all that is of such tragic and
 surpassing interest, comes this trivial fact about cats and dogs. it makes
 an unfavourable impression, because it is dramatically out of keeping with
 the tragedy of the story. but we are not here to construct a drama. no,
 gentlemen, look at it merely as a trivial incident of ordinary, everyday
 life, and you will see it in its proper light." m. roussel concluded by
 saying that castaing's most eloquent advocate, if he could have been
 present, would have been auguste ballet. "if providence had permitted him
 to enter this court, he would cry out to you, 'save my friend's life! his
 heart is undefiled! he is innocent!'"
 m. roussel concluded his speech at ten o'clock on sunday night, november
 . the next morning berryer addressed the jury. his speech in defence of
 castaing is not considered one of his most successful efforts. he gave
 personal testimony as to the taste of acetate of morphia. he said that
 with the help of his own chemist he had put a quarter of a grain of the
 acetate into a large spoonful of milk, and had found it so insupportably
 bitter to the taste that he could not keep it in his mouth. if, he
 contended, ballet had been poisoned by tartar emetic, then twelve grains
 given in milk would have given it an insipid taste, and vomiting
 immediately after would have got rid of the poison. later investigations
 have shown that, in cases of antimonial poisoning, vomiting does not
 necessarily get rid of all the poison, and the convulsions in which
 auguste ballet died are symptomatic of poisoning either by morphia or
 antimony. in conclusion, berryer quoted the words addressed by one of the
 kings of france to his judges: "when god has not vouchsafed clear proof of
 a crime, it is a sign that he does not wish that man should determine it,
 but leaves its judgment to a higher tribunal."
 the avocat-general, in reply, made a telling answer to m. roussel's
 attempt to minimise the importance of the cats and dogs: "he has spoken of
 the drama of life, and of its ordinary everyday incidents. if there is
 drama in this case, it is of castaing's making. as to the ordinary
 incidents of everyday life, a man buys poison, brings it to the bedside of
 his sick friend, saying it is for experiments on cats and dogs, the friend
 dies, the other, his sole heir, after foretelling his death, takes
 possession of his keys, and proceeds to gather up the spoils—are
 these ordinary incidents of every-day life?"
 it was nine o'clock at night when the jury retired to consider their
 verdict. they returned into court after two hours' deliberation. they
 found the prisoner "not guilty" of the murder of hippolyte ballet,
 "guilty" of destroying his will, and "guilty" by seven votes to five of
 the murder of auguste ballet. asked if he had anything to say before
 judgment was given, castaing, in a very loud voice, said "no; but i shall
 know how to die, though i am the victim of ill-fortune, of fatal
 circumstance. i shall go to meet my two friends. i am accused of having
 treacherously murdered them. there is a providence above us! if there is
 such a thing as an immortal soul, i shall see hippolyte and auguste ballet
 again. this is no empty declamation; i don't ask for human pity" (raising
 his hands to heaven), "i look to god's mercy, and shall go joyfully to the
 scaffold. my conscience is clear. it will not reproach me even when i
 feel" (putting his hands to his neck). "alas! it is easier to feel what i
 am feeling than to express what i dare not express." (in a feeble voice):
 "you have desired my death; you have it!" the judges retired to consider
 the sentence. the candles were guttering, the light of the lamps was
 beginning to fade; the aspect of the court grim and terrible. m. roussel
 broke down and burst into tears. castaing leant over to his old
 schoolfellow: "courage, roussel," he said; "you have always believed me
 innocent, and i am innocent. embrace for me my father, my mother, my
 brothers, my child." he turned to a group of young advocates standing
 near: "and you, young people, who have listened to my trial, attend also
 my execution; i shall be as firm then as i am now. all i ask is to die
 soon. i should be ashamed to plead for mercy." the judges returned.
 castaing was condemned to death, and ordered to pay , francs damages
 to the family of auguste ballet.
 castaing was not ashamed to appeal to the court of cassation for a
 revision of his trial, but on december  his appeal was rejected. two days
 later he was executed. he had attempted suicide by means of poison, which
 one of his friends had brought to him in prison, concealed inside a watch.
 his courage failed him at the last, and he met his death in a state of
 collapse.
 it is not often, happily, that a young man of gentle birth and good
 education is a double murderer at twenty-six. and such a soft, humble,
 insinuating young man too!—good to his mother, good to his mistress,
 fond of his children, kind to his patients.
 yet this gentle creature can deliberately poison his two friends.
 was ever such a contradictory fellow?
 professor webster
 the best report of webster's trial is that edited by bemis. the following
 tracts in the british museum have been consulted by the writer: "appendix
 to the webster trial," boston, : "thoughts on the conviction of
 webster"; "the boston tragedy," by w. e. bigelow.
 it is not often that the gaunt spectre of murder invades the cloistered
 calm of academic life. yet such a strange and unwonted tragedy befell
 harvard university in the year , when john w. webster, professor of
 chemistry, took the life of dr. george parkman, a distinguished citizen of
 boston. the scene of the crime, the old medical school, now a dental
 hospital, is still standing, or was when the present writer visited boston
 in . it is a large and rather dreary red-brick, three-storied
 building, situated in the lower part of the city, flanked on its west side
 by the mud flats leading down to the charles river. the first floor
 consists of two large rooms, separated from each other by the main
 entrance hall, which is approached by a flight of steps leading up from
 the street level. of these two rooms, the left, as you face the building,
 is fitted up as a lecture-room. in the year  it was the lecture-room
 of professor webster. behind the lecture-room is a laboratory, known as
 the upper laboratory, communicating by a private staircase with the lower
 laboratory, which occupies the left wing of the ground floor. a small
 passage, entered by a door on the left-hand side of the front of the
 building, separated this lower laboratory from the dissecting-room, an
 out-house built on to the west wall of the college, but now demolished.
 from this description it will be seen that any person, provided with the
 necessary keys, could enter the college by the side-door near the
 dissecting room on the ground floor, and pass up through the lower and
 upper laboratory into professor webster's lecture-room without entering
 any other part of the building. the professor of chemistry, by locking the
 doors of his lecture-rooms and the lower laboratory, could, if he wished,
 make himself perfectly secure against intrusion, and come and go by the
 side-door without attracting much attention. these rooms are little
 altered at the present time from their arrangement in . the
 lecture-room and laboratory are used for the same purposes to-day; the
 lower laboratory, a dismal chamber, now disused and somewhat rearranged,
 is still recognisable as the scene of the professor's chemical
 experiments.
 on the second floor of the hospital is a museum, once anatomical, now
 dental. one of the principal objects of interest in this museum is a
 plaster cast of the jaws of dr. george parkman, made by a well-known
 dentist of boston, dr. keep, in the year . in that year the new
 medical college was formally opened. dr. parkman, a wealthy and
 public-spirited citizen of boston, had given the piece of land, on which
 the college had been erected. he had been invited to be present at the
 opening ceremony. in anticipation of being asked to make a speech on this
 occasion dr. parkman, whose teeth were few and far between, had himself
 fitted by dr. keep with a complete set of false teeth. oliver wendell
 holmes, then professor of anatomy at harvard, who was present at the
 opening of the college, noticed how very nice and white the doctor's teeth
 appeared to be. it was the discovery of the remains of these same
 admirable teeth three years later in the furnace in professor webster's
 lower laboratory that led to the conviction of dr. parkman's murderer. by
 a strange coincidence the doctor met his death in the very college which
 his generosity had helped to build. though to-day the state of the college
 has declined from the medical to the dental, his memory still lives within
 its walls by the cast of his jaws preserved in the dental museum as a
 relic of a case, in which the art of dentistry did signal service to the
 cause of justice.
 in his lifetime dr. parkman was a well-known figure in the streets of
 boston. his peculiar personal appearance and eccentric habits combined to
 make him something of a character. as he walked through the streets he
 presented a remarkable appearance. he was exceptionally tall, longer in
 the body than the legs; his lower jaw protruded some half an inch beyond
 the upper; he carried his body bent forward from the small of his back. he
 seemed to be always in a hurry; so impetuous was he that, if his horse did
 not travel fast enough to please him, he would get off its back, and,
 leaving the steed in the middle of the street, hasten on his way on foot.
 a just and generous man, he was extremely punctilious in matters of
 business, and uncompromising in his resentment of any form of falsehood or
 deceit. it was the force of his resentment in such a case that cost him
 his life.
 the doctor was unfailingly punctual in taking his meals. dr. kingsley,
 during the fourteen years he had acted as his agent, had always been able
 to make sure of finding him at home at his dinner hour, half-past two
 o'clock. but on friday, november , , to his surprise and that of his
 family, dr. parkman did not come home to dinner; and their anxiety was
 increased when the day passed, and there was still no sign of the doctor's
 return. inquiries were made. from these it appeared that dr. parkman had
 been last seen alive between one and two o'clock on the friday afternoon.
 about half-past one he had visited a grocer's shop in bridge street, made
 some purchases, and left behind him a paper bag containing a lettuce,
 which, he said, he would call for on his way home. shortly before two
 o'clock he was seen by a workman, at a distance of forty or fifty feet
 from the medical college, going in that direction. from that moment all
 certain trace of him was lost. his family knew that he had made an
 appointment for half-past one that day, but where and with whom they did
 not know. as a matter of fact, professor john w. webster had appointed
 that hour to receive dr. parkman in his lecture-room in the medical
 college.
 john w. webster was at this time professor of chemistry and mineralogy in
 harvard university, a doctor of medicine and a member of the american
 academy of arts and sciences, the london geological society and the st.
 petersburg mineralogical society. he was the author of several works on
 geology and chemistry, a man now close on sixty years of age. his
 countenance was genial, his manner mild and unassuming; he was clean
 shaven, wore spectacles, and looked younger than his years.
 professor webster was popular with a large circle of friends. to those who
 liked him he was a man of pleasing and attractive manners, artistic in his
 tastes—he was especially fond of music—not a very profound or
 remarkable chemist, but a pleasant social companion. his temper was hasty
 and irritable. spoilt in his boyhood as an only child, he was self-willed
 and self-indulgent. his wife and daughters were better liked than he. by
 unfriendly criticics{sic} the professor was thought to be selfish, fonder
 of the good things of the table and a good cigar than was consistent with
 his duty to his family or the smallness of his income. his father, a
 successful apothecary at boston, had died in , leaving john, his only
 son, a fortune of some l,. in rather less than ten years webster had
 run through the whole of his inheritance. he had built himself a costly
 mansion in cambridge, spent a large sum of money in collecting minerals,
 and delighted to exercise lavish hospitality. by living consistently
 beyond his means he found himself at length entirely dependent on his
 professional earnings. these were small. his salary as professor was fixed
 at l a year;() the rest of his income he derived from the sale of
 tickets for his lectures at the medical college. that income was
 insufficient to meet his wants.
 () i have given these sums of money in their english equivalents
in order to give the reader an idea of the smallness of the sum which
brought about the tragedy.
 as early as  he had borrowed l from his friend dr. parkman. it was
 to parkman's good offices that he owed his appointment as a professor at
 harvard; they had entered the university as under-graduates in the same
 year. up to  webster had repaid parkman twenty pounds of his debt;
 but, in that year he found it necessary to raise a further loan of l,
 which was subscribed by a few friends, among them parkman himself. as a
 security for the repayment of this loan, the professor executed a mortgage
 on his valuable collection of minerals in favour of parkman. in the april
 of  the professor's financial difficulties became so serious that he
 was threatened with an execution in his house. in this predicament he went
 to a mr. shaw, dr. parkman's brother-in-law, and begged a loan of l,
 offering him as security a bill of sale on the collection of minerals,
 which he had already mortgaged to parkman. shaw accepted the security, and
 lent the money. shaw would seem to have had a good deal of sympathy with
 webster's embarrassments; he considered the professor's income very
 inadequate to his position, and showed himself quite ready at a later
 period to waive his debt altogether.
 dr. parkman was a less easy-going creditor. forbearing and patient as long
 as he was dealt with fairly, he was merciless where he thought he detected
 trickery or evasion. his forbearance and his patience were utterly
 exhausted, his anger and indignation strongly aroused, when he learnt from
 shaw that webster had given him as security for his debt a bill of sale on
 the collection of minerals, already mortgaged to himself. from the moment
 of the discovery of this act of dishonesty on the part of webster, parkman
 pursued his debtor with unrelenting severity.
 he threatened him with an action at law; he said openly that he was
 neither an honourable, honest, nor upright man; he tried to appropriate to
 the payment of his debt the fees for lectures which mr. pettee, webster's
 agent, collected on the professor's behalf. he even visited webster in his
 lecture-room and sat glaring at him in the front row of seats, while the
 professor was striving under these somewhat unfavourable conditions to
 impart instruction to his pupils—a proceeding which the doctor's odd
 cast of features must have aggravated in no small degree.
 it was early in november that parkman adopted these aggressive tactics. on
 the th of that month webster and the janitor of the college, ephraim
 littlefield, were working in the upper laboratory. it was dark; they had
 lit candles. webster was reading a chemical book. as he looked up from the
 book he saw parkman standing in the doorway leading from the lecture-room.
 "dr. webster, are you ready for me to-night?" asked parkman. "no," replied
 the other, "i am not ready to-night." after a little further conversation
 in regard to the mortgage, parkman departed with the ominous remark,
 "doctor, something must be done to-morrow."
 unfortunately the professor was not in a position to do anything. he had
 no means sufficient to meet his creditor's demands; and that creditor was
 unrelenting. on the nd parkman rode into cambridge, where webster lived,
 to press him further, but failed to find him. webster's patience, none too
 great at any time, was being sorely tried. to whom could he turn? what
 further resource was open to him? there was none. he determined to see his
 creditor once more. at  o'clock on the morning of friday the rd,
 webster called at dr. parkman's house and made the appointment for their
 meeting at the medical college at half-past one, to which the doctor had
 been seen hastening just before his disappearance. at nine o'clock the
 same morning pettee, the agent, had called on the professor at the college
 and paid him by cheque a balance of l due on his lecture tickets,
 informing him at the same time that, owing to the trouble with dr.
 parkman, he must decline to receive any further sums of money on his
 behalf. webster replied that parkman was a nervous, excitable man, subject
 to mental aberrations, but he added, "you will have no further trouble
 with dr. parkman, for i have settled with him." it is difficult to see how
 the professor could have settled, or proposed to settle, with his creditor
 on that day. a balance of l at his bank, and the l which mr. pettee
 had paid to him that morning, represented the sum of professor webster's
 fortune on friday, november , .
 since the afternoon of that day the search for the missing parkman had
 been unremitting. on the saturday his friends communicated with the
 police. on sunday hand-bills were issued stating the fact of the doctor's
 disappearance, and on monday, the th, a description and the offer of a
 considerable reward for the discovery of his body were circulated both in
 and out of the city. two days later a further reward was offered. but
 these efforts were fruitless. the only person who gave any information
 beyond that afforded by those who had seen the doctor in the streets on
 the morning of his disappearance, was professor webster. about four
 o'clock on the sunday afternoon the professor called at the house of the
 revd. francis parkman, the doctor's brother. they were intimate friends.
 webster had for a time attended parkman's chapel; and mr. parkman had
 baptised the professor's grand-daughter. on this sunday afternoon mr.
 parkman could not help remarking webster's peculiar manner. with a bare
 greeting and no expression of condolence with the family's distress, his
 visitor entered abruptly and nervously on the object of his errand. he had
 called, he said, to tell mr. parkman that he had seen his brother at the
 medical college on friday afternoon, that he had paid him l which he
 owed him, and that the doctor had in the course of their interview taken
 out a paper and dashed his pen through it, presumably as an acknowledgment
 of the liquidation of the professor's debt. having communicated this
 intelligence to the somewhat astonished gentleman, webster left him as
 abruptly as he had come.
 another relative of dr. parkman, his nephew, mr. parkman blake, in the
 course of inquiries as to his uncle's fate, thought it right to see
 webster. accordingly he went to the college on monday, the th, about
 eleven o'clock in the morning. though not one of his lecture days, the
 janitor littlefield informed him that the professor was in his room. the
 door of the lecture-room, however, was found to be locked, and it was only
 after considerable delay that mr. blake gained admittance. as he descended
 the steps to the floor of the lecture-room webster, dressed in a working
 suit of blue overalls and wearing on his head a smoking cap, came in from
 the back door. instead of advancing to greet his visitor, he stood fixed
 to the spot, and waited, as if defensively, for mr. blake to speak. in
 answer to mr. blake's questions webster described his interview with dr.
 parkman on the friday afternoon. he gave a very similar account of it to
 that he had already given to mr. francis parkman. he added that at the end
 of their interview he had asked the doctor for the return of the mortgage,
 to which the latter had replied, "i haven't it with me, but i will see it
 is properly cancelled." mr. blake asked webster if he could recollect in
 what form of money it was that he had paid dr. parkman. webster answered
 that he could only recollect a bill of l on the new zealand bank:
 pressed on this point, he seemed to rather avoid any further inquiries.
 mr. blake left him, dissatisfied with the result of his visit.
 one particular in webster's statement was unquestionably strange, if not
 incredible. he had, he said, paid parkman a sum of l, which he had given
 him personally, and represented the doctor as having at their interview
 promised to cancel the mortgage on the collection of minerals which
 webster had given as security for the loan of l that had been
 subscribed by parkman and four of his friends. now l of this loan was
 still owing. if webster's statement were true, parkman had a perfect right
 to cancel webster's personal debt to himself; but he had no right to
 cancel entirely the mortgage on the minerals, so long as money due to
 others on that mortgage was yet unpaid. was it conceivable that one so
 strict and scrupulous in all monetary transactions as parkman would have
 settled his own personal claim, and then sacrificed in so discreditable a
 manner the claims of others, for the satisfaction of which he had made
 himself responsible?
 there was yet another singular circumstance. on saturday, the th, the
 day after his settlement with parkman, webster paid into his own account
 at the charles river bank the cheque for l, lecture fees, handed over to
 him by the agent pettee just before dr. parkman's visit on the friday.
 this sum had not apparently gone towards the making up of the l, which
 webster said that he had paid to parkman that day. the means by which
 webster had been enabled to settle this debt became more mysterious than
 ever.
 on tuesday, november , the professor received three other visitors in
 his lecture-room. these were police officers who, in the course of their
 search for the missing man, felt it their duty to examine, however
 perfunctorily, the medical college. with apologies to the professor, they
 passed through his lecture room to the laboratory at the back, and from
 thence, down the private stairs, past a privy, into the lower laboratory.
 as they passed the privy one of the officers asked what place it was. "dr.
 webster's private lavatory," replied the janitor, who was conducting them.
 at that moment webster's voice called them away to examine the store-room
 in the lower laboratory, and after a cursory examination the officers
 departed.
 the janitor, ephraim littlefield, did not take the opportunity afforded
 him by the visit of the police officers to impart to them the feelings of
 uneasiness; which the conduct of professor webster during the last three
 days had excited in his breast. there were circumstances in the
 professor's behaviour which could not fail to attract the attention of a
 man, whose business throughout the day was to dust and sweep the college,
 light the fires and overlook generally the order and cleanliness of the
 building.
 littlefield, it will be remembered, had seen dr. parkman on the monday
 before his disappearance, when he visited webster at the college, and been
 present at the interview, in the course of which the doctor told webster
 that "something must be done." that monday morning webster asked
 littlefield a number of questions about the dissecting-room vault, which
 was situated just outside the door of the lower laboratory. he asked how
 it was built, whether a light could be put into it, and how it was reached
 for the purpose of repair. on the following thursday, the day before
 parkman's disappearance, the professor told littlefield to get him a pint
 of blood from the massachusetts hospital; he said that he wanted it for an
 experiment. on the morning of friday, the day of parkman's disappearance,
 littlefield informed the professor that he had been unsuccessful in his
 efforts to get the blood, as they had not been bleeding anyone lately at
 the hospital. the same morning littlefield found to his surprise a
 sledge-hammer behind the door of the professor's back room; he presumed
 that it had been left there by masons, and took it down to the lower
 laboratory. this sledge-hammer littlefield never saw again. about a
 quarter to two that afternoon littlefield, standing at the front door,
 after his dinner, saw dr. parkman coming towards the college. at two
 o'clock littlefield went up to dr. oliver wendell holmes' room,
 immediately above professor webster's, to help the doctor to clear his
 table after his lecture, which was the last delivered that day. about a
 quarter of an hour later he let dr. holmes out, locked the front door and
 began to clear out the stoves in the other lecture-rooms. when he reached
 webster's he was surprised to find that both doors, that of the lecture
 room and that of the lower laboratory, were either locked or bolted. he
 could hear nothing but the running of water in one of the sinks. about
 half-past five littlefield saw the professor coming down the back stairs
 with a lighted candle in his hand. webster blew out the candle and left
 the building. late that night littlefield again tried the professor's
 doors; they were still fastened. the janitor was surprised at this, as he
 had never known such a thing to happen before.
 on saturday, the th, though not lecturing that day, the professor came
 to the college in the morning. he told littlefield to light the stove in
 the lower laboratory. when littlefield made to pass from the lecture-room
 into the professor's private room at the back, and so down by the private
 stairs to the lower laboratory, the professor stopped him and told him to
 go round by the door in front of the building. the whole of that day and
 sunday, the professor's doors remained fast. on sunday evening at sunset
 littlefield, who was talking with a friend in north grove street, the
 street that faces the college, was accosted by webster. the professor
 asked him if he recollected parkman's visit to the college on friday, the
 rd, and, on his replying in the affirmative, the professor described to
 him their interview and the repayment of his debt. littlefield was struck
 during their conversation by the uneasiness of the professor's bearing;
 contrary to his habit he seemed unable to look him in the face, his manner
 was confused, his face pale.
 during the whole of monday, except for a visit from mr. parkman blake,
 professor webster was again locked alone in his laboratory. neither that
 night, nor early tuesday morning, could littlefield get into the
 professor's rooms to perform his customary duties. on tuesday the
 professor lectured at twelve o'clock, and later received the visit of the
 police officers that has been described already. at four o'clock that
 afternoon, the professor's bell rang. littlefield answered it. the
 professor asked the janitor whether he had bought his turkey for
 thanksgiving day, which was on the following thursday. littlefield said
 that he had not done so yet. webster then handed him an order on his
 provision dealer. "take that," he said, "and get a nice turkey; perhaps i
 shall want you to do some odd jobs for me." littlefield thanked him, and
 said that he would be glad to do anything for him that he could. the
 janitor was the more surprised at webster's generosity on this occasion,
 as this turkey was the first present he had received at the professor's
 hands during the seven years he had worked in the college. littlefield saw
 the professor again about half-past six that evening as the latter was
 leaving the college. the janitor asked him if he wanted any more fires
 lighted in his rooms, because owing to the holidays there were to be no
 further lectures that week. webster said that he did not, and asked
 littlefield whether he were a freemason. the janitor said "yes," and with
 that they parted.
 littlefield was curious. the mysterious activity of the professor of
 chemistry seemed to him more than unusual. his perplexity was increased on
 the following day. though on account of the holidays all work had been
 suspended at the college for the remainder of the week, webster was again
 busy in his room early wednesday morning. littlefield could hear him
 moving about. in vain did the janitor look through the keyhole, bore a
 hole in the door, peep under it; all he could get was a sight of the
 professor's feet moving about the laboratory. perplexity gave way to
 apprehension when in the course of the afternoon littlefield discovered
 that the outer wall of the lower laboratory was so hot that he could
 hardly bear to place his hand on it. on the outer side of this wall was a
 furnace sometimes used by the professor in his chemical experiments. how
 came it to be so heated? the professor had told littlefield on tuesday
 that he should not be requiring any fires during the remainder of the
 week.
 the janitor determined to resolve his suspicions. he climbed up to the
 back windows of the lower laboratory, found one of them unfastened, and
 let himself in. but, beyond evidences of the considerable fires that had
 been kept burning during the last few days, littlefield saw nothing to
 excite peculiar attention. still he was uneasy. those he met in the street
 kept on telling him that dr. parkman would be found in the medical
 college. he felt that he himself was beginning to be suspected of having
 some share in the mystery, whilst in his own mind he became more certain
 every day that the real solution lay within the walls of professor
 webster's laboratory. his attention had fixed itself particularly on the
 lavatory at the foot of the stairs connecting the upper and lower
 laboratories. this room he found to be locked and the key, a large one,
 had disappeared. he recollected that when the police officers had paid
 their visit to the college, the professor had diverted their attention as
 they were about to inspect this room. the only method by which, unknown to
 the professor and without breaking open the door, littlefield could
 examine the vault of this retiring room was by going down to the basement
 floor of the college and digging a hole through the wall into the vault
 itself. this he determined to do.
 on thursday, thanksgiving day, littlefield commenced operations with a
 hatchet and a chisel. progress was slow, as that evening he had been
 invited to attend a festal gathering. on friday the janitor, before
 resuming work, acquainted two of the professors of the college with his
 proposed investigation, and received their sanction. as webster, however,
 was going constantly in and out of his rooms, he could make little further
 progress that day. the professor had come into town early in the morning.
 before going to the college he purchased some fish-hooks and gave orders
 for the making of a strong tin box with firm handles, a foot and a half
 square and a little more than a foot in depth; during the rest of the day
 he had been busy in his rooms until he left the college about four
 o'clock. not till then was the watchful janitor able to resume his
 labours. armed with a crowbar, he worked vigorously until he succeeded in
 penetrating the wall sufficiently to admit a light into the vault of the
 lavatory. the first objects which the light revealed to his eyes, were the
 pelvis of a man and two parts of a human leg.
 leaving his wife in charge of the remains, littlefield went immediately to
 the house of professor bigelow, and informed him of the result of his
 search. they returned to the college some twenty minutes later,
 accompanied by the city marshal. the human remains—a pelvis, a thigh
 and a leg—were taken out of the vault, and on a further search some
 pieces of bone were removed from one of the furnaces in the lower
 laboratory. the city marshal at once dispatched three of his officers to
 cambridge, to the house of professor webster.
 to his immediate circle of friends and relations the conduct of the
 professor during this eventful week had betrayed no unwonted discomposure
 or disturbance of mind. his evenings had been spent either at the house of
 friends, or at his own, playing whist, or reading milton's "allegro" and
 "penseroso" to his wife and daughters. on friday evening, about eight
 o'clock, as the professor was saying good-bye to a friend on the steps of
 his house at cambridge, the three police officers drove up to the door and
 asked him to accompany them to the medical college. it was proposed, they
 said, to make a further search there that evening, and his presence was
 considered advisable. webster assented immediately, put on his boots, his
 hat and coat, and got into the hired coach. as they drove towards the
 city, webster spoke to the officers of parkman's disappearance, and
 suggested that they should stop at the house of a lady who, he said, could
 give them some peculiar information on that subject. as they entered
 boston, he remarked that they were taking the wrong direction for reaching
 the college. one of the officers replied that the driver might be "green,"
 but that he would find his way to the college in time. at length the coach
 stopped. one of the officers alighted, and invited his companions to
 follow him into the office of the leverett street jail. they obeyed. the
 professor asked what it all meant; he was informed that he must consider
 himself in custody, charged with the murder of dr. george parkman.
 webster, somewhat taken aback, desired that word should be sent to his
 family, but was dissuaded from his purpose for the time being. he was
 searched, and among other articles taken from him was a key some four or
 five inches long; it was the missing lavatory key. whilst one of the
 officers withdrew to make out a mittimus, the professor asked one of the
 others if they had found dr. parkman. the officer begged him not to
 question him. "you might tell me something about it," pleaded webster.
 "where did they find him? did they find the whole body? oh, my children!
 what will they do? what will they think of me? where did you get the
 information?" the officers asked him if anybody had access to his
 apartments but himself. "nobody," he replied, "but the porter who makes
 the fire." then, after a pause, he exclaimed: "that villain! i am a ruined
 man." he was walking up and down wringing his hands, when one of the
 officers saw him put one hand into his waistcoat pocket, and raise it to
 his lips. a few moments later the unhappy man was seized with violent
 spasms. he was unable to stand, and was laid down in one of the cells.
 from this distressing state he was roused shortly before eleven, to be
 taken to the college. he was quite incapable of walking, and had to be
 supported by two of the officers. he was present there while his rooms
 were searched; but his state was painful in the extreme. he asked for
 water, but trembled so convulsively that he could only snap at the tumbler
 like a dog; his limbs were rigid; tears and sweat poured down his cheeks.
 on the way back to the jail, one of the officers, moved by his condition,
 expressed his pity for him. "do you pity me? are you sorry for me? what
 for?" asked webster. "to see you so excited," replied the officer. "oh!
 that's it," said the professor.
 the whole night through the prisoner lay without moving, and not until the
 following afternoon were his limbs relaxed sufficiently to allow of his
 sitting up. as his condition improved, he grew more confident. "that is no
 more dr. parkman's body," he said, "than mine. how in the world it came
 there i don't know," and he added: "i never liked the looks of littlefield
 the janitor; i opposed his coming there all i could."
 in the meantime a further examination of the professor's rooms on saturday
 had resulted in the discovery, in a tea-chest in the lower laboratory, of
 a thorax, the left thigh of a leg, and a hunting knife embedded in tan and
 covered over with minerals; some portions of bone and teeth were found
 mixed with the slag and cinders of one of the furnaces; also some
 fish-hooks and a quantity of twine, the latter identical with a piece of
 twine that had been tied round the thigh found in the chest.
 two days later the professor furnished unwittingly some additional
 evidence against himself. on the monday evening after his arrest he wrote
 from prison to one of his daughters the following letter:
 "my dearest marianne,—i wrote mama yesterday; i had a good sleep
 last night, and dreamt of you all. i got my clothes off, for the first
 time, and awoke in the morning quite hungry. it was a long time before my
 first breakfast from parker's came; and it was relished, i can assure you.
 at one o'clock i was notified that i must appear at the court room. all
 was arranged with great regard to my comfort, and went off better than i
 had anticipated.
 "on my return i had a bit of turkey and rice from parker's. they send much
 more than i can eat, and i have directed the steward to distribute the
 surplus to any poor ones here.
 "if you will send me a small canister of tea, i can make my own. a little
 pepper i may want some day. i would send the dirty clothes, but they were
 taken to dry. tell mama not to open the little bundle i gave her the other
 day, but to keep it just as she received it. with many kisses to you all.
 good night!—from your affectionate
 "p.s.—my tongue troubles me yet very much, and i must have bitten it
 in my distress the other night; it is painful and swollen, affecting my
 speech. had mama better send for nancy? i think so; or aunt amelia."
 "couple of coloured neck handkerchiefs, one madras."
 this letter, which shows an anxiety about his personal comfort singular in
 one so tragically situated, passed through the hands of the keeper of the
 jail. he was struck by the words underlined, "not to open," in regard to
 the small bundle confided to mrs. webster. he called the attention of the
 police to this phrase. they sent immediately an officer armed with a
 search warrant to the professor's house. he received from mrs. webster
 among other papers a package which, on being opened, was found to contain
 the two notes given by webster to parkman as acknowledgments of his
 indebtedness to him in  and , and a paper showing the amount of
 his debts to parkman in . there were daubs and erasures made across
 these documents, and across one was written twice over the word "paid."
 all these evidences of payments and cancellations appeared on examination
 to be in the handwriting of the professor.
 after an inquest lasting nine days the coroner's jury declared the remains
 found in the college to be those of dr. george parkman, and that the
 deceased had met his death at the hands of professor j. w. webster. the
 prisoner waived his right to a magisterial investigation, and on january
 , , the grand jury returned a true bill. but it was not until march
  that the professor's trial opened before the supreme court of
 massachusetts. the proceedings were conducted with that dignity and
 propriety which we look for in the courts of that state. the principal
 features in the defence were an attempt to impugn the testimony of the
 janitor littlefield, and to question the possibility of the identification
 of the remains of parkman's teeth. there was a further attempt to prove
 that the deceased had been seen by a number of persons in the streets of
 boston on the friday afternoon, after his visit to the medical college.
 the witness littlefield was unshaken by a severe cross-examination. the
 very reluctance with which dr. keep gave his fatal evidence, and the
 support given to his conclusions by distinguished testimony told strongly
 in favour of the absolute trustworthiness of his statements. the evidence
 called to prove that the murdered man had been seen alive late on friday
 afternoon was highly inconclusive.
 contrary to the advice of his counsel, webster addressed the jury himself.
 he complained of the conduct of his case, and enumerated various points
 that his counsel had omitted to make, which he conceived to be in his
 favour. the value of his statements may be judged by the fact that he
 called god to witness that he had not written any one of the anonymous
 letters, purporting to give a true account of the doctor's fate, which had
 been received by the police at the time of parkman's disappearance. after
 his condemnation webster confessed to the authorship of at least one of
 them.
 the jury retired at eight o'clock on the eleventh day of the trial. they
 would seem to have approached their duty in a most solemn and devout
 spirit, and it was with the greatest reluctance and after some searching
 of heart that they brought themselves to find the prisoner guilty of
 wilful murder. on hearing their verdict, the professor sank into a seat,
 and, dropping his head, rubbed his eyes behind his spectacles as if wiping
 away tears. on the following morning the chief justice sentenced him to
 death after a well-meaning speech of quite unnecessary length and
 elaboration, at the conclusion of which the condemned man wept freely.
 a petition for a writ of error having been dismissed, the professor in
 july addressed a petition for clemency to the council of the state. dr.
 putnam, who had been attending webster in the jail, read to the council a
 confession which he had persuaded the prisoner to make. according to this
 statement webster had, on the friday afternoon, struck parkman on the head
 with a heavy wooden stick in a wild moment of rage, induced by the violent
 taunts and threats of his creditor. appalled by his deed, he had in panic
 locked himself in his room, and proceeded with desperate haste to
 dismember the body; he had placed it for that purpose in the sink in his
 back room, through which was running a constant stream of water that
 carried away the blood. some portions of the body he had burnt in the
 furnace; those in the lavatory and the tea-chest he had concealed there,
 until he should have had an opportunity of getting rid of them.
 in this statement professor webster denied all premeditation. dr. putnam
 asked him solemnly whether he had not, immediately before the crime,
 meditated at any time on the advantages that would accrue to him from
 parkman's death. webster replied "never, before god!" he had, he
 protested, no idea of doing parkman an injury until the bitter tongue of
 the latter provoked him. "i am irritable and violent," he said, "a
 quickness and brief violence of temper has been the besetting sin of my
 life. i was an only child, much indulged, and i have never secured the
 control over my passions that i ought to have acquired early; and the
 consequence is—all this!" he denied having told parkman that he was
 going to settle with him that afternoon, and said that he had asked him to
 come to the college with the sole object of pleading with him for further
 indulgence. he explained his convulsive seizure at the time of his arrest
 by his having taken a dose of strychnine, which he had carried in his
 pocket since the crime. in spite of these statements and the prayers of
 the unfortunate man's wife and daughters, who, until his confession to dr.
 putnam, had believed implicity in his innocence, the council decided that
 the law must take its course, and fixed august  as the day of execution.
 the professor resigned himself to his fate. he sent for littlefield and
 his wife, and expressed his regret for any injustice he had done them:
 "all you said was true. you have misrepresented nothing." asked by the
 sheriff whether he was to understand from some of his expressions that he
 contemplated an attempt at suicide, "why should i?" he replied, "all the
 proceedings in my case have been just... and it is just that i should die
 upon the scaffold in accordance with that sentence." "everybody is right,"
 he said to the keeper of the jail, "and i am wrong. and i feel that, if
 the yielding up of my life to the injured law will atone, even in part,
 for the crime i have committed, that is a consolation."
 in a letter to the reverend francis parkman he expressed deep contrition
 for his guilt. he added one sentence which may perhaps fairly express the
 measure of premeditation that accompanied his crime. "i had never," he
 wrote, "until the two or three last interviews with your brother, felt
 towards him anything but gratitude for his many acts of kindness and
 friendship."
 professor webster met his death with fortitude and resignation. that he
 deserved his fate few will be inclined to deny. the attempt to procure
 blood, the questions about the dissecting-room vault, the appointment made
 with parkman at the college, the statement to pettee, all point to some
 degree of premeditation, or at least would make it appear that the murder
 of parkman had been considered by him as a possible eventuality. his
 accusation of littlefield deprives him of a good deal of sympathy. on the
 other hand, the age and position of webster, the aggravating persistency
 of parkman, his threats and denunciations, coupled with his own shortness
 of temper, make it conceivable that he may have killed his victim on a
 sudden and overmastering provocation, in which case he had better at once
 have acknowledged his crime instead of making a repulsive attempt to
 conceal it. but for the evidence of dr. keep he would possibly have
 escaped punishment altogether. save for the portions of his false teeth,
 there was not sufficient evidence to identify the remains found in the
 college as those of parkman. without these teeth the proof of the corpus
 delicti would have been incomplete, and so afforded webster a fair chance
 of acquittal.
 the mysterious mr. holmes
 "the holmes-pitezel case," by f. b. geyer, ; "holmes' own story,"
 philadelphia, ; and "celebrated criminal cases of america," by t. s.
 duke, san francisco, are the authorities for this account of the case.
 in the year  mr. smith, a carpenter, of philadelphia, had patented a
 new saw-set. wishing to make some money out of his invention, mr. smith
 was attracted by the sign:
 which he saw stretched across the window of a two-storied house, ,
 callowhill street. he entered the house and made the acquaintance of mr.
 perry, a tall, dark, bony man, to whom he explained the merits of his
 invention. perry listened with interest, and asked for a model. in the
 meantime he suggested that smith should do some carpenter's work for him
 in the house. smith agreed, and on august , while at work there saw a
 man enter the house and go up with perry to a room on the second story.
 a few days later smith called at callowhill street to ask perry about the
 sale of the patent. he waited half an hour in the shop below, called out
 to perry who, he thought, might be in the rooms above, received no answer
 and went away. next day, september , smith returned, found the place just
 as he had left it the day before; called perry again, but again got no
 answer. surprised, he went upstairs, and in the back room of the second
 story the morning sunshine, streaming through the window, showed him the
 dead body of a man, his face charred beyond recognition, lying with his
 feet to the window and his head to the door. there was evidence of some
 sort of explosion: a broken bottle that had contained an inflammable
 substance, a broken pipe filled with tobacco, and a burnt match lay by the
 side of the body.
 the general appearance of the dead man answered to that of b. f. perry. a
 medical examination of the body showed that death had been sudden, that
 there had been paralysis of the involuntary muscles, and that the stomach,
 besides showing symptoms of alcoholic irritation, emitted a strong odour
 of chloroform. an inquest was held, and a verdict returned that b. f.
 perry had died of congestion of the lungs caused by the inhalation of
 flame or chloroform. after lying in the mortuary for eleven days the body
 was buried.
 in the meantime the philadelphia branch of the fidelity mutual life
 association had received a letter from one jephtha d. howe, an attorney at
 st. louis, stating that the deceased b. f. perry was benjamin f. pitezel
 of that city, who had been insured in their office for a sum of ten
 thousand dollars. the insurance had been effected in chicago in the
 november of . mr. howe proposed to come to philadelphia with some
 members of the pitezel family to identify the remains. referring to their
 chicago branch, the insurance company found that the only person who would
 seem to have known pitezel when in that city, was a certain h. h. holmes,
 living at wilmette, illinois. they got into communication with mr. holmes,
 and forwarded to him a cutting from a newspaper, which stated erroneously
 that the death of b. f. perry had taken place in chicago.
 on september  they received a letter from mr. holmes, in which he
 offered what assistance he could toward the identification of b. f. perry
 as b. f. pitezel. he gave the name of a dentist in chicago who would be
 able to recognise teeth which he had made for pitezel, and himself
 furnished a description of the man, especially of a malformation of the
 knee and a warty growth on the back of the neck by which he could be
 further identified. mr. holmes offered, if his expenses were paid, to come
 to chicago to view the body. two days later he wrote again saying that he
 had seen by other papers that perry's death had taken place in
 philadelphia and not in chicago, and that as he had to be in baltimore in
 a day or two, he would run over to philadelphia and visit the office of
 the fidelity life association.
 on september  the assiduous mr. holmes called at the office of the
 association in philadelphia, inquired anxiously about the nature and cause
 of perry's death, gave again a description of him and, on learning that
 mr. howe, the attorney from st. louis, was about to come to philadelphia
 to represent the widow, mrs. pitezel, and complete the identification,
 said that he would return to give the company any further help he could in
 the matter. the following day mr. jephtha d. howe, attorney of st. louis,
 arrived in philadelphia, accompanied by alice pitezel, a daughter of the
 deceased. howe explained that pitezel had taken the name of perry owing to
 financial difficulties. the company said that they accepted the fact that
 perry and pitezel were one and the same man, but were not convinced that
 the body was pitezel's body. the visit of holmes was mentioned. howe said
 that he did not know mr. holmes, but would be willing to meet him. at this
 moment holmes arrived at the office. he was introduced to howe as a
 stranger, and recognised as a friend by alice pitezel, a shy, awkward girl
 of fourteen or fifteen years of age. it was then arranged that all the
 parties should meet again next day to identify, if possible, the body,
 which had been disinterred for that purpose.
 the unpleasant duty of identifying the rapidly decomposing remains was
 greatly curtailed by the readiness of mr. holmes. when the party met on
 the nd at the potter's field, where the body had been disinterred and
 laid out, the doctor present was unable to find the distinctive marks
 which would show perry and pitezel to have been the same man. holmes at
 once stepped into the breach, took off his coat, rolled up his sleeves,
 put on the rubber gloves, and taking a surgeon's knife from his pocket,
 cut off the wart at the back of the neck, showed the injury to the leg,
 and revealed also a bruised thumbnail which had been another distinctive
 mark of pitezel. the body was then covered up all but the teeth; the girl
 alice was brought in, and she said that the teeth appeared to be like
 those of her father. the insurance company declared themselves satisfied,
 and handed to mr. howe a cheque for , dollars, and to mr. holmes ten
 dollars for his expenses. smith, the carpenter, had been present at the
 proceedings at the potter's field. for a moment he thought he detected a
 likeness in mr. holmes to the man who had visited perry at callowhill
 street on august  and gone upstairs with him, but he did not feel sure
 enough of the fact to make any mention of it.
 in the prison at st. louis there languished in the year  one marion
 hedgspeth, serving a sentence of twenty years' imprisonment for an
 audacious train robbery. on the night of november , , the 'friscow
 express from st. louis had been boarded by four ruffians, the express car
 blown open with dynamite, and , dollars carried off. hedgspeth and
 another man were tried for the robbery, and sentenced to twenty years'
 imprisonment. on october , , hegspeth{sic} made a statement to the
 governor of the st. louis prison, which he said he wished to be
 communicated to the fidelity mutual life association. in the previous july
 hedgspeth said that he had met in the prison a man of the name of h. m.
 howard, who was charged with fraud, but had been released on bail later in
 the month. while in prison howard told hedgspeth that he had devised a
 scheme for swindling an insurance company of , dollars, and promised
 hedgspeth that, if he would recommend him a lawyer suitable for such an
 enterprise, he should have  dollars as his share of the proceeds.
 hedgspeth recommended jephtha d. howe. the latter entered with enthusiasm
 into the scheme, and told hedgspeth that he thought mr. howard "one of the
 smoothest and slickest" men he had ever known. a corpse was to be found
 answering to pitezel's description, and to be so treated as to appear to
 have been the victim of an accidental explosion, while pitezel himself
 would disappear to germany. from howe hedgspeth learnt that the swindle
 had been carried out successfully, but he had never received from howard
 the  dollars promised him. consequently, he had but little compunction
 in divulging the plot to the authorities.
 it was realised at once that h. m. howard and h. h. holmes were the same
 person, and that jephtha d. howe and mr. holmes were not the strangers to
 each other that they had affected to be when they met in philadelphia.
 though somewhat doubtful of the truth of hedgspeth's statement, the
 insurance company decided to set pinkerton's detectives on the track of
 mr. h. h. holmes. after more than a month's search he was traced to his
 father's house at gilmanton, n. h., and arrested in boston on november .
 inquiry showed that, early in , holmes and pitezel had acquired some
 real property at fort worth in texas and commenced building operations,
 but had soon after left texas under a cloud, arising from the theft of a
 horse and other dubious transactions.
 holmes had obtained the property at fort worth from a miss minnie
 williams, and transferred it to pitezel. pitezel was a drunken "crook," of
 mean intelligence, a mesmeric subject entirely under the influence of
 holmes, who claimed to have considerable hypnotic powers. pitezel had a
 wife living at st. louis and five children, three girls—dessie,
 alice, and nellie—a boy, howard, and a baby in arms. at the time of
 holmes' arrest mrs. pitezel, with her eldest daughter, dessie, and her
 little baby, was living at a house rented by holmes at burlington,
 vermont. she also was arrested on a charge of complicity in the insurance
 fraud and brought to boston.
 two days after his arrest holmes, who dreaded being sent back to texas on
 a charge of horse-stealing, for which in that state the punishment is apt
 to be rough and ready, made a statement to the police, in which he
 acknowledged the fraud practised by him and pitezel on the insurance
 company. the body substituted for pitezel had been obtained, said holmes,
 from a doctor in new york, packed in a trunk and sent to philadelphia, but
 he declined for the present to give the doctor's name. pitezel, he said,
 had gone with three of his children—alice, nellie and howard—to
 south america. this fact, however, holmes had not communicated to mrs.
 pitezel. when she arrived at boston, the poor woman was in great distress
 of mind. questioned by the officers, she attempted to deny any complicity
 in the fraud, but her real anxiety was to get news of her husband and her
 three children. alice she had not seen since the girl had gone to
 philadelphia to identify the supposed remains of her father. shortly after
 this holmes had come to mrs. pitezel at st. louis, and taken away nellie
 and howard to join alice, who, he said, was in the care of a widow lady at
 ovington, kentucky. since then mrs. pitezel had seen nothing of the
 children or her husband. at holmes' direction she had gone to detroit,
 toronto, ogdensberg and, lastly, to burlington in the hope of meeting
 either pitezel or the children, but in vain. she believed that her husband
 had deserted her; her only desire was to recover her children.
 on november  holmes and mrs. pitezel were transferred from boston to
 philadelphia, and there, along with benjamin pitezel and jephtha d. howe,
 were charged with defrauding the fidelity life association of ,
 dollars. soon after his arrival in philadelphia holmes, who was never
 averse to talking, was asked by an inspector of the insurance company who
 it was that had helped him to double up the body sent from new york and
 pack it into the trunk. he replied that he had done it alone, having
 learned the trick when studying medicine in michigan. the inspector
 recollected that the body when removed from callowhill street had been
 straight and rigid. he asked holmes what trick he had learnt in the course
 of his medical studies by which it was possible to re-stiffen a body once
 the rigor mortis had been broken. to this holmes made no reply. but he
 realised his mistake, and a few weeks later volunteered a second
 statement. he now said that pitezel, in a fit of depression, aggravated by
 his drinking habits, had committed suicide on the third story of the house
 in callowhill street. there holmes had found his body, carried it down on
 to the floor below, and arranged it in the manner agreed upon for
 deceiving the insurance company. pitezel, he said, had taken his life by
 lying on the floor and allowing chloroform to run slowly into his mouth
 through a rubber tube placed on a chair. the three children, holmes now
 stated, had gone to england with a friend of his, miss minnie williams.
 miss minnie williams was the lady, from whom holmes was said to have
 acquired the property in texas which he and pitezel had set about
 developing. there was quite a tragedy, according to holmes, connected with
 the life of miss williams. she had come to holmes in , as secretary,
 at a drug store which he was then keeping in chicago. their relations had
 become more intimate, and later in the year miss williams wrote to her
 sister, nannie, saying that she was going to be married, and inviting her
 to the wedding. nannie arrived, but unfortunately a violent quarrel broke
 out between the two sisters, and holmes came home to find that minnie in
 her rage had killed her sister. he had helped her out of the trouble by
 dropping nannie's body into the chicago lake. after such a distressing
 occurrence miss williams was only too glad of the opportunity of leaving
 america with the pitezel children. in the meantime holmes, under the name
 of bond, and pitezel, under that of lyman, had proceeded to deal with miss
 williams' property in texas.
 for women holmes would always appear to have possessed some power of
 attraction, a power of which he availed himself generously. holmes, whose
 real name was herman w. mudgett, was thirty-four years of age at the time
 of his arrest. as a boy he had spent his life farming in vermont, after
 which he had taken up medicine and acquired some kind of medical degree.
 in the course of his training holmes and a fellow student, finding a body
 that bore a striking resemblance to the latter; obtained , dollars
 from an insurance company by a fraud similar to that in which holmes had
 engaged subsequently with pitezel. after spending some time on the staff
 of a lunatic asylum in pennsylvania, holmes set up as a druggist in
 chicago. his affairs in this city prospered, and he was enabled to erect,
 at the corner of wallace and sixty-third streets, the four-storied
 building known later as "holmes castle." it was a singular structure. the
 lower part consisted of a shop and offices. holmes occupied the second
 floor, and had a laboratory on the third. in his office was a vault, air
 proof and sound proof. in the bathroom a trap-door, covered by a rug,
 opened on to a secret staircase leading down to the cellar, and a similar
 staircase connected the cellar with the laboratory. in the cellar was a
 large grate. to this building miss minnie williams had invited her sister
 to come for her wedding with holmes, and it was in this building,
 according to holmes, that the tragedy of nannie's untimely death occurred.
 in hoping to become holmes' wife, miss minnie williams was not to enjoy an
 exclusive privilege. at the time of his arrest holmes had three wives,
 each ignorant of the others' existence. he had married the first in ,
 under the name of mudgett, and was visiting her at burlington, vermont,
 when the pinkerton detectives first got on his track. the second he had
 married at chicago, under the name of howard, and the third at denver as
 recently as january, , under the name of holmes. the third mrs. holmes
 had been with him when he came to philadelphia to identify pitezel's body.
 the appearance of holmes was commonplace, but he was a man of plausible
 and ingratiating address, apparent candour, and able in case of necessity
 to "let loose," as he phrased it, "the fount of emotion."
 the year  opened to find the much enduring holmes still a prisoner in
 philadelphia. the authorities seemed in no haste to indict him for fraud;
 their interest was concentrated rather in endeavouring to find the
 whereabouts of miss williams and her children, and of one edward hatch,
 whom holmes had described as helping him in arranging for their departure.
 the "great humiliation" of being a prisoner was very distressing to
 holmes.
 "i only know the sky has lost its blue,
 the days are weary and the night is drear."
 these struck him as two beautiful lines very appropriate to his situation.
 he made a new year's resolve to give up meat during his close confinement.
 the visits of his third wife brought him some comfort. he was "agreeably
 surprised" to find that, as an unconvicted prisoner, he could order in his
 own meals and receive newspapers and periodicals. but he was hurt at an
 unfriendly suggestion on the part of the authorities that pitezel had not
 died by his own hand, and that edward hatch was but a figment of his rich
 imagination. he would like to have been released on bail, but in the same
 unfriendly spirit was informed that, if he were, he would be detained on a
 charge of murder. and so the months dragged on. holmes, studious, patient,
 injured, the authorities puzzled, suspicions, baffled—still no news
 of miss williams or the three children. it was not until june  that
 holmes was put on his trial for fraud, and the following day pleaded
 guilty. sentence was postponed.
 the same day holmes was sent for to the office of the district attorney,
 who thus addressed him: "it is strongly suspected, holmes, that you have
 not only murdered pitezel, but that you have killed the children. the best
 way to remove this suspicion is to produce the children at once. now,
 where are they?" unfriendly as was this approach, holmes met it calmly,
 reiterated his previous statement that the children had gone with miss
 williams to england, and gave her address in london,  veder or vadar
 street, where, he said, miss williams had opened a massage establishment.
 he offered to draw up and insert a cipher advertisement in the new york
 herald, by means of which, he said, miss williams and he had agreed to
 communicate, and almost tearfully he added, "why should i kill innocent
 children?"
 asked to give the name of any person who had seen miss williams and the
 children in the course of their journeyings in america, he resented the
 disbelief implied in such a question, and strong was his manly indignation
 when one of the gentlemen present expressed his opinion that the story was
 a lie from beginning to end. this rude estimate of holmes' veracity was,
 however, in some degree confirmed when a cipher advertisement published in
 the new york herald according to holmes' directions, produced no reply
 from miss williams, and inquiry showed that no such street as veder or
 vadar street was to be found in london.
 in spite of these disappointments, holmes' quiet confidence in his own
 good faith continued unshaken. when the hapless mrs. pitezel was released,
 he wrote her a long letter. "knowing me as you do," he said, "can you
 imagine me killing little and innocent children, especially without any
 motive?" but even mrs. pitezel was not wholly reassured. she recollected
 how holmes had taken her just before his arrest to a house he had rented
 at burlington, vermont, how he had written asking her to carry a package
 of nitro-glycerine from the bottom to the top of the house, and how one
 day she had found him busily removing the boards in the cellar.
 the district attorney and the insurance company were not in agreement as
 to the fate of the pitezel children. the former still inclined to the hope
 and belief that they were in england with miss williams, but the insurance
 company took a more sinister view. no trace of them existed except a tin
 box found among holmes' effects, containing letters they had written to
 their mother and grandparents from cincinnati, indianapolis, and detroit,
 which had been given to holmes to dispatch but had never reached their
 destination. the box contained letters from mrs. pitezel to her children,
 which holmes had presumably intercepted.
 it was decided to make a final attempt to resolve all doubts by sending an
 experienced detective over the route taken by the children in america. he
 was to make exhaustive inquiries in each city with a view to tracing the
 visits of holmes or the three children. for this purpose a detective of
 the name of geyer was chosen. the record of his search is a remarkable
 story of patient and persistent investigation.
 alice pitezel had not seen her mother since she had gone with holmes to
 identify her father's remains in philadelphia. from there holmes had taken
 her to indianapolis. in the meantime he had visited mrs. pitezel at st.
 louis, and taken away with him the girl, nellie, and the boy, howard,
 alleging as his reason for doing so that they and alice were to join their
 father, whose temporary effacement was necessary to carry out successfully
 the fraud on the insurance company, to which mrs. pitezel had been from
 the first an unwilling party. holmes, nellie and howard had joined alice
 at indianapolis, and from there all four were believed to have gone to
 cincinnati. it was here, accordingly, on june , , that geyer
 commenced his search.
 after calling at a number of hotels, geyer found that on friday, september
 , , a man, giving the name of alexander e. cook, and three children
 had stayed at a hotel called the atlantic house. geyer recollected that
 holmes, when later on he had sent mrs. pitezel to the house in burlington,
 had described her as mrs. a. e. cook and, though not positive, the hotel
 clerk thought that he recognised in the photographs of holmes and he three
 children, which geyer showed him, the four visitors to the hotel.
 they had left the atlantic house the next day, and on that same day, the
 th, geyer found that mr. a. e. cook and three children had registered at
 the bristol hotel, where they had stayed until sunday the th.
 knowing holmes' habit of renting houses, geyer did not confine his
 enquiries to the hotels. he visited a number of estate agents and learnt
 that a man and a boy, identified as holmes and howard pitezel, had
 occupied a house no.  poplar street. the man had given the name of a.
 c. hayes. he had taken the house on friday the th, and on the th had
 driven up to it with the boy in a furniture wagon. a curious neighbour,
 interested in the advent of a newcomer, saw the wagon arrive, and was
 somewhat astonished to observe that the only furniture taken into the
 house was a large iron cylinder stove. she was still further surprised
 when, on the following day, mr. hayes told her that he was not going after
 all to occupy the house, and made her a present of the cylinder stove.
 from cincinnati geyer went to indianapolis. here inquiry showed that on
 september  three children had been brought by a man identified as holmes
 to the hotel english, and registered in the name of canning. this was the
 maiden name of mrs. pitezel. the children had stayed at the hotel one
 night. after that geyer seemed to lose track of them until he was reminded
 of a hotel then closed, called the circle house. with some difficulty he
 got a sight of the books of the hotel, and found that the three canning
 children had arrived there on october  and stayed until the th. from
 the former proprietor of the hotel he learnt that holmes had described
 himself as the children's uncle, and had said that howard was a bad boy,
 whom he was trying to place in some institution. the children seldom went
 out; they would sit in their room drawing or writing, often they were
 found crying; they seemed homesick and unhappy.
 there are letters of the children written from indianapolis to their
 mothers, letters found in holmes' possession, which had never reached her.
 in these letters they ask their mother why she does not write to them. she
 had written, but her letters were in holmes' possession. alice writes that
 she is reading "uncle tom's cabin." she has read so much that her eyes
 hurt; they have bought a crystal pen for five cents which gives them some
 amusement; they had been to the zoo in cincinnati the sunday before: "i
 expect this sunday will pass away slower than i don't know—howard is
 two (sic) dirty to be seen out on the street to-day." sometimes they go
 and watch a man who paints "genuine oil paintings" in a shoe store, which
 are given away with every dollar purchase of shoes—"he can paint a
 picture in one and a half minutes, ain't that quick!" howard was getting a
 little troublesome. "i don't like to tell you," writes alice, "but you ask
 me, so i will have to. howard won't mind me at all. he wanted a book and i
 got 'life of general sheridan,' and it is awful nice, but now he don't
 read it at all hardly." poor howard! one morning, says alice, mr. holmes
 told him to stay in and wait for him, as he was coming to take him out,
 but howard was disobedient, and when mr. holmes arrived he had gone out.
 better for howard had he never returned! "we have written two or three
 letters to you," alice tells her mother, "and i guess you will begin to
 get them now." she will not get them. mr. holmes is so very particular
 that the insurance company shall get no clue to the whereabouts of any
 member of the pitezel family.
 geyer knew that from indianapolis holmes had gone to detroit. he
 ascertained that two girls, "etta and nellie canning," had registered on
 october  at the new western hotel in that city, and from there had moved
 on the th to a boarding-house in congress street. from detroit alice had
 written to her grandparents. it was cold and wet, she wrote; she and etta
 had colds and chapped hands: "we have to stay in all the time. all that
 nell and i can do is to draw, and i get so tired sitting that i could get
 up and fly almost. i wish i could see you all. i am getting so homesick
 that i don't know what to do. i suppose wharton (their baby brother) walks
 by this time, don't he? i would like to have him here, he would pass away
 the time a good deal." as a fact little wharton, his mother and sister
 dessie, were at this very moment in detroit, within ten minutes' walk of
 the hotel at which holmes had registered "etta and nellie canning."
 on october  there had arrived in that city a weary, anxious-looking
 woman, with a girl and a little baby. they took a room at geis's hotel,
 registering as mrs. adams and daughter. mrs. adams seemed in great
 distress of mind, and never left her room.
 the housekeeper, being shown their photographs, identified the woman and
 the girl as mrs. pitezel and her eldest daughter dessie. as the same time
 there had been staying at another hotel in detroit a mr. and mrs. holmes,
 whose photographs showed them to be the mr. holmes in question and his
 third wife. these three parties—the two children, mrs. pitezel and
 her baby, and the third mrs. holmes—were all ignorant of each
 other's presence in detroit; and under the secret guidance of mr. holmes
 the three parties (still unaware of their proximity to each other), left
 detroit for canada, arriving in toronto on or about october , and
 registering at three separate hotels. the only one who had not to all
 appearances reached toronto was the boy howard.
 in toronto "alice and nellie canning" stayed at the albion hotel.
 they arrived there on october , and left on the th. during their stay
 a man, identified as holmes, had called every morning for the two
 children, and taken them out; but they had come back alone, usually in
 time for supper. on the th he had called and taken them out, but they
 had not returned to supper. after that date geyer could find no trace of
 them. bearing in mind holmes' custom of renting houses, he compiled a list
 of all the house agents in toronto, and laboriously applied to each one
 for information. the process was a slow one, and the result seemed likely
 to be disappointing.
 to aid his search geyer decided to call in the assistance of the press.
 the newspapers readily published long accounts of the case and portraits
 of holmes and the children. at last, after eight days of patient and
 untiring investigation, after following up more than one false clue, geyer
 received a report that there was a house—no.  st. vincent street—which
 had been rented in the previous october by a man answering to the
 description of holmes. the information came from an old scottish gentleman
 living next door. geyer hastened to see him. the old gentleman said that
 the man who had occupied no.  in october had told him that he had taken
 the house for his widowed sister, and he recognised the photograph of
 alice pitezel as one of the two girls accompanying him. the only furniture
 the man had taken into the house was a bed, a mattress and a trunk. during
 his stay at no.  this man had called on his neighbour about four o'clock
 one afternoon and borrowed a spade, saying that he wanted to dig a place
 in the cellar where his widowed sister could keep potatoes; he had
 returned the spade the following morning. the lady to whom the house
 belonged recognised holmes' portrait as that of the man to whom she had
 let no. .
 at last geyer seemed to be on the right track. he hurried back to st.
 vincent street, borrowed from the old gentleman at no.  the very spade
 which he had lent to holmes in the previous october, and got the
 permission of the present occupier of no.  to make a search. in the
 centre of the kitchen geyer found a trap-door leading down into a small
 cellar. in one corner of the cellar he saw that the earth had been
 recently dug up. with the help of the spade the loose earth was removed,
 and at a depth of some three feet, in a state of advanced decomposition,
 lay the remains of what appeared to be two children. a little toy wooden
 egg with a snake inside it, belonging to the pitezel children, had been
 found by the tenant who had taken the house after holmes; a later tenant
 had found stuffed into the chimney, but not burnt, some clothing that
 answered the description of that worn by alice and etta pitezel; and by
 the teeth and hair of the two corpses mrs. pitezel was able to identify
 them as those of her two daughters. the very day that alice and etta had
 met their deaths at st. vincent street, their mother had been staying near
 them at a hotel in the same city, and later on the same day holmes had
 persuaded her to leave toronto for ogdensburg. he said that they were
 being watched by detectives, and so it would be impossible for her husband
 to come to see her there.
 but the problem was not yet wholly solved. what had become of howard? so
 far geyer's search had shown that holmes had rented three houses, one in
 cincinnati, one in detroit, and one in toronto. howard had been with his
 sisters at the hotels in indianapolis, and in detroit the house agents had
 said that, when holmes had rented a house there, he had been accompanied
 by a boy. yet an exhaustive search of that house had revealed no trace of
 him. geyer returned to detroit and again questioned the house agents; on
 being pressed their recollection of the boy who had accompanied holmes
 seemed very vague and uncertain. this served only to justify a conclusion
 at which geyer had already arrived, that howard had never reached detroit,
 but had disappeared in indianapolis. alice's letters, written from there,
 had described how holmes had wanted to take howard out one day and how the
 boy had refused to stay in and wait for him. in the same way holmes had
 called for the two girls at the albion hotel in toronto on october  and
 taken them out with him, after which they had never been seen alive except
 by the old gentleman at no.  st. vincent street.
 if geyer could discover that holmes had not departed in indianapolis from
 his usual custom of renting houses, he might be on the high way to solving
 the mystery of howard's fate. accordingly he returned to indianapolis.
 in the meantime, holmes, in his prison at philadelphia, learnt of the
 discovery at toronto. "on the morning of the th of july," he writes in
 his journal, "my newspaper was delivered to me about . a.m., and i had
 hardly opened it before i saw in large headlines the announcement of the
 finding of the children in toronto. for the moment it seemed so impossible
 that i was inclined to think it was one of the frequent newspaper
 excitements that had attended the earlier part of the case, but, in
 attempting to gain some accurate comprehension of what was stated in the
 article, i became convinced that at least certain bodies had been found
 there, and upon comparing the date when the house was hired i knew it to
 be the same as when the children had been in toronto; and thus being
 forced to realise the awfulness of what had probably happened, i gave up
 trying to read the article, and saw instead the two little faces as they
 had looked when i hurriedly left them—felt the innocent child's kiss
 so timidly given, and heard again their earnest words of farewell, and
 realised that i had received another burden to carry to my grave with me,
 equal, if not worse, than the horrors of nannie williams' death."
 questioned by the district attorney, holmes met this fresh evidence by
 evoking once again the mythical edward hatch and suggesting that miss
 minnie williams, in a "hellish wish for vengeance" because of holmes'
 fancied desertion, and in order to make it appear probable that he, and
 not she, had murdered her sister, had prompted hatch to commit the horrid
 deed. holmes asked to be allowed to go to toronto that he might collect
 any evidence which he could find there in his favour. the district
 attorney refused his request; he had determined to try holmes in
 philadelphia. "what more could, be said?" writes holmes. indeed, under the
 circumstances, and in the unaccountable absence of edward hatch and minnie
 williams, there was little more to be said.
 detective geyer reopened his search in indianapolis by obtaining a list of
 advertisements of houses to let in the city in . nine hundred of these
 were followed up in vain. he then turned his attention to the small towns
 lying around indianapolis with no happier result. geyer wrote in something
 of despair to his superiors: "by monday we will have searched every
 outlying town except irvington. after irvington, i scarcely know where we
 shall go." thither he went on august , exactly two months from the day
 on which his quest had begun. as he entered the town he noticed the
 advertisement of an estate agent. he called at the office and found a
 "pleasant-faced old gentleman," who greeted him amiably. once again geyer
 opened his now soiled and ragged packet of photographs, and asked the
 gentleman if in october, , he had let a house to a man who said that
 he wanted one for a widowed sister. he showed him the portrait of holmes.
 the old man put on his glasses and looked at the photograph for some time.
 yes, he said, he did remember that he had given the keys of a cottage in
 october, , to a man of holmes' appearance, and he recollected the man
 the more distinctly for the uncivil abruptness with which he had asked for
 the keys; "i felt," he said, "he should have had more respect for my grey
 hairs."
 from the old gentleman's office geyer hastened to the cottage, and made at
 once for the cellar. there he could find no sign of recent disturbance.
 but beneath the floor of a piazza adjoining the house he found the remains
 of a trunk, answering to the description of that which the pitezel
 children had had with them, and in an outhouse he discovered the
 inevitable stove, holmes' one indispensable piece of furniture. it was
 stained with blood on the top. a neighbour had seen holmes in the same
 october drive up to the house in the furniture wagon accompanied by a boy,
 and later in the day holmes had asked him to come over to the cottage and
 help him to put up a stove. the neighbour asked him why he did not use
 gas; holmes replied that he did not think gas was healthy for children.
 while the two men were putting up the stove, the little boy stood by and
 watched them. after further search there were discovered in the cellar
 chimney some bones, teeth, a pelvis and the baked remains of a stomach,
 liver and spleen.
 medical examination showed them to be the remains of a child between seven
 and ten years of age. a spinning top, a scarf-pin, a pair of shoes and
 some articles of clothing that had belonged to the little pitezels, had
 been found in the house at different times, and were handed over to geyer.
 his search was ended. on september  he returned to philadelphia.
 holmes was put on his trial on october , , before the court of oyer
 and terminer in philadelphia, charged with the murder of benjamin pitezel.
 in the course of the trial the district attorney offered to put in
 evidence showing that holmes had also murdered the three children of
 pitezel, contending that such evidence was admissible on the ground that
 the murders of the children and their father were parts of the same
 transaction. the judge refused to admit the evidence, though expressing a
 doubt as to its inadmissibility. the defence did not dispute the identity
 of the body found in callowhill street, but contended that pitezel had
 committed suicide. the medical evidence negatived such a theory. the
 position of the body, its condition when discovered, were entirely
 inconsistent with self-destruction, and the absence of irritation in the
 stomach showed that the chloroform found there must have been poured into
 it after death. in all probability, holmes had chloroformed pitezel when
 he was drunk or asleep. he had taken the chloroform to callowhill street
 as a proposed ingredient in a solution for cleaning clothes, which he and
 pitezel were to patent. it was no doubt with the help of the same drug
 that he had done to death the little children, and failing the
 nitro-glycerine, with that drug he had intended to put mrs. pitezel and
 her two remaining children out of the way at the house in burlington; for
 after his trial there was found there, hidden away in the cellar, a bottle
 containing eight or ten ounces of chloroform.
 though assisted by counsel, holmes took an active part in his defence. he
 betrayed no feeling at the sight of mrs. pitezel, the greater part of
 whose family he had destroyed, but the appearance of his third wife as a
 witness he made an opportunity for "letting loose the fount of emotion,"
 taking care to inform his counsel beforehand that he intended to perform
 this touching feat. he was convicted and sentenced to death on november .
 previous to the trial of holmes the police had made an exhaustive
 investigation of the mysterious building in chicago known as "holmes'
 castle." the result was sufficiently sinister. in the stove in the cellar
 charred human bones were found, and in the middle of the room stood a
 large dissecting table stained with blood. on digging up the cellar floor
 some human ribs, sections of vertebrae and teeth were discovered buried in
 quicklime, and in other parts of the "castle" the police found more
 charred bones, some metal buttons, a trunk, and a piece of a watch chain.
 the trunk and piece of watch chain were identified as having belonged to
 miss minnie williams.
 inquiry showed that miss williams had entered holmes' employment as a
 typist in , and had lived with him at the castle. in the latter part
 of the year she had invited her sister, nannie, to be present at her
 wedding with holmes. nannie had come to chicago for that purpose, and
 since then the two sisters had never been seen alive. in february in the
 following year pitezel, under the name of lyman, had deposited at fort
 worth, texas, a deed according to which a man named bond had transferred
 to him property in that city which had belonged to miss williams, and
 shortly after, holmes, under the name of pratt, joined him at fort worth,
 whereupon the two commenced building on miss williams' land.
 other mysterious cases besides those of the williams sisters revealed the
 bluebeard-like character of this latterday castle of mr. holmes. in  a
 man of the name of connor entered holmes' employment. he brought with him
 to the castle a handsome, intelligent wife and a little girl of eight or
 nine years of age.
 after a short time connor quarrelled with his wife and went away, leaving
 mrs. connor and the little girl with holmes. after  mrs. connor and
 her daughter had disappeared, but in august, , the police found in the
 castle some clothes identified as theirs, and the janitor, quinlan,
 admitted having seen the dead body of mrs. connor in the castle. holmes,
 questioned in his prison in philadelphia, said that mrs. connor had died
 under an operation, but that he did not know what had become of the little
 girl.
 in the year of mrs. connor's disappearance, a typist named emily cigrand,
 who had been employed in a hospital in which benjamin pitezel had been a
 patient, was recommended by the latter to holmes. she entered his
 employment, and she and holmes soon became intimate, passing as "mr. and
 mrs. gordon." emily cigrand had been in the habit of writing regularly to
 her parents in indiana, but after december , , they had never heard
 from her again, nor could any further trace of her be found.
 a man who worked for holmes as a handy man at the castle stated to the
 police that in  holmes had given him a skeleton of a man to mount, and
 in january, , showed him in the laboratory another male skeleton with
 some flesh still on it, which also he asked him to mount. as there was a
 set of surgical instruments in the laboratory and also a tank filled with
 a fluid preparation for removing flesh, the handy man thought that holmes
 was engaged in some kind of surgical work.
 about a month before his execution, when holmes' appeals from his sentence
 had failed and death appeared imminent, he sold to the newspapers for
 , dollars a confession in which he claimed to have committed
 twenty-seven murders in the course of his career. the day after it
 appeared he declared the whole confession to be a "fake." he was tired, he
 said, of being accused by the newspapers of having committed every
 mysterious murder that had occurred during the last ten years. when it was
 pointed out to him that the account given in his confession of the murder
 of the pitezel children was clearly untrue, he replied, "of course, it is
 not true, but the newspapers wanted a sensation and they have got it." the
 confession was certainly sensational enough to satisfy the most exacting
 of penny-a-liners, and a lasting tribute to holmes' undoubted power of
 extravagant romancing.
 according to his story, some of his twenty-seven victims had met their
 death by poison, some by more violent methods, some had died a lingering
 death in the air-tight and sound-proof vault of the castle. most of these
 he mentioned by name, but some of these were proved afterwards to be
 alive. holmes had actually perpetrated, in all probability, about ten
 murders. but, given further time and opportunity, there is no reason why
 this peripatetic assassin should not have attained to the considerable
 figure with which he credited himself in his bogus confession.
 holmes was executed in philadelphia on may , . he seemed to meet his
 fate with indifference.
 the motive of holmes in murdering pitezel and three of his children and in
 planning to murder his wife and remaining children, originated in all
 probability in a quarrel that occurred between pitezel and himself in the
 july of . pitezel had tired apparently of holmes and his doings, and
 wanted to break off the connection. but he must have known enough of
 holmes' past to make him a dangerous enemy. it was pitezel who had
 introduced to holmes, emily cigrand, the typist, who had disappeared so
 mysteriously in the castle; pitezel had been his partner in the fraudulent
 appropriation of miss minnie williams' property in texas; it is more than
 likely, therefore, that pitezel knew something of the fate of miss
 williams and her sister. by reviving, with pitezel's help, his old plan
 for defrauding insurance companies, holmes saw the opportunity of making
 , dollars, which he needed sorely, and at the same time removing his
 inconvenient and now lukewarm associate. having killed pitezel and
 received the insurance money, holmes appropriated to his own use the
 greater part of the , dollars, giving mrs. pitezel in return for her
 share of the plunder a bogus bill for , dollars. having robbed mrs.
 pitezel of both her husband and her money, to this thoroughgoing criminal
 there seemed only one satisfactory way of escaping detection, and that was
 to exterminate her and the whole of her family.
 had holmes not confided his scheme of the insurance fraud to hedgspeth in
 st. louis prison and then broken faith with him, there is no reason why
 the fraud should ever have been discovered. the subsequent murders had
 been so cunningly contrived that, had the insurance company not put the
 pinkerton detectives on his track, holmes would in all probability have
 ended by successfully disposing of mrs. pitezel, dessie, and the baby at
 the house in burlington, vermont, and the entire pitezel family would have
 disappeared as completely as his other victims.
 holmes admitted afterwards that his one mistake had been his confiding to
 hedgspeth his plans for defrauding an insurance company—a mistake,
 the unfortunate results of which might have been avoided, if he had kept
 faith with the train robber and given him the  dollars which he had
 promised.
 the case of holmes illustrates the practical as well as the purely ethical
 value of "honour among thieves," and shows how a comparatively
 insignificant misdeed may ruin a great and comprehensive plan of crime. to
 dare to attempt the extermination of a family of seven persons, and to
 succeed so nearly in effecting it, could be the work of no tyro, no
 beginner like j. b. troppmann. it was the act of one who having already
 succeeded in putting out of the way a number of other persons undetected,
 might well and justifiably believe that he was born for greater and more
 compendious achievements in robbery and murder than any who had gone
 before him. one can almost subscribe to america's claim that holmes is the
 "greatest criminal" of a century boasting no mean record in such persons.
 in the remarkable character of his achievements as an assassin we are apt
 to lose sight of holmes' singular skill and daring as a liar and a
 bigamist. as an instance of the former may be cited his audacious
 explanation to his family, when they heard of his having married a second
 time. he said that he had met with a serious accident to his head, and
 that when he left the hospital, found that he had entirely lost his
 memory; that, while in this state of oblivion, he had married again and
 then, when his memory returned, realised to his horror his unfortunate
 position. plausibility would seem to have been one of holmes' most useful
 gifts; men and women alike—particularly the latter—he seems to
 have deceived with ease. his appearance was commonplace, in no way
 suggesting the conventional criminal, his manner courteous, ingratiating
 and seemingly candid, and like so many scoundrels, he could play
 consummately the man of sentiment.
 the weak spot in holmes' armour as an enemy of society was a dangerous
 tendency to loquacity, the defect no doubt of his qualities of plausible
 and insinuating address and ever ready mendacity.
 the widow gras
 report of the trial of the woman gras and gaudry in the gazette des
 tribunaux. the case is dealt with also by mace in his "femmes
 criminelles."
 jenny amenaide brecourt was born in paris in the year . her father was
 a printer, her mother sold vegetables. the parents neglected the child,
 but a lady of title took pity on her, and when she was five years old
 adopted her. even as a little girl she was haughty and imperious. at the
 age of eight she refused to play with another child on the ground of her
 companion's social inferiority. "the daughter of a baroness," she said,
 "cannot play with the daughter of a wine-merchant." when she was eleven
 years old, her parents took her away from her protectress and sent her
 into the streets to sell gingerbread—a dangerous experience for a
 child of tender years. after six years of street life, amenaide sought out
 her benefactress and begged her to take her back. the baroness consented,
 and found her employment in a silk manufactory. one day the girl, now
 eighteen years old, attended the wedding of one of her companions in the
 factory. she returned home after the ceremony thoughtful.
 she said that she wanted to get married. the baroness did not take her
 statement seriously, and on the grocer calling one day, said in jest to
 amenaide, "you want a husband, there's one."
 but amenaide was in earnest. she accepted the suggestion and, to the
 baroness' surprise, insisted on taking the grocer as her husband.
 reluctantly the good lady gave her consent, and in  amenaide brecourt
 became the wife of the grocer gras.
 a union, so hasty and ill-considered, was not likely to be of long
 duration. with the help of the worthy baroness the newly married couple
 started a grocery business. but amenaide was too economical for her
 husband and mother-in-law. quarrels ensued, recriminations. in a spirit of
 unamiable prophecy husband and wife foretold each other's future. "you
 will die in a hospital," said the wife. "you will land your carcase in
 prison," retorted the husband. in both instances they were correct in
 their anticipations. one day the husband disappeared. for a short time
 amenaide returned to her long-suffering protectress, and then she too
 disappeared.
 when she is heard of again, amenaide brecourt has become jeanne de la
 cour. jeanne de la cour is a courtesan. she has tried commerce, acting,
 literature, journalism, and failed at them all. henceforth men are to make
 her fortune for her. such charms as she may possess, such allurements as
 she can offer, she is ready to employ without heart or feeling to
 accomplish her end. without real passion, she has an almost abnormal,
 erotic sensibility, which serves in its stead. she cares only for one
 person, her sister. to her jeanne de la cour unfolded her philosophy of
 life. while pretending to love men, she is going to make them suffer. they
 are to be her playthings, she knows how to snare them: "all is dust and
 lies. so much the worse for the men who get in my way. men are mere
 stepping-stones to me. as soon as they begin to fail or are played out, i
 put them scornfully aside. society is a vast chess-board, men the pawns,
 some white, some black; i move them as i please, and break them when they
 bore me."
 the early years of jeanne de la cour's career as a phryne were hardly more
 successful than her attempts at literature, acting and journalism. true to
 her philosophy, she had driven one lover, a german, to suicide, and
 brought another to his death by over-doses of cantharides. on learning of
 the death of the first, she reflected patriotically, "one german the less
 in paris!" that of the second elicited the matter-of-fact comment, "it was
 bound to happen; he had no moderation." a third admirer, who died in a
 hospital, was dismissed as "a fool who, in spite of all, still respects
 women." but, in ruining her lovers, she had ruined her own health. in 
 she was compelled to enter a private asylum. there she is described as
 "dark in complexion, with dark expressive eyes, very pale, and of a
 nervous temperament, agreeable, and pretty." she was suffering at the time
 of her admission from hysterical seizures, accompanied by insane
 exaltation, convulsions and loss of speech. in speaking of her humble
 parents she said, "i don't know such people"; her manner was bombastic,
 and she was fond of posing as a fine lady.
 after a few months jeanne de la cour was discharged from the asylum as
 cured, and on the advice of her doctors went to vittel.
 there she assumed the rank of baroness and recommenced her career, but
 this time in a more reasonable and businesslike manner. her comments,
 written to her sister, on her fellow guests at the hotel are caustic. she
 mocks at some respectable married women who are trying to convert her to
 catholicism. to others who refuse her recognition, she makes herself so
 mischievous and objectionable that in self-defence they are frightened
 into acknowledging her. admirers among men she has many, ex-ministers,
 prefects. it was at vittel that occurred the incident of the wounded
 pigeon. there had been some pigeon-shooting. one of the wounded birds flew
 into the room of the baroness de la cour. she took pity on it, tended it,
 taught it not to be afraid of her and to stay in her room. so touching was
 her conduct considered by some of those who heard it, that she was
 nicknamed "the charmer." but she is well aware, she writes to her sister,
 that with the true ingratitude of the male, the pigeon will leave her as
 soon as it needs her help no longer.
 however, for the moment, "disfigured as it is, beautiful or ugly," she
 loves it. "don't forget," she writes, "that a woman who is practical and
 foreseeing, she too enjoys her pigeon shooting, but the birds are her
 lovers."
 shortly after she left vittel an event occurred which afforded jeanne de
 la cour the prospect of acquiring that settled position in life which,
 "practical and foreseeing," she now regarded as indispensable to her
 future welfare. her husband, gras, died, as she had foretold, in the
 charity hospital. the widow was free. if she could bring down her bird, it
 was now in her power to make it hers for life. henceforth all her efforts
 were directed to that end. she was reaching her fortieth year, her hair
 was turning grey, her charms were waning. poverty, degradation, a
 miserable old age, a return to the wretched surroundings of her childhood,
 such she knew to be the fate of many of her kind. there was nothing to be
 hoped for from the generosity of men. her lovers were leaving her.
 blackmail, speculation on the bourse, even the desperate expedient of a
 supposititious child, all these she tried as means of acquiring a
 competence. but fortune was shy of the widow. there was need for dispatch.
 the time was drawing near when it might be man's unkind privilege to put
 her scornfully aside as a thing spent and done with. she must bring down
 her bird, and that quickly. it was at this critical point in the widow's
 career, in the year , that she met at a public ball for the first time
 georges de saint pierre.()
 () for obvious reasons i have suppressed the real name of the widow's
lover.
 georges de saint pierre was twenty years of age when he made the
 acquaintance of the widow gras. he had lost his mother at an early age,
 and since then lived with relatives in the country. he was a young man of
 independent means, idle, of a simple, confiding and affectionate
 disposition. four months after his first meeting with the widow they met
 again. the end of the year  saw the commencement of an intimacy, which
 to all appearances was characterised by a more lasting and sincere
 affection than is usually associated with unions of this kind. there can
 be no doubt that during the three years the widow gras was the mistress of
 georges de saint pierre, she had succeeded in subjugating entirely the
 senses and the affection of her young lover. in spite of the twenty years
 between them, georges de saint pierre idolised his middle-aged mistress.
 she was astute enough to play not only the lover, but the mother to this
 motherless youth. after three years of intimacy he writes to her: "it is
 enough for me that you love me, because i don't weary you, and i, i love
 you with all my heart. i cannot bear to leave you. we will live happily
 together. you will always love me truly, and as for me, my loving care
 will ever protect you. i don't know what would become of me if i did not
 feel that your love watched over me." the confidence of georges in the
 widow was absolute. when, in , he spent six months in egypt, he made
 her free of his rooms in paris, she was at liberty to go there when she
 liked; he trusted her entirely, idolised her. whatever her faults, he was
 blind to them. "your form," he writes, "is ever before my eyes; i wish i
 could enshrine your pure heart in gold and crystal."
 the widow's conquest, to all appearances, was complete. but georges was
 very young. he had a family anxious for his future; they knew of his
 liaison; they would be hopeful, no doubt, of one day breaking it off and
 of marrying him to some desirable young person. from the widow's point of
 view the situation lacked finality. how was that to be secured?
 one day, toward the end of the year , after the return of georges from
 egypt, the widow happened to be at the house of a friend, a ballet dancer.
 she saw her friend lead into the room a young man; he was sightless, and
 her friend with tender care guided him to a seat on the sofa. the widow
 was touched by the spectacle. when they were alone, she inquired of her
 friend the reason of her solicitude for the young man. "i love this victim
 of nature," she replied, "and look after him with every care. he is young,
 rich, without family, and is going to marry me. like you, i am just on
 forty; my hair is turning grey, my youth vanishing. i shall soon be cast
 adrift on the sea, a wreck. this boy is the providential spar to which i
 am going to cling that i may reach land in safety." "you mean, then," said
 the widow, "that you will soon be beyond the reach of want?" "yes,"
 answered the friend, "i needn't worry any more about the future."
 "i congratulate you," said the widow, "and what is more, your lover will
 never see you grow old."
 to be cast adrift on the sea and to have found a providential spar! the
 widow was greatly impressed by her friend's rare good fortune. indeed, her
 experience gave the widow furiously to think, as she revolved in her brain
 various expedients by which georges de saint pierre might become the
 "providential spar" in her own impending wreck. the picture of the blind
 young man tenderly cared for, dependent utterly on the ministrations of
 his devoted wife, fixed itself in the widow's mind; there was something
 inexpressibly pathetic in the picture, whilst its practical significance
 had its sinister appeal to one in her situation.
 at this point in the story there appears on the scene a character as
 remarkable in his way as the widow herself, remarkable at least for his
 share in the drama that is to follow. nathalis gaudry, of humble
 parentage, rude and uncultivated, had been a playmate of the widow when
 she was a child in her parents' house.
 they had grown up together, but, after gaudry entered the army, had lost
 sight of each other. gaudry served through the italian war of ,
 gaining a medal for valour. in  he had married.
 eleven years later his wife died, leaving him with two children. he came
 to paris and obtained employment in an oil refinery at saint denis. his
 character was excellent; he was a good workman, honest, hard-working, his
 record unblemished. when he returned to paris, gaudry renewed his
 friendship with the companion of his youth. but jeanne brecourt was now
 jeanne de la cour, living in refinement and some luxury, moving in a
 sphere altogether remote from and unapproachable by the humble workman in
 an oil refinery. he could do no more than worship from afar this strange
 being, to him wonderfully seductive in her charm and distinction.
 on her side the widow was quite friendly toward her homely admirer. she
 refused to marry him, as he would have wished, but she did her best
 without success to marry him to others of her acquaintance. neither a
 sempstress nor an inferior actress could she persuade, for all her zeal,
 to unite themselves with a hand in an oil mill, a widower with two
 children. it is typical of the widow's nervous energy that she should have
 undertaken so hopeless a task. in the meantime she made use of her
 admirer. on sundays he helped her in her apartment, carried coals, bottled
 wine, scrubbed the floors, and made himself generally useful. he was
 supposed by those about the house to be her brother. occasionally, in the
 absence of a maid, the widow allowed him to attend on her personally, even
 to assist her in her toilette and perform for her such offices as one
 woman would perform for another. the man soon came to be madly in love
 with the woman; his passion, excited but not gratified, enslaved and
 consumed him. to some of his fellow-workmen who saw him moody and
 preoccupied, he confessed that he ardently desired to marry a friend of
 his childhood, not a working woman but a lady.
 such was the situation and state of mind of nathalis gaudry when, in
 november, , he received a letter from the widow, in which she wrote,
 "come at once. i want you on a matter of business. tell your employer it
 is a family affair; i will make up your wages." in obedience to this
 message gaudry was absent from the distillery from the th to the rd of
 november.
 the "matter of business" about which the widow wished to consult with
 gaudry turned out to be a scheme of revenge. she told him that she had
 been basely defrauded by a man to whom she had entrusted money. she
 desired to be revenged on him, and could think of no better way than to
 strike at his dearest affections by seriously injuring his son. this she
 proposed to do with the help of a knuckle-duster, which she produced and
 gave to gaudry. armed with this formidable weapon, gaudry was to strike
 her enemy's son so forcibly in the pit of the stomach as to disable him
 for life. the widow offered to point out to gaudry the young man whom he
 was to attack. she took him outside the young man's club and showed him
 his victim. he was georges de saint pierre.
 the good fortune of her friend, the ballet-dancer, had proved a veritable
 toxin in the intellectual system of the widow gras. the poison of envy,
 disappointment, suspicion, apprehension had entered into her soul. of what
 use to her was a lover, however generous and faithful, who was free to
 take her up and lay her aside at will? but such was her situation relative
 to georges de saint pierre. she remembered that the wounded pigeon, as
 long as it was dependent on her kind offices, had been compelled to stay
 by her side; recovered, it had flown away. only a pigeon, maimed beyond
 hope of recovery, could she be sure of compelling to be hers for all time,
 tied to her by its helpless infirmity, too suffering and disfigured to be
 lured from its captivity. and so, in accordance with her philosophy of
 life, the widow, by a blow in the pit of the stomach with a
 knuckle-duster, was to bring down her bird which henceforth would be
 tended and cared for by "the charmer" to her own satisfaction and the
 admiration of all beholders.
 for some reason, the natural reluctance of gaudry, or perhaps a feeling of
 compunction in the heart of the widow, this plan was not put into
 immediate execution. possibly she hesitated before adopting a plan more
 cruel, more efficacious. her hesitation did not last long.
 with the dawn of the year  the vigilant apprehension of the widow was
 roused by the tone of m. de saint pierre's letters. he wrote from his home
 in the country, "i cannot bear leaving you, and i don't mean to. we will
 live together." but he adds that he is depressed by difficulties with his
 family, "not about money or business but of a kind he can only communicate
 to her verbally." to the widow it was clear that these difficulties must
 relate to the subject of marriage. the character of georges was not a
 strong one; sooner or later he might yield to the importunities of his
 family; her reign would be ended, a modest and insufficient pension the
 utmost she could hope for. she had passed the meridian of her life as a
 charmer of men, her health was giving way, she was greedy, ambitious,
 acquisitive. in january she asked her nephew, who worked as a gilder, to
 get her some vitriol for cleaning her copper. he complied with her
 request.
 during jeanne de la cour's brief and unsuccessful appearance as an actress
 she had taken part in a play with the rather cumbrous title, who puts out
 the eyes must pay for them. the widow may have forgotten this event; its
 occurrence so many years before may have been merely a sinister
 coincidence. but the incident of the ballet-dancer and her sightless lover
 was fresh in her mind.
 early in january the widow wrote to georges, who was in the country, and
 asked him to take her to the masked ball at the opera on the th. her
 lover was rather surprised at her request, nor did he wish to appear with
 her at so public a gathering. "i don't understand," he writes, "why you
 are so anxious to go to the opera. i can't see any real reason for your
 wanting to tire yourself out at such a disreputable gathering. however, if
 you are happy and well, and promise to be careful, i will take you. i
 would be the last person, my dear little wife, to deny you anything that
 would give you pleasure." but for some reason georges was unhappy,
 depressed. some undefined presentiment of evil seems to have oppressed
 him. his brother noticed his preoccupation.
 he himself alludes to it in writing to his mistress: "i am depressed this
 evening. for a very little i could break down altogether and give way to
 tears. you can't imagine what horrid thoughts possess me. if i felt your
 love close to me, i should be less sad." against his better inclination
 georges promised to take the widow to the ball on the th. he was to come
 to paris on the night of the th.
 on the afternoon of january , gaudry called to see the widow. there had
 been an accident at the distillery that morning, and work was suspended
 for three days. the widow showed gaudry the bottle containing the vitriol
 which her nephew had procured for her use. she was ill, suffering, she
 said; the only thing that could make her well again would be the execution
 of her revenge on the son of the man who had defrauded her so wickedly:
 "make him suffer, here are the means, and i swear i will be yours." she
 dropped a little of the vitriol on to the floor to show its virulent
 effect. at first gaudry was shocked, horrified. he protested that he was a
 soldier, that he could not do such a deed; he suggested that he should
 provoke the young man to a duel and kill him. "that is no use," said the
 widow, always sensitive to social distinctions; "he is not of your class,
 he would refuse to fight with you." mad with desire for the woman, his
 senses irritated and excited, the ultimate gratification of his passion
 held alluringly before him, the honest soldier consented to play the
 cowardly ruffian. the trick was done. the widow explained to her
 accomplice his method of proceeding. the building in the rue de boulogne,
 in which the widow had her apartment, stood at the end of a drive some
 twenty-seven and a half yards long and five and a half yards wide. about
 half-way up the drive, on either side, there were two small houses, or
 pavilions, standing by themselves and occupied by single gentlemen. the
 whole was shut off from the street by a large gate, generally kept closed,
 in which a smaller gate served to admit persons going in or out. according
 to the widow's plan, the young man, her enemy's son, was to take her to
 the ball at the opera on the night of january . gaudry was to wait in
 her apartment until their return. when he heard the bell ring, which
 communicated with the outer gate, he was to come down, take his place in
 the shadow of one of the pavilions on either side of the drive, and from
 the cover of this position fling in the face of the young man the vitriol
 which she had given him. the widow herself, under the pretence of closing
 the smaller gate, would be well behind the victim, and take care to leave
 the gate open so that gaudry could make his escape.
 in spite of his reluctance, his sense of foreboding, georges de saint
 pierre came to paris on the night of the th, which he spent at the
 widow's apartment. he went to his own rooms on the morning of the th.
 this eventful day, which, to quote iago, was either to "make or fordo
 quite" the widow, found her as calm, cool and deliberate in the execution
 of her purpose as the ancient himself. gaudry came to her apartment about
 five o'clock in the afternoon. the widow showed him the vitriol and gave
 him final directions. she would, she said, return from the ball about
 three o'clock in the morning. gaudry was then sent away till ten o'clock,
 as georges was dining with her. he returned at half-past ten and found the
 widow dressing, arraying herself in a pink domino and a blonde wig. she
 was in excellent spirits. when georges came to fetch her, she put gaudry
 into an alcove in the drawing-room which was curtained off from the rest
 of the room. always thoughtful, she had placed a stool there that he might
 rest himself. gaudry could hear her laughing and joking with her lover.
 she reproached him playfully with hindering her in her dressing. to keep
 him quiet, she gave him a book to read, montaigne's "essays." georges
 opened it and read the thirty-fifth chapter of the second book, the essay
 on "three good women," which tells how three brave women of antiquity
 endured death or suffering in order to share their husbands' fate.
 curiously enough, the essay concludes with these words, almost prophetic
 for the unhappy reader: "i am enforced to live, and sometimes to live is
 magnanimity." whilst georges went to fetch a cab, the widow released
 gaudry from his place of concealment, exhorted him to have courage, and
 promised him, if he succeeded, the accomplishment of his desire. and so
 the gay couple departed for the ball. there the widow's high spirits, her
 complete enjoyment, were remarked by more than one of her acquaintances;
 she danced one dance with her lover, and with another young man made an
 engagement for the following week.
 meanwhile, at the rue de boulogne, gaudry sat and waited in the widow's
 bedroom. from the window he could see the gate and the lights of the cab
 that was to bring the revellers home. the hours passed slowly. he tried to
 read the volume of montaigne where georges had left it open, but the words
 conveyed little to him, and he fell asleep. between two and three o'clock
 in the morning he was waked by the noise of wheels. they had returned. he
 hurried downstairs and took up his position in the shadow of one of the
 pavilions. as georges de saint pierre walked up the drive alone, for the
 widow had stayed behind to fasten the gate, he thought he saw the figure
 of a man in the darkness. the next moment he was blinded by the burning
 liquid flung in his face. the widow had brought down her pigeon.
 at first she would seem to have succeeded perfectly in her attempt.
 georges was injured for life, the sight of one eye gone, that of the other
 threatened, his face sadly disfigured. neither he nor anyone else
 suspected the real author of the crime. it was believed that the
 unfortunate man had been mistaken for some other person, and made by
 accident the victim of an act of vengeance directed against another.
 georges was indeed all the widow's now, lodged in her own house to nurse
 and care for. she undertook the duty with every appearance of affectionate
 devotion. the unhappy patient was consumed with gratitude for her untiring
 solicitude; thirty nights she spent by his bedside. his belief in her was
 absolute. it was his own wish that she alone should nurse him. his family
 were kept away, any attempts his relatives or friends made to see or
 communicate with him frustrated by the zealous widow.
 it was this uncompromising attitude on her part toward the friends of
 georges, and a rumour which reached the ears of one of them that she
 intended as soon as possible to take her patient away to italy, that
 sounded the first note of danger to her peace of mind. this friend
 happened to be acquainted with the son of one of the deputy public
 prosecutors in paris. to that official he confided his belief that there
 were suspicious circumstances in the case of georges de saint pierre. the
 judicial authorities were informed and the case placed in the hands of an
 examining magistrate. on february , nearly a month after the crime, the
 magistrate, accompanied by mace, then a commissary of police, afterwards
 head of the detective department, paid a visit to the rue de boulogne.
 their reception was not cordial. it was only after they had made known
 their official character that they got audience of the widow. she entered
 the room, carrying in her hand a surgical spray, with which she played
 nervously while the men of the law asked to see her charge. she replied
 that it was impossible. mace placed himself in front of the door by which
 she had entered, and told her that her attitude was not seemly. "leave
 that spray alone," he said; "it might shoot over us, and then perhaps we
 should be sprinkled as m. de saint pierre was." from that moment, writes
 mace, issue was joined between the widow and himself.
 the magistrate insisted on seeing the patient. he sat by his bedside. m.
 de saint pierre told him that, having no enemies, he was sure he had been
 the victim of some mistake, and that, as he claimed no damages for his
 injuries, he did not wish his misfortune to be made public. he wanted to
 be left alone with his brave and devoted nurse, and to be spared the
 nervous excitement of a meeting with his family. he intended, he added, to
 leave paris shortly for change of scene and air. the widow cut short the
 interview on the ground that her patient was tired.
 it was inhuman, she said, to make him suffer so. the magistrate, before
 leaving, asked her whither she intended taking her patient. she replied,
 "to italy." that, said the magistrate, would be impossible until his
 inquiry was closed. in the meantime she might take him to any place within
 the department of the seine; but she must be prepared to be under the
 surveillance of m. mace, who would have the right to enter her house
 whenever he should think it expedient. with this disconcerting
 intelligence the men of the law took leave of the widow.
 she was no longer to be left in undisturbed possession of her prize. her
 movements were watched by two detectives. she was seen to go to the
 bachelor lodgings of georges and take away a portable desk, which
 contained money and correspondence. more mysterious, however, was a visit
 she paid to the charonne cemetery, where she had an interview with an
 unknown, who was dressed in the clothes of a workman. she left the
 cemetery alone, and the detectives lost track of her companion. this
 meeting took place on february . shortly after the widow left paris with
 georges de saint pierre for the suburb of courbevoie.
 mace had elicited certain facts from the porter at the rue de boulogne and
 other witnesses, which confirmed his suspicion that the widow had played a
 sinister part in her lover's misfortune. her insistence that he should
 take her to the ball on january ; the fact that, contrary to the
 ordinary politeness of a gentleman, he was walking in front of her at the
 time of the attack; and that someone must have been holding the gate open
 to enable the assailant to escape it was a heavy gate, which, if left to
 itself after being opened, would swing too quickly on its hinges and shut
 of its own accord—these facts were sufficient to excite suspicion.
 the disappearance, too, of the man calling himself her brother, who had
 been seen at her apartment on the afternoon of the th, coupled with the
 mysterious interview in the cemetery, suggested the possibility of a crime
 in which the widow had had the help of an accomplice. to facilitate
 investigation it was necessary to separate the widow from her lover. the
 examining magistrate, having ascertained from a medical report that such a
 separation would not be hurtful to the patient, ordered the widow to be
 sent back to paris, and the family of m. de saint pierre to take her
 place. the change was made on march . on leaving courbevoie the widow was
 taken to the office of mace. there the commissary informed her that she
 must consider herself under provisional arrest. "but who," she asked
 indignantly, "is to look after my georges?" "his family," was the curt
 reply. the widow, walking up and down the room like a panther, stormed and
 threatened. when she had in some degree recovered herself, mace asked her
 certain questions. why had she insisted on her lover going to the ball?
 she had done nothing of the kind. how was it his assailant had got away so
 quickly by the open gate? she did not know. what was the name and address
 of her reputed brother? she was not going to deliver an honest father of a
 family into the clutches of the police. what was the meaning of her visit
 to the charonne cemetery? she went there to pray, not to keep
 assignations. "and if you want to know," she exclaimed, "i have had
 typhoid fever, which makes me often forget things. so i shall say nothing
 more—nothing—nothing."
 taken before the examining magistrate, her attitude continued to be
 defiant and arrogant. "your cleverest policemen," she told the magistrate,
 "will never find any evidence against me. think well before you send me to
 prison. i am not the woman to live long among thieves and prostitutes."
 before deciding finally whether the widow should be thrown into such
 uncongenial society, the magistrate ordered mace to search her apartment
 in the rue de boulogne.
 on entering the apartment the widow asked that all the windows should be
 opened. "let in the air," she said; "the police are coming in; they make a
 nasty smell." she was invited to sit down while the officers made their
 search. her letters and papers were carefully examined; they presented a
 strange mixture of order and disorder. carefully kept account books of her
 personal expenses were mixed up with billets dous, paints and pomades,
 moneylenders' circulars, belladonna and cantharides. but most astounding
 of all were the contents of the widows' prie-dieu. in this devotional
 article of furniture were stored all the inmost secrets of her profligate
 career. affectionate letters from the elderly gentleman on whom she had
 imposed a supposititious child lay side by side with a black-edged card,
 on which was written the last message of a young lover who had killed
 himself on her account. "jeanne, in the flush of my youth i die because of
 you, but i forgive you.—m." with these genuine outpourings of
 misplaced affection were mingled the indecent verses of a more vulgar
 admirer, and little jars of hashish. the widow, unmoved by this rude
 exposure of her way of life, only broke her silence to ask mace the
 current prices on the stock exchange.
 one discovery, however, disturbed her equanimity. in the drawer of a
 cupboard, hidden under some linen, mace found a leather case containing a
 sheaf of partially-burnt letters. as he was about to open it the widow
 protested that it was the property of m. de saint pierre. regardless of
 her protest, mace opened the case, and, looking through the letters, saw
 that they were addressed to m. de saint pierre and were plainly of an
 intimate character. "i found them on the floor near the stove in the
 dining-room," said the widow, "and i kept them. i admit it was a wrong
 thing to do, but georges will forgive me when he knows why i did it." from
 his better acquaintance with her character mace surmised that an action
 admitted by the widow to be "wrong" was in all probability something
 worse. without delay he took the prisoner back to his office, and himself
 left for courbevoie, there to enlighten, if possible, her unhappy victim
 as to the real character of his enchantress.
 the interview was a painful one. the lover refused to hear a word against
 his mistress. "jeanne is my antigone," he said. "she has lavished on me
 all her care, her tenderness, her love, and she believes in god." mace
 told him of her past, of the revelations contained in the prie-dieu of
 this true believer, but he could make no impression. "i forgive her past,
 i accept her present, and please understand me, no one has the power to
 separate me from her." it was only when mace placed in his hands the
 bundle of burnt letters, that he might feel what he could not see, and
 read him some passages from them, that the unhappy man realised the full
 extent of his mistress' treachery. feeling himself dangerously ill, dying
 perhaps, m. de saint pierre had told the widow to bring from his rooms to
 the rue de boulogne the contents of his private desk. it contained some
 letters compromising to a woman's honour. these he was anxious to destroy
 before it was too late. as he went through the papers, his eyes bandaged,
 he gave them to the widow to throw into the stove. he could hear the fire
 burning and feel its warmth. he heard the widow take up the tongs. he
 asked her why she did so. she answered that it was to keep the burning
 papers inside the stove. now from mace he learnt the real truth. she had
 used the tongs to take out some of the letters half burnt, letters which
 in her possession might be one day useful instruments for levying
 blackmail on her lover. "to blind me," exclaimed m. de saint pierre, "to
 torture me, and then profit by my condition to lie to me, to betray me—it's
 infamous—infamous!" his dream was shattered. mace had succeeded in
 his task; the disenchantment of m. de saint pierre was complete. that
 night the fastidious widow joined the thieves and prostitutes in the st.
 lazare prison.
 it was all very well to imprison the widow, but her participation in the
 outrage on m. de saint pierre was by no means established.
 the reputed brother, who had been in the habit of attending on her at the
 rue de boulogne, still eluded the searches of the police. in silence lay
 the widow's only hope of baffling her enemies. unfortunately for the
 widow, confinement told on her nerves. she became anxious, excited. her
 very ignorance of what was going on around her, her lover's silence made
 her apprehensive; she began to fear the worst. at length—the widow
 always had an itch for writing—she determined to communicate at all
 costs with gaudry and invoke his aid. she wrote appealing to him to come
 forward and admit that he was the man the police were seeking, for
 sheltering whom she had been thrown into prison. she drew a harrowing
 picture of her sufferings in jail. she had refused food and been forcibly
 fed; she would like to dash her head against the walls. if any misfortune
 overtake gaudry, she promises to adopt his son and leave him a third of
 her property. she persuaded a fellow-prisoner; an italian dancer
 undergoing six months' imprisonment for theft, who was on the point of
 being released, to take the letter and promise to deliver it to gaudry at
 saint denis. on her release the dancer told her lover of her promise. he
 refused to allow her to mix herself up in such a case, and destroyed the
 letter. then the dancer blabbed to others, until her story reached the
 ears of the police. mace sent for her. at first she could remember only
 that the name nathalis occurred in the letter, but after visiting
 accidentally the cathedral at saint denis, she recollected that this
 nathalis lived there, and worked in an oil factory. it was easy after this
 for the police to trace gaudry. he was arrested. at his house, letters
 from the widow were found, warning him not to come to her apartment, and
 appointing to meet him in charonne cemetery. gaudry made a full
 confession. it was his passion for the widow, and a promise on her part to
 marry him, which, he said, had induced him to perpetrate so abominable a
 crime. he was sent to the mazas prison.
 in the meantime the widow gras was getting more and more desperate. her
 complete ignorance tormented her. at last she gave up all hope, and twice
 attempted suicide with powdered glass and verdigris. on may  the
 examining magistrate confronted her with gaudry. the man told his story,
 the widow feigned surprise that the "friend of her childhood" should
 malign her so cruelly. but to her desperate appeals gaudry would only
 reply, "it is too late!" they were sent for trial.
 the trial of the widow and her accomplice opened before the paris assize
 court on july , , and lasted three days. the widow was defended by
 lachaud, one of the greatest criminal advocates of france, the defender of
 madame lafarge, la pommerais, troppmann, and marshal bazaine. m. demange
 (famous later for his defence of dreyfus) appeared for gaudry. the case
 had aroused considerable interest. among those present at the trial were
 halevy, the dramatist, and mounet-sully and coquelin, from the comedie
 francaise. fernand rodays thus described the widow in the figaro: "she
 looks more than her age, of moderate height, well made, neither blatant
 nor ill at ease, with nothing of the air of a woman of the town. her hands
 are small. her bust is flat, and her back round, her hair quite white.
 beneath her brows glitter two jet-black eyes—the eyes of a tigress,
 that seem to breathe hatred and revenge."
 gaudry was interrogated first. asked by the president the motive of his
 crime, he answered, "i was mad for madame gras; i would have done anything
 she told me. i had known her as a child, i had been brought up with her.
 then i saw her again. i loved her, i was mad for her, i couldn't resist
 it. her wish was law to me."
 asked if gaudry had spoken the truth, the widow said that he lied. the
 president asked what could be his motive for accusing her unjustly. the
 widow was silent. lachaud begged her to answer. "i cannot," she faltered.
 the president invited her to sit down. after a pause the widow seemed to
 recover her nerve.
 president: was gaudry at your house while you were at the ball?
 widow: no, no! he daren't look me in the face and say so.
 president: but he is looking at you now.
 widow: no, he daren't! (she fixes her eyes on gaudry, who lowers his
 head.)
 president: i, whose duty it is to interrogate you, look you in the face
 and repeat my question: was gaudry at your house at half-past ten that
 night?
 widow: no.
 president: you hear her, gaudry?
 gaudry: yes, monsieur, but i was there.
 widow: it is absolutely impossible! can anyone believe me guilty of such a
 thing.
 president: woman gras, you prefer to feign indignation and deny
 everything. you have the right. i will read your examination before the
 examining magistrate. i see m. lachaud makes a gesture, but i must beg the
 counsel for the defence not to impart unnecessary passion into these
 proceedings.
 lachaud: my gesture was merely meant to express that the woman gras is on
 her trial, and that under the circumstances her indignation is natural.
 president: very good.
 the appearance in the witness box of the widow's unhappy victim evoked
 sympathy. he gave his evidence quietly, without resentment or indignation.
 as he told his story the widow, whose eyes were fixed on him all the time,
 murmured: "georges! georges! defend me! defend me!" "i state the facts,"
 he replied.
 the prisoners could only defend themselves by trying to throw on each
 other the guilt of the crime. m. demange represented gaudry as acting
 under the influence of his passion for the widow gras. lachaud, on the
 other hand, attributed the crime solely to gaudry's jealousy of the
 widow's lover, and contended that he was the sole author of the outrage.
 the jury by their verdict assigned to the widow the greater share of
 responsibility. she was found guilty in the full degree, but to gaudry
 were accorded extenuating circumstances. the widow was condemned to
 fifteen years' penal servitude, her accomplice to five years'
 imprisonment.
 it is dreadful to think how very near the widow gras came to accomplishing
 successfully her diabolical crime. a little less percipitancy on her part,
 and she might have secured the fruits of her cruelty. her undoubted powers
 of fascination, in spite of the fiendishness of her real character, are
 doubly proved by the devotion of her lover and the guilt of her
 accomplice. at the same time, with that strange contradiction inherent in
 human nature, the jekyll and hyde elements which, in varying degree, are
 present in all men and women, the widow gras had a genuine love for her
 young sister. her hatred of men was reasoned, deliberate, merciless and
 implacable. there is something almost sadistic in the combination in her
 character of erotic sensibility with extreme cruelty.
 vitalis and marie boyer
 i found the story of this case in a brochure published in paris as one of
 a series of modern causes celebres. i have compared it with the reports of
 the trial in the gazette des tribunaux.
 i in the may of , in the town of montpellier, m. boyer, a retired
 merchant, some forty-six years of age, lay dying. for some months previous
 to his death he had been confined to his bed, crippled by rheumatic gout.
 as the hour of his death drew near, m. boyer was filled with a great
 longing to see his daughter, marie, a girl of fifteen, and embrace her for
 the last time. the girl was being educated in a convent at marseilles. one
 of m. boyer's friends offered to go there to fetch her. on arriving at the
 convent, he was told that marie had become greatly attracted by the
 prospect of a religious life. "you are happy," the mother superior had
 written to her mother, "very happy never to have allowed the impure breath
 of the world to have soiled this little flower. she loves you and her
 father more than one can say." her father's friend found the girl dressed
 in the costume of a novice, and was told that she had expressed her desire
 to take, one day, her final vows. he informed marie of her father's dying
 state, of his earnest wish to see her for the last time, and told her that
 he had come to take her to his bedside. "take me away from here?" she
 exclaimed. the mother superior, surprised at her apparent reluctance to
 go, impressed on her the duty of acceding to her father's wish. to the
 astonishment of both, marie refused to leave the convent. if she could
 save her father's life, she said, she would go, but, as that was
 impossible and she dreaded going out into the world again, she would stay
 and pray for her father in the chapel of the convent, where her prayers
 would be quite as effective as by his bedside. in vain the friend and the
 mother superior tried to bend her resolution.
 happily m. boyer died before he could learn of his daughter's singular
 refusal. but it had made an unfavourable impression on the friend's mind.
 he looked on marie as a girl without real feeling, an egoist, her religion
 purely superficial, hiding a cold and selfish disposition; he felt some
 doubt as to the future development of her character.
 m. boyer left a widow, a dark handsome woman, forty years of age.
 some twenty years before his death, marie salat had come to live with m.
 boyer as a domestic servant. he fell in love with her, she became his
 mistress, and a few months before the birth of marie, m. boyer made her
 his wife. madame boyer was at heart a woman of ardent and voluptuous
 passions that only wanted opportunity to become careless in their
 gratification. her husband's long illness gave her such an opportunity. at
 the time of his death she was carrying on an intrigue with a bookseller's
 assistant, leon vitalis, a young man of twenty-one. her bed-ridden
 husband, ignorant of her infidelity, accepted gratefully the help of
 vitalis, whom his wife described as a relative, in the regulation of his
 affairs. at length the unsuspecting boyer died. the night of his death
 madame boyer spent with her lover.
 the mother had never felt any great affection for her only child.
 during her husband's lifetime she was glad to have marie out of the way at
 the convent. but the death of m. boyer changed the situation. he had left
 almost the whole of his fortune, about , francs, to his daughter,
 appointing her mother her legal guardian with a right to the enjoyment of
 the income on the capital until marie should come of age. madame boyer had
 not hitherto taken her daughter's religious devotion very seriously. but
 now that the greater part of her husband's fortune was left to marie, she
 realised that, should her daughter persist in her intention of taking the
 veil, that fortune would in a very few years pass into the hands of the
 sisterhood. without delay madame boyer exercised her authority, and
 withdrew marie from the convent. the girl quitted it with every
 demonstration of genuine regret.
 marie boyer when she left the convent was growing into a tall and
 attractive woman, her figure slight and elegant, her hair and eyes dark,
 dainty and charming in her manner. removed from the influences of convent
 life, her religious devotion became a thing of the past. in her new
 surroundings she gave herself up to the enjoyments of music and the
 theatre. she realised that she was a pretty girl, whose beauty well repaid
 the hours she now spent in the adornment of her person. the charms of
 marie were not lost on leon vitalis. mean and significant in appearance,
 vitalis would seem to have been one of those men who, without any great
 physical recommendation, have the knack of making themselves attractive to
 women. after her husband's death madame boyer had yielded herself
 completely to his influence and her own undoubted passion for him. she had
 given him the money with which to purchase a business of his own as a
 second-hand bookseller. this trade the enterprising and greedy young man
 combined with money-lending and he clandestine sale of improper books and
 photographs. to such a man the coming of marie boyer was a significant
 event. she was younger, more attractive than her mother; in a very few
 years the whole of her father's fortune would be hers. slowly vitalis set
 himself to win the girl's affections. the mother's suspicions were
 aroused; her jealousy was excited. she sent marie to complete her
 education at a convent school in lyons. this was in the april of . by
 this time marie and vitalis had become friendly enough to arrange to
 correspond clandestinely during the girl's absence from home. marie was so
 far ignorant of the relations of vitalis with her mother.
 her daughter sent away, madame boyer surrendered herself with complete
 abandonment to her passion for her lover. at castelnau, close to
 montpellier, she bought a small country house. there she could give full
 rein to her desire. to the scandal of the occasional passerby she and her
 lover would bathe in a stream that passed through the property, and sport
 together on the grass. indoors there were always books from vitalis'
 collection to stimulate their lascivious appetites. this life of pastoral
 impropriety lasted until the middle of august, when marie boyer came home
 from lyons.
 vitalis would have concealed from the young girl as long as he could the
 nature of his relations with madame boyer, but his mistress by her own
 deliberate conduct made all concealment impossible. whether from the utter
 recklessness of her passion for vitalis, or a desire to kill in her
 daughter's heart any attachment which she may have felt towards her lover,
 the mother paraded openly before her daughter the intimacy of her
 relations with vitalis, and with the help of the literature with which the
 young bookseller supplied her, set about corrupting her child's mind to
 her own depraved level. the effect of her extraordinary conduct was,
 however, the opposite to what she had intended. the mind of the young girl
 was corrupted; she was familiarised with vice. but in her heart she did
 not blame vitalis for what she saw and suffered; she pitied, she excused
 him. it was her mother whom she grew to hate, with a hate all the more
 determined for the cold passionless exterior beneath which it was
 concealed.
 madame boyer's deliberate display of her passion for vitalis served only
 to aggravate and intensify in marie boyer an unnatural jealousy that was
 fast growing up between mother and daughter.
 marie did not return to the school at lyons. in the winter of , madame
 boyer gave up the country house and, with her daughter, settled in one of
 the suburbs of montpellier. in the january of  a theft occurred in her
 household which obliged madame boyer to communicate with the police.
 spendthrift and incompetent in the management of her affairs, she was
 hoarding and suspicious about money itself. cash and bonds she would hide
 away in unexpected places, such as books, dresses, even a soup tureen. one
 of her most ingenious hiding places was a portrait of her late husband,
 behind which she concealed some bearer bonds in landed security, amounting
 to about , francs. one day in january these bonds disappeared. she
 suspected a theft, and informed the police. three days later she withdrew
 her complaint, and no more was heard of the matter. as marie and vitalis
 were the only persons who could have known her secret, the inference is
 obvious. when, later in the year, vitalis announced his intention of going
 to paris on business, his mistress expressed to him the hope that he would
 "have a good time" with her bonds. vitalis left for paris. but there was
 now a distinct understanding between marie and himself. vitalis had
 declared himself her lover and asked her to marry him. the following
 letter, written to him by marie boyer in the october of , shows her
 attitude toward his proposal:
 "i thank you very sincerely for your letter, which has given me very great
 pleasure, because it tells me that you are well. it sets my mind at rest,
 for my feelings towards you are the same as ever. i don't say they are
 those of love, for i don't know myself; i don't know what such feelings
 are. but i feel a real affection for you which may well turn to love. how
 should i not hold in affectionate remembrance one who has done everything
 for me? but love does not come to order. so i can't and don't wish to give
 any positive answer about our marriage—all depends on circumstances.
 i don't want any promise from you, i want you to be as free as i am. i am
 not fickle, you know me well enough for that. so don't ask me to give you
 any promise. you may find my letter a little cold. but i know too much of
 life to pledge myself lightly. i assure you i think on it often. sometimes
 i blush when i think what marriage means."
 madame boyer, displeased at the theft, had let her lover go without any
 great reluctance. no sooner had he gone than she began to miss him. life
 seemed dull without him. mother and daughter were united at least in their
 common regret at the absence of the young bookseller. to vary the monotony
 of existence, to find if possible a husband for her daughter, madame boyer
 decided to leave montpellier for marseilles, and there start some kind of
 business. the daughter, who foresaw greater amusement and pleasure in the
 life of a large city, assented willingly. on october , , they arrived
 at marseilles, and soon after madame bought at a price considerably higher
 than their value, two shops adjoining one another in the rue de la
 republique. one was a cheese shop, the other a milliner's.
 the mother arranged that she should look after the cheese shop, while her
 daughter presided over the milliner's. the two shops were next door to one
 another. behind the milliner's was a drawing-room, behind the cheese shop
 a kitchen; these two rooms communicated with each other by a large dark
 room at the back of the building. in the kitchen was a trap-door leading
 to a cellar. the two women shared a bedroom in an adjoining house.
 vitalis had opposed the scheme of his mistress to start shop-keeping in
 marseilles. he knew how unfitted she was to undertake a business of any
 kind. but neither mother nor daughter would relinquish the plan. it
 remained therefore to make the best of it. vitalis saw that he must get
 the business into his own hands; and to do that, to obtain full control of
 madame boyer's affairs, he must continue to play the lover to her. to the
 satisfaction of the two women, he announced his intention of coming to
 marseilles in the new year of . it was arranged that he should pass as
 a nephew of madame boyer, the cousin of marie. he arrived at marseilles on
 january , and received a cordial welcome. of the domestic arrangements
 that ensued, it is sufficient to say that they were calculated to whet the
 jealousy and inflame the hatred that marie felt towards her mother, who
 now persisted as before in parading before her daughter the intimacy of
 her relations with vitalis.
 in these circumstances vitalis succeeded in extracting from his mistress a
 power of attorney, giving him authority to deal with her affairs and sell
 the two businesses, which were turning out unprofitable. this done, he
 told marie, whose growing attachment to him, strange as it may seem, had
 turned to love, that now at last they could be free. he would sell the two
 shops, and with the money released by the sale they could go away
 to-gether. suddenly madame boyer fell ill, and was confined to her bed.
 left to themselves, the growing passion of marie boyer for vitalis
 culminated in her surrender. but for the sick mother the happiness of the
 lovers was complete. if only her illness were more serious, more likely to
 be fatal in its result! "if only god would take her!" said vitalis. "yes,"
 replied her daughter, "she has caused us so much suffering!"
 to madame boyer her illness had brought hours of torment, and at last
 remorse. she realised the duplicity of her lover, she knew that he meant
 to desert her for her daughter, she saw what wrong she had done that
 daughter, she suspected even that marie and vitalis were poisoning her.
 irreligious till now, her thoughts turned to religion. as soon as she
 could leave her bed she would go to mass and make atonement for her sin;
 she would recover her power of attorney, get rid of vitalis for good and
 all, and send her daughter back to a convent. but it was too late. nemesis
 was swift to overtake the hapless woman. try as he might, vitalis had
 found it impossible to sell the shops at anything but a worthless figure.
 he had no money of his own, with which to take marie away. he knew that
 her mother had resolved on his instant dismissal.
 as soon as madame boyer was recovered sufficiently to leave her bed, she
 turned on her former lover, denounced his treachery, accused him of
 robbing and swindling her, and bade him go without delay. to vitalis
 dismissal meant ruin, to marie it meant the loss of her lover. during her
 illness the two young people had wished madame boyer dead, but she had
 recovered. providence or nature having refused to assist vitalis, he
 resolved to fall back on art. he gave up a whole night's rest to the
 consideration of the question. as a result of his deliberations he
 suggested to the girl of seventeen the murder of her mother. "this must
 end," said vitalis. "yes, it must," replied marie. vitalis asked her if
 she had any objection to such a crime. marie hesitated, the victim was her
 mother. vitalis reminded her what sort of a mother she had been to her.
 the girl said that she was terrified at the sight of blood; vitalis
 promised that her mother should be strangled. at length marie consented.
 that night on some slight pretext madame boyer broke out into violent
 reproaches against her daughter. she little knew that every reproach she
 uttered served only to harden in her daughter's heart her unnatural
 resolve.
 on the morning of march  madame boyer rose early to go to mass.
 before she went out, she reminded vitalis that this was his last day in
 her service, that when she returned she would expect to find him gone. it
 was after seven when she left the house. the lovers had no time to lose;
 the deed must be done immediately on the mother's return. they arranged
 that vitalis should get rid of the shop-boy, and that, as soon as he had
 gone, marie should shut and lock the front doors of the two shops. at one
 o'clock madame boyer came back. she expressed her astonishment and disgust
 that vitalis still lingered, and threatened to send for the police to turn
 him out. vitalis told the shop-boy that he could go away for a few hours;
 they had some family affairs to settle. the boy departed. madame boyer,
 tired after her long morning in the town, was resting on a sofa in the
 sitting-room, at the back of the milliner's shop. vitalis entered the
 room, and after a few heated words, struck her a violent blow in the
 chest. she fell back on the sofa, calling to her daughter to come to her
 assistance. the daughter sought to drown her mother's cries by banging the
 doors, and opening and shutting drawers. vitalis, who was now trying to
 throttle his victim, called to marie to shut the front doors of the two
 shops.
 to do so marie had to pass through the sitting-room, and was a witness to
 the unsuccessful efforts of vitalis to strangle her mother. having closed
 the doors, she retired into the milliner's shop to await the issue. after
 a few moments her lover called to her for the large cheese knife; he had
 caught up a kitchen knife, but in his struggles it had slipped from his
 grasp. quickly marie fetched the knife and returned to the sitting-room.
 there a desperate struggle was taking place between the man and woman. at
 one moment it seemed as if madame boyer would get the better of vitalis,
 whom nature had not endowed greatly for work of this kind. marie came to
 his aid. she kicked and beat her mother, until at last the wretched
 creature released her hold and sank back exhausted. with the cheese knife,
 which her daughter had fetched, vitalis killed madame boyer.
 they were murderers now, the young lovers. what to do with the body? the
 boy would be coming back soon. the cellar under the kitchen seemed the
 obvious place of concealment. with the help of a cord the body was lowered
 into the cellar, and marie washed the floor of the sitting-room. the boy
 came back. he asked where madame boyer was. vitalis told him that she was
 getting ready to return to montpellier the same evening, and that he had
 arranged to go with her, but that he had no intention of doing so; he
 would accompany her to the station, he said, and then at the last moment,
 just as the train was starting, slip away and let her go on her journey
 alone. to the boy, who knew enough of the inner history of the household
 to enjoy the piquancy of the situation, such a trick seemed quite amusing.
 he went away picturing in his mind the scene at the railway station and
 its humorous possibilities.
 at seven o'clock vitalis and marie boyer were alone once more with the
 murdered woman. they had the whole night before them. vitalis had already
 considered the matter of the disposal of the body. he had bought a pick
 and spade. he intended to bury his former mistress in the soil under the
 cellar. after that had been done, he and marie would sell the business for
 what it would fetch, and go to brussels—an admirable plan, which two
 unforeseen circumstances defeated. the rue de la republique was built on a
 rock, blasted out for the purpose. the shop-boy had gone to the station
 that evening to enjoy the joke which, he believed, was to be played on his
 mistress.
 when vitalis tried to dig a grave into the ground beneath the cellar he
 realised the full horror of the disappointment. what was to be done? they
 must throw the body into the sea. but how to get it there? the crime of
 billoir, an old soldier, who the year before in paris had killed his
 mistress in a fit of anger and cut up her body, was fresh in the
 recollection of vitalis. the guilty couple decided to dismember the body
 of madame boyer and so disfigure her face as to render it unrecognisable.
 in the presence of marie, vitalis did this, and the two lovers set out at
 midnight to discover some place convenient for the reception of the
 remains. they found the harbour too busy for their purpose, and decided to
 wait until the morrow, when they would go farther afield. they returned
 home and retired for the night, occupying the bed in which madame boyer
 had slept the night before.
 on the morning of the th the lovers rose early, and a curious neighbour,
 looking through the keyhole, saw them counting joyously money and
 valuables, as they took them from madame boyer's cashbox. when the
 shop-boy arrived, he asked vitalis for news of madame boyer. vitalis told
 him that he had gone with her to the station, that she had taken the train
 to montpellier, and that, in accordance with his plan, he had given her
 the slip just as the train was starting. this the boy knew to be false: he
 had been to the station himself to enjoy the fun, and had seen neither
 vitalis nor madame boyer. he began to suspect some mystery. in the
 evening, when the shops had been closed, and he had been sent about his
 business, he waited and watched. in a short time he saw vitalis and marie
 boyer leave the house, the former dragging a hand-cart containing two
 large parcels, while marie walked by his side. they travelled some
 distance with their burden, leaving the city behind them, hoping to find
 some deserted spot along the coast where they could conceal the evidence
 of their crime. their nerves were shaken by meeting with a custom-house
 officer, who asked them what it was they had in the cart. vitalis answered
 that it was a traveller's luggage, and the officer let them pass on. but
 soon after, afraid to risk another such experience, the guilty couple
 turned out the parcels into a ditch, covered them with stones and sand,
 and hurried home.
 the next day, the shop-boy and the inquisitive neighbour having consulted
 together, went to the commissary of police and told him of the mysterious
 disappearance of madame boyer. the commissary promised to investigate the
 matter, and had just dismissed his informants when word was brought to him
 of the discovery, in a ditch outside marseilles, of two parcels containing
 human remains. he called back the boy and took him to view the body at the
 morgue. the boy was able, by the clothes, to identify the body as that of
 his late mistress. the commissary went straight to the shops in the rue de
 la republique, where he found the young lovers preparing for flight. at
 first they denied all knowledge of the crime, and said that madame boyer
 had gone to montpellier. they were arrested, and it was not long before
 they both confessed their guilt to the examining magistrate.
 vitalis and marie boyer were tried before the assize court at aix on july
 , . vitalis is described as mean and insignificant in appearance,
 thin, round-backed, of a bilious complexion; marie boyer as a pretty, dark
 girl, her features cold in expression, dainty and elegant. at her trial
 she seemed to be still so greatly under the influence of vitalis that
 during her interrogatory the president sent him out of court. to the
 examining magistrate marie boyer, in describing her mother's murder, had
 written, "i cannot think how i came to take part in it. i, who wouldn't
 have stayed in the presence of a corpse for all the money in the world."
 vitalis was condemned to death, and was executed on august . he died
 fearful and penitent, acknowledging his miserable career to be a warning
 to misguided youth. extenuating circumstances were accorded to marie
 boyer, and she was sentenced to penal servitude for life. her conduct in
 prison was so repentant and exemplary that she was released in .
 m. proal, a distinguished french judge, and the author of some important
 works on crime, acted as the examining magistrate in the case of vitalis
 and marie boyer. he thus sums up his impression of the two criminals:
 "here is an instance of how greed and baseness on the one side, lust and
 jealousy on the other, bring about by degrees a change in the characters
 of criminals, and, after some hesitation, the suggestion and
 accomplishment of parricide, is it necessary to seek an explanation of the
 crime in any psychic abnormality which is negatived to all appearances by
 the antecedents of the guilty pair? is it necessary to ask it of anatomy
 or physiology? is not the crime the result of moral degradation gradually
 asserting itself in two individuals, whose moral and intellectual
 faculties are the same as those of other men, but who fall, step by step,
 into vice and crime? it is by a succession of wrongful acts that a man
 first reaches the frontier of crime and then at length crosses it."
 the fenayrou case
 there is an account of this case in bataille "causes criminelles et
 mondaines" (), and in mace's book, "femmes criminelles." it is alluded
 to in "souvenirs d'un president d'assises," by berard des glajeux. the
 murder of the chemist aubert by marin fenayrou and his wife gabrielle was
 perpetrated near paris in the year . in its beginning the story is
 commonplace enough. fenayrou was the son of a small chemist in the south
 of france, and had come to paris from the aveyron department to follow his
 father's vocation. he obtained a situation as apprentice in the rue de la
 ferme des mathurins in the shop of a m. gibon. on the death of m. gibon
 his widow thought she saw in fenayrou a man capable of carrying on her
 late husband's business. she gave her daughter in marriage to her
 apprentice, and installed him in the shop. the ungrateful son-in-law, sure
 of his wife and his business and contrary to his express promise, turned
 the old lady out of the house. this occurred in the year , fenayrou
 being then thirty years of age, his wife, gabrielle, seventeen.
 they were an ill-assorted and unattractive couple. the man, a compound of
 coarse brutality and shrewd cunning, was at heart lazy and selfish, the
 woman a spoilt child, in whom a real want of feeling was supplied by a
 shallow sentimentalism. vain of the superior refinement conferred on her
 by a good middle-class education, she despised and soon came to loathe her
 coarse husband, and lapsed into a condition of disappointment and
 discontent that was only relieved superficially by an extravagant devotion
 to religious exercises.
 it was in , when the disillusionment of mme. fenayrou was complete,
 that her husband received into his shop a pupil, a youth of twenty-one,
 louis aubert. he was the son of a norman tradesman. the ambitious father
 had wished his son to enter the church, but the son preferred to be a
 chemist. he was a shrewd, hard-working fellow, with an eye to the main
 chance and a taste for pleasures that cost him nothing, jovial, but vulgar
 and self-satisfied, the kind of man who, having enjoyed the favours of
 woman, treats her with arrogance and contempt, till from loving she comes
 to loathe him—a characteristic example, according to m. bourget, of
 le faux homme a femmes. such was aubert, fenayrou's pupil. he was soon to
 become something more than pupil.
 fenayrou as chemist had not answered to the expectations of his
 mother-in-law. his innate laziness and love of coarse pleasures had
 asserted themselves. at first his wife had shared in the enjoyments, but
 as time went on and after the birth of their two children, things became
 less prosperous. she was left at home while fenayrou spent his time in
 drinking bocks of beer, betting and attending race-meetings. it was
 necessary, under these circumstances, that someone should attend to the
 business of the shop. in aubert fenayrou found a ready and willing
 assistant.
 from  to , save for an occasional absence for military service,
 aubert lived with the fenayrous, managing the business and making love to
 the bored and neglected wife, who after a few months became his mistress.
 did fenayrou know of this intrigue or not? that is a crucial question in
 the case. if he did not, it was not for want of warning from certain of
 his friends and neighbours, to whom the intrigue was a matter of common
 knowledge. did he refuse to believe in his wife's guilt? or, dependent as
 he was for his living on the exertions of his assistant, did he
 deliberately ignore it, relying on his wife's attractions to keep the
 assiduous aubert at work in the shop? in any case aubert's arrogance,
 which had increased with the consciousness of his importance to the
 husband and his conquest of the wife, led in august of , to a rupture.
 aubert left the fenayrous and bought a business of his own on the
 boulevard malesherbes.
 before his departure aubert had tried to persuade mme. gibon to sell up
 her son-in-law by claiming from him the unpaid purchase-money for her
 husband's shop. he represented fenayrou as an idle gambler, and hinted
 that he would find her a new purchaser. such an underhand proceeding was
 likely to provoke resentment if it should come to the ears of fenayrou.
 during the two years that elapsed between his departure from fenayrou's
 house and his murder, aubert had prospered in his shop on the boulevard
 malesherbes, whilst the fortunes of the fenayrous had steadily
 deteriorated.
 at the end of the year  fenayrou sold his shop and went with his
 family to live on one of the outer boulevards, that of gouvion-saint-cyr.
 he had obtained a post in a shady mining company, in which he had
 persuaded his mother-in-law to invest , francs. he had attempted also
 to make money by selling fradulent imitations of a famous table-water. for
 this offence, at the beginning of , he was condemned by the
 correctional tribunal of paris to three months' imprisonment and ,
 francs costs.
 in march of  the situation of the fenayrous was parlous, that of
 aubert still prosperous.
 since aubert's departure mme. fenayrou had entertained another lover, a
 gentleman on the staff of a sporting newspaper, one of fenayrou's turf
 acquaintances. this gentleman had found her a cold mistress, preferring
 the ideal to the real. as a murderess madame fenayrou overcame this
 weakness.
 if we are to believe fenayrou's story, the most critical day in his life
 was march , , for it was on that day, according to his account, that
 he learnt for the first time of his wife's intrigue with aubert. horrified
 and enraged at the discovery, he took from her her nuptial wreath, her
 wedding-ring, her jewellery, removed from its frame her picture in
 charcoal which hung in the drawing-room, and told her, paralysed with
 terror, that the only means of saving her life was to help him to murder
 her lover.
 two months later, with her assistance, this outraged husband accomplished
 his purpose with diabolical deliberation. he must have been well aware
 that, had he acted on the natural impulse of the moment and revenged
 himself then and there on aubert, he would have committed what is regarded
 by a french jury as the most venial of crimes, and would have escaped with
 little or no punishment. he preferred, for reasons of his own, to set
 about the commission of a deliberate and cold-blooded murder that bears
 the stamp of a more sinister motive than the vengeance of a wronged
 husband.
 the only step he took after the alleged confession of his wife on march 
 was to go to a commissary of police and ask him to recover from aubert
 certain letters of his wife's that were in his possession. this the
 commissary refused to do. mme. gibon, the mother-in-law, was sent to
 aubert to try to recover the letters, but aubert declined to give them up,
 and wrote to mme. fenayrou:
 "madame, to my displeasure i have had a visit this morning from your
 mother, who has come to my home and made a most unnecessary scene and
 reproached me with facts so serious that i must beg you to see me without
 delay. it concerns your honour and mine.... i have no fear of being
 confronted with your husband and yourself. i am ready, when you wish, to
 justify myself.... please do all you can to prevent a repetition of your
 mother's visit or i shall have to call in the police."
 it is clear that the fenayrous attached the utmost importance to the
 recovery of this correspondence, which disappeared with aubert's death.
 was the prime motive of the murder the recovery and destruction of these
 letters? was aubert possessed of some knowledge concerning the fenayrous
 that placed them at his mercy?
 it would seem so. to a friend who had warned him of the danger to which
 his intimacy with gabrielle fenayrou exposed him, aubert had replied,
 "bah! i've nothing to fear. i hold them in my power." the nature of the
 hold which aubert boasted that he possessed over these two persons remains
 the unsolved mystery of the case, "that limit of investigation," in the
 words of a french judge, "one finds in most great cases, beyond which
 justice strays into the unknown."
 that such a hold existed, aubert's own statement and the desperate
 attempts made by the fenayrous to get back these letters, would seem to
 prove beyond question. had aubert consented to return them, would he have
 saved his life? it seems probable. as it was, he was doomed. fenayrou
 hated him. they had had a row on a race-course, in the course of which
 aubert had humiliated his former master. more than this, aubert had
 boasted openly of his relations with mme. fenayrou, and the fact had
 reached the ears of the husband. fenayrou believed also, though
 erroneously, that aubert had informed against him in the matter of the
 table-water fraud. whether his knowledge of aubert's relations with his
 wife was recent or of long standing, he had other grounds of hate against
 his former pupil. he himself had failed in life, but he saw his rival
 prosperous, arrogant in his prosperity, threatening, dangerous to his
 peace of mind; he envied and feared as well as hated him. cruel, cunning
 and sinister, fenayrou spent the next two months in the meditation of a
 revenge that was not only to remove the man he feared, but was to give him
 a truly fiendish opportunity of satisfying his ferocious hatred.
 and the wife what of her share in the business? had she also come to hate
 aubert? or did she seek to expiate her guilt by assisting her husband in
 the punishment of her seducer? a witness at the trial described mme.
 fenayrou as "a soft paste" that could be moulded equally well to vice or
 virtue, a woman destitute of real feeling or strength of will, who, under
 the direction of her husband, carried out implicitly, precisely and
 carefully her part in an atrocious murder, whose only effort to prevent
 the commission of such a deed was to slip away into a church a few minutes
 before she was to meet the man she was decoying to his death, and pray
 that his murder might be averted.
 her religious sense, like the images in the hat of louis xi., was a source
 of comfort and consolation in the doing of evil, but powerless to restrain
 her from the act itself, in the presence of a will stronger than her own.
 at the time of his death aubert contemplated marriage, and had advertised
 for a wife. if mme. fenayrou was aware of this, it may have served to
 stimulate her resentment against her lover, but there seems little reason
 to doubt that, left to herself, she would never have had the will or the
 energy to give that resentment practical expression. it required the
 dictation of the vindictive and malevolent fenayrou to crystallise her
 hatred of aubert into a deliberate participation in his murder.
 eight or nine miles north-west of paris lies the small town of chatou, a
 pleasant country resort for tired parisians. here madeleine brohan, the
 famous actress, had inhabited a small villa, a two-storied building. at
 the beginning of  it was to let. in the april of that year a person of
 the name of "hess" agreed to take it at a quarterly rent of , francs,
 and paid  in advance. "hess" was no other than fenayrou—the villa
 that had belonged to madeleine brohan the scene chosen for aubert's
 murder. fenayrou was determined to spare no expense in the execution of
 his design: it was to cost him some , francs before he had finished
 with it.
 as to the actual manner of his betrayer's death, the outraged husband
 found it difficult to make up his mind. it was not to be prompt, nor was
 unnecessary suffering to be avoided. at first he favoured a pair of
 "infernal" opera-glasses that concealed a couple of steel points which, by
 means of a spring, would dart out into the eyes of anyone using them and
 destroy their sight. this rather elaborate and uncertain machine was
 abandoned later in favour of a trap for catching wolves. this was to be
 placed under the table, and seize in its huge iron teeth the legs of the
 victim. in the end simplicity, in the shape of a hammer and sword-stick,
 won the day. an assistant was taken in the person of lucien fenayrou, a
 brother of marin.
 this humble and obliging individual, a maker of children's toys, regarded
 his brother the chemist with something like veneration as the gentleman
 and man of education of the family. fifty francs must have seemed to him
 an almost superfluous inducement to assist in the execution of what
 appeared to be an act of legitimate vengeance, an affair of family honour
 in which the wife and brother of the injured husband were in duty bound to
 participate. mme. fenayrou, with characteristic superstition, chose the
 day of her boy's first communion to broach the subject of the murder to
 lucien. by what was perhaps more than coincidence, ascension day, may ,
 was selected as the day for the crime itself. there were practical reasons
 also. it was a thursday and a public holiday. on thursdays the fenayrou
 children spent the day with their grandmother, and at holiday time there
 was a special midnight train from chatou to paris that would enable the
 murderers to return to town after the commission of their crime. a goat
 chaise and twenty-six feet of gas piping had been purchased by fenayrou
 and taken down to the villa.
 nothing remained but to secure the presence of the victim. at the
 direction of her husband mme. fenayrou wrote to aubert on may , a letter
 in which she protested her undying love for him, and expressed a desire to
 resume their previous relations. aubert demurred at first, but, as she
 became more pressing, yielded at length to her suggestion. if it cost him
 nothing, aubert was the last man to decline an invitation of the kind. a
 trip to chatou was arranged for ascension day, may , by the train
 leaving paris from the st. lazare station, at half-past eight in the
 evening.
 on the afternoon of that day fenayrou, his wife and his brother sent the
 children to their grandmother and left paris for chatou at three o'clock.
 arrived there, they went to the villa, fenayrou carrying the twenty-six
 feet of gas-piping wound round him like some huge hunting-horn. he spent
 the afternoon in beating out the piping till it was flat, and in making a
 gag. he tried to take up the flooring in the kitchen, but this plan for
 the concealment of the body was abandoned in favour of the river. as soon
 as these preparations, in which he was assisted by his two relatives, had
 been completed, fenayrou placed a candle, some matches and the sword-stick
 on the drawing-room table and returned to paris.
 the three conspirators dined together heartily in the avenue de clichy—soup,
 fish, entree, sweet and cheese, washed down by a bottle of claret and a
 pint of burgundy, coffee to follow, with a glass of chartreuse for madame.
 to the waiter the party seemed in the best of spirits. dinner ended, the
 two men returned to chatou by the . train, leaving gabrielle to follow
 an hour later with aubert. fenayrou had taken three second-class return
 tickets for his wife, his brother and himself, and a single for their
 visitor. it was during the interval between the departure of her husband
 and her meeting with aubert that mme. fenayrou went into the church of st.
 louis d'antin and prayed.
 at half-past eight she met aubert at the st. lazare station, gave him his
 ticket and the two set out for chatou—a strange journey mme.
 fenayrou was asked what they talked about in the railway carriage. "mere
 nothings," she replied. aubert abused her mother; for her own part, she
 was very agitated—tres emotionnee. it was about half-past nine when
 they reached their destination. the sight of the little villa pleased
 aubert.
 "ah!" he said, "this is good. i should like a house like this and twenty
 thousand francs a year!" as he entered the hall, surprised at the
 darkness, he exclaimed: "the devil! it's precious dark! 'tu sais,
 gabrielle, que je ne suis pas un heros d'aventure.'" the woman pushed him
 into the drawing-room. he struck a match on his trousers. fenayrou, who
 had been lurking in the darkness in his shirt sleeves, made a blow at him
 with the hammer, but it was ineffectual. a struggle ensued. the room was
 plunged in darkness. gabrielle waited outside. after a little, her husband
 called for a light; she came in and lit a candle on the mantelpiece.
 fenayrou was getting the worst of the encounter. she ran to his help, and
 dragged off his opponent. fenayrou was free. he struck again with the
 hammer. aubert fell, and for some ten minutes fenayrou stood over the
 battered and bleeding man abusing and insulting him, exulting in his
 vengeance. then he stabbed him twice with the sword-stick, and so ended
 the business.
 the murderers had to wait till past eleven to get rid of the body, as the
 streets were full of holiday-makers. when all was quiet they put it into
 the goat chaise, wrapped round with the gas-piping, and wheeled it on to
 the chatou bridge. to prevent noise they let the body down by a rope into
 the water. it was heavier than they thought, and fell with a loud splash
 into the river. "hullo!" exclaimed a night-fisherman, who was mending his
 tackle not far from the bridge, "there go those butchers again, chucking
 their filth into the seine!"
 as soon as they had taken the chaise back to the villa, the three
 assassins hurried to the station to catch the last train. arriving there a
 little before their time, they went into a neighbouring cafe. fenayrou had
 three bocks, lucien one, and madame another glass of chartreuse. so home
 to paris. lucien reached his house about two in the morning. "well," asked
 his wife, "did you have a good day?" "splendid," was the reply.
 eleven days passed. fenayrou paid a visit to the villa to clean it and put
 it in order. otherwise he went about his business as usual, attending race
 meetings, indulging in a picnic and a visit to the salon. on may  a man
 named bailly, who, by a strange coincidence, was known by the nickname of
 "the chemist," walking by the river, had his attention called by a
 bargeman to a corpse that was floating on the water. he fished it out. it
 was that of aubert. in spite of a gag tired over his mouth the water had
 got into the body, and, notwithstanding the weight of the lead piping, it
 had risen to the surface.
 as soon as the police had been informed of the disappearance of aubert,
 their suspicions had fallen on the fenayrous in consequence of the request
 which marin fenayrou had made to the commissary of police to aid him in
 the recovery from aubert of his wife's letters. but there had been nothing
 further in their conduct to provoke suspicion. when, however, the body was
 discovered and at the same time an anonymous letter received denouncing
 the fenayrous as the murderers of aubert, the police decided on their
 arrest. on the morning of june  m. mace, then head of the detective
 department, called at their house. he found fenayrou in a dressing-gown.
 this righteous avenger of his wife's seduction denied his guilt, like any
 common criminal, but m. mace handed him over to one of his men, to be
 taken immediately to versailles. he himself took charge of madame, and, in
 the first-class carriage full of people, in which they travelled together
 to versailles, she whispered to the detective a full confession of the
 crime.
 mace has left us an account of this singular railway journey. it was two
 o'clock in the afternoon. in the carriage were five ladies and a young man
 who was reading la vie parisienne. mme. fenayrou was silent and
 thoughtful. "you're thinking of your present position?" asked the
 detective. "no, i'm thinking of my mother and my dear children." "they
 don't seem to care much about their father," remarked mace. "perhaps not."
 "why?" asked m. mace. "because of his violent temper," was the reply.
 after some further conversation and the departure at courbevoie of the
 young man with la vie parisienne, mme. fenayrou asked abruptly: "do you
 think my husband guilty?" "i'm sure of it." "so does aubert's sister."
 "certainly," answered m. mace; "she looks on the crime as one of revenge."
 "but my brother-in-law," urged the woman, "could have had no motive for
 vengeance against aubert." mace answered coldly that he would have to
 explain how he had employed his time on ascension day. "you see criminals
 everywhere," answered madame.
 after the train had left st. cloud, where the other occupants of the
 carriage had alighted, the detective and his prisoner were alone, free of
 interruption till versailles should be reached. hitherto they had spoken
 in whispers; now mace seized the opportunity to urge the woman to unbosom
 herself to him, to reveal her part in the crime. she burst into tears.
 there was an interval of silence; then she thanked mace for the kindness
 and consideration he had shown her. "you wish me," she asked, "to betray
 my husband?" "without any design or intention on your part," discreetly
 answered the detective; "but by the sole force of circumstances you are
 placed in such a position that you cannot help betraying him."
 whether convinced or not of this tyranny of circumstance, mme. fenayrou
 obeyed her mentor, and calmly, coldly, without regret or remorse, told him
 the story of the assassination. towards the end of her narration she
 softened a little. "i know i am a criminal," she exclaimed. "since this
 morning i have done nothing but lie. i am sick of it; it makes me suffer
 too much. don't tell my husband until this evening that i have confessed;
 there's no need, for, after what i have told you, you can easily expose
 his falsehoods and so get at the truth."
 that evening the three prisoners—lucien had been arrested at the
 same time as the other two—were brought to chatou. identified by the
 gardener as the lessee of the villa, fenayrou abandoned his protestations
 of innocence and admitted his guilt. the crime was then and there
 reconstituted in the presence of the examining magistrate. with the help
 of a gendarme, who impersonated aubert, fenayrou repeated the incidents of
 the murder. the goat-chaise was wheeled to the bridge, and there in the
 presence of an indignant crowd, the murderer showed how the body had been
 lowered into the river.
 after a magisterial investigation lasting two months, which failed to shed
 any new light on the more mysterious elements in the case, fenayrou, his
 wife and brother were indicted on august  before the assize court for
 the seine-et-oise department, sitting at versailles.
 the attitude of the three culprits was hardly such as to provoke the
 sympathies of even a french jury. fenayrou seemed to be giving a clumsy
 and unconvincing performance of the role of the wronged husband; his heavy
 figure clothed in an ill-fitting suit of "blue dittos," his ill-kempt red
 beard and bock-stained moustache did not help him in his impersonation.
 mme. fenayrou, pale, colourless, insignificant, was cold and impenetrable.
 she described the murder of her lover "as if she were giving her cook a
 household recipe for making apricot jam." lucien was humble and
 lachrymose.
 in his interrogatory of the husband the president, m. berard des glajeux,
 showed himself frankly sceptical as to the ingenuousness of fenayrou's
 motives in assassinating aubert. "now, what was the motive of this
 horrible crime?" he asked. "revenge," answered fenayrou.
 president: but consider the care you took to hide the body and destroy all
 trace of your guilt; that is not the way in which a husband sets out to
 avenge his honour; these are the methods of the assassin! with your wife's
 help you could have caught aubert in flagrante delicto and killed him on
 the spot, and the law would have absolved you. instead of which you decoy
 him into a hideous snare. public opinion suggests that jealousy of your
 former assistant's success, and mortification at your own failure, were
 the real motives. or was it not perhaps that you had been in the habit of
 rendering somewhat dubious services to some of your promiscuous clients?
 fenayrou: nothing of the kind, i swear it!
 president: do not protest too much. remember that among your acquaintances
 you were suspected of cheating at cards. as a chemist you had been
 convinced of fraud. perhaps aubert knew something against you. some act of
 poisoning, or abortion, in which you had been concerned? many witnesses
 have believed this.
 your mother-in-law is said to have remarked, "my son-in-law will end in
 jail."
 fenayrou (bursting into tears): this is too dreadful.
 president: and dr. durand, an old friend of aubert, remembers the deceased
 saying to him, "one has nothing to fear from people one holds in one's
 hands."
 fenayrou: i don't know what he meant.
 president: or, considering the cruelty, cowardice, the cold calculation
 displayed in the commission of the crime, shall we say this was a woman's
 not a man's revenge. you have said your wife acted as your slave—was
 it not the other way about?
 fenayrou: no; it was my revenge, mine alone.
 the view that regarded mme. fenayrou as a soft, malleable paste was not
 the view of the president.
 "why," he asked the woman, "did you commit this horrible murder, decoy
 your lover to his death?" "because i had repented," was the answer; "i had
 wronged my husband, and since he had been condemned for fraud, i loved him
 the more for being unfortunate. and then i feared for my children."
 president: is that really the case?
 mme. fenayrou: certainly it is.
 president: then your whole existence has been one of lies and hypocrisy.
 whilst you were deceiving your husband and teaching your children to
 despise him you were covering him with caresses.
 you have played false to both husband and lover—to aubert in
 decoying him to his death, to your husband by denouncing him directly you
 were arrested. you have betrayed everybody. the only person you have not
 betrayed is yourself. what sort of a woman are you? as you and aubert went
 into the drawing-room on the evening of the murder you said loudly, "this
 is the way," so that your husband, hearing your voice outside, should not
 strike you by mistake in the darkness. if lucien had not told us that you
 attacked aubert whilst he was struggling with your husband, we should
 never have known it, for you would never have admitted it, and your
 husband has all along refused to implicate you.... you have said that you
 had ceased to care for your lover: he had ceased to care for you. he was
 prosperous, happy, about to marry: you hated him, and you showed your hate
 when, during the murder, you flung yourself upon him and cried, "wretch!"
 is that the behaviour of a woman who represents herself to have been the
 timid slave of her husband? no. this crime is the revenge of a cowardly
 and pitiless woman, who writes down in her account book the expenses of
 the trip to chatou and, after the murder, picnics merrily in the green
 fields. it was you who steeled your husband to the task.
 how far the president was justified in thus inverting the parts played by
 the husband and wife in the crime must be a matter of opinion. in his
 volume of souvenirs m. berard des glajeux modifies considerably the view
 which he perhaps felt it his duty to express in his interrogatory of
 gabrielle fenayrou. he describes her as soft and flexible by nature, the
 repentant slave of her husband, seeking to atone for her wrong to him by
 helping him in his revenge. the one feature in the character of mme.
 fenayrou that seems most clearly demonstrated is its absolute
 insensibility under any circumstances whatsoever.
 the submissive lucien had little to say for himself, nor could any motive
 for joining in the murder beyond a readiness to oblige his brother be
 suggested. in his souvenirs m. berard des glajeux states that to-day it
 would seem to be clearly established that lucien acted blindly at the
 bidding of his sister-in-law, "qu'il avait beaucoup aimee et qui n'avait
 pas ete cruelle a son egard."
 the evidence recapitulated for the most part the facts already set out.
 the description of mme. fenayrou by the gentleman on the sporting
 newspaper who had succeeded aubert in her affections is, under the
 circumstances, interesting: "she was sad, melancholy; i questioned her,
 and she told me she was married to a coarse man who neglected her, failed
 to understand her, and had never loved her. i became her lover but, except
 on a few occasions, our relations were those of good friends. she was a
 woman with few material wants, affectionate, expansive, an idealist, one
 who had suffered much and sought from without a happiness her marriage had
 never brought her. i believe her to have been the blind tool of her
 husband."
 from motives of delicacy the evidence of this gentleman was read in his
 presence; he was not examined orally. his eulogy of his mistress is loyal.
 against it may be set the words of the procureur de la republique, m.
 delegorgue: "never has a more thorough-paced, a more hideous monster been
 seated in the dock of an assize court. this woman is the personification
 of falsehood, depravity, cowardice and treachery. she is worthy of the
 supreme penalty." the jury were not of this opinion. they preferred to
 regard mme. fenayrou as playing a secondary part to that of her husband.
 they accorded in both her case and that of lucien extenuating
 circumstances. the woman was sentenced to penal servitude for life, lucien
 to seven years. fenayrou, for whose conduct the jury could find no
 extenuation, was condemned to death.
 it is the custom in certain assize towns for the president, after
 pronouncing sentence, to visit a prisoner who had been ordered for
 execution. m. berard des glajeux describes his visit to fenayrou at
 versailles. he was already in prison dress, sobbing.
 his iron nature, which during five days had never flinched, had broken
 down; but it was not for himself he wept, but for his wife, his children,
 his brother; of his own fate he took no account. at the same moment his
 wife was in the lodge of the courthouse waiting for the cab that was to
 take her to her prison. freed from the anxieties of the trial, knowing her
 life to be spared, without so much as a thought for the husband whom she
 had never loved, she had tidied herself up, and now, with all the ease of
 a woman, whose misfortunes have not destroyed her self-possession, was
 doing the honours of the jail. it was she who received her judge.
 but fenayrou was not to die. the court of cassation, to which he had made
 the usual appeal after condemnation, decided that the proceedings at
 versailles had been vitiated by the fact that the evidence of gabrielle
 fenayrou's second lover had not been taken orally, within the requirements
 of the criminal code; consequently a new trial was ordered before the
 paris assize court. this second trial, which commenced on october ,
 saved fenayrou's head. the parisian jury showed themselves more lenient
 than their colleagues at versailles. not only was fenayrou accorded
 extenuating circumstances, but lucien was acquitted altogether. the only
 person to whom these new proceedings brought no benefit was mme. fenayrou,
 whose sentence remained unaltered.
 marin fenayrou was sent to new caledonia to serve his punishment.
 there he was allowed to open a dispensary, but, proving dishonest, he lost
 his license and became a ferryman—a very charon for terrestrial
 passengers. he died in new caledonia of cancer of the liver.
 gabrielle fenayrou made an exemplary prisoner, so exemplary that, owing to
 her good conduct and a certain ascendancy she exercised over her
 fellow-prisoners, she was made forewoman of one of the workshops. whilst
 holding this position she had the honour of receiving, among those
 entrusted to her charge, another gabrielle, murderess, gabrielle bompard,
 the history of whose crime is next to be related.
 eyraud and bompard
 there are accounts of this case in bataille "causes criminelles et
 mondaines," , and in volume x. of fouquier "causes celebres."
 "l'affaire gouffe" by dr. lacassagne, lyons, , and goron "l'amour
 criminel" may be consulted.
 on july , in the year , the parisian police were informed of the
 disappearance of one gouffe, a bailiff. he had been last seen by two
 friends on the boulevard montmartre at about ten minutes past seven on the
 evening of the th, a friday. since then nothing had been heard of him,
 either at his office in the rue montmartre, or at his private house in the
 rue rougemont. this was surprising in the case of a man of regular habits
 even in his irregularities, robust health, and cheerful spirits.
 gouffe was a widower, forty-two years of age. he had three daughters who
 lived happily with him in the rue rougemont. he did a good trade as
 bailiff and process-server, and at times had considerable sums of money in
 his possession. these he would never leave behind him at his office, but
 carry home at the end of the day's work, except on fridays. friday nights
 gouffe always spent away from home. as the society he sought on these
 nights was of a promiscuous character, he was in the habit of leaving at
 his office any large sum of money that had come into his hands during the
 day.
 about nine o'clock on this particular friday night, july , the
 hall-porter at gouffe's office in the rue montmartre heard someone, whom
 he had taken at first to be the bailiff himself, enter the hall and go
 upstairs to the office, where he remained a few minutes. as he descended
 the stairs the porter came out of his lodge and, seeing it was a stranger,
 accosted him. but the man hurried away without giving the porter time to
 see his face.
 when the office was examined the next day everything was found in perfect
 order, and a sum of , francs, hidden away behind some papers,
 untouched. the safe had not been tampered with; there was, in short,
 nothing unusual about the room except ten long matches that were lying
 half burnt on the floor.
 on hearing of the bailiff's disappearance and the mysterious visitor to
 his office, the police, who were convinced that gouffe had been the victim
 of some criminal design, inquired closely into his habits, his friends,
 his associates, men and women. but the one man who could have breathed the
 name that would have set the police on the track of the real culprits was,
