 “and her companion, miss beverley.”
 “quite so. nor must we forget the spanish butler, and the colonel himself,
 whose acquaintance i am extremely anxious to renew.”
 “the whole thing is wildly bizarre, harley.”
 “my dear knox,” he replied, stretching himself luxuriously in the long
 lounge chair, “the most commonplace life hovers on the edge of the
 bizarre. but those of us who overstep the border become preposterous in
 the eyes of those who have never done so. this is not because the unusual
 is necessarily the untrue, but because writers of fiction have claimed the
 unusual as their particular province, and in doing so have divorced it
 from fact in the public eye. thus i, myself, am a myth, and so are you,
 knox!”
 he raised his hand and pointed to the doorway communicating with the
 office.
 “we owe our mythological existence to that american genius whose portrait
 hangs beside the burmese cabinet and who indiscreetly created the
 character of c. auguste dupin. the doings of this amateur investigator
 were chronicled by an admirer, you may remember, since when no private
 detective has been allowed to exist outside the pages of fiction. my most
 trivial habits confirm my unreality.
 “for instance, i have a friend who is good enough sometimes to record my
 movements. so had dupin. i smoke a pipe. so did dupin. i investigate
 crime, and i am sometimes successful. here i differ from dupin. dupin was
 always successful. but my argument is this—you complain that the
 life of colonel don juan sarmiento menendez, on his own showing, has been
 at least as romantic as his name. it would not be accounted romantic by
 the adventurous, knox; it is only romantic to the prosaic mind. in the
 same way his name is only unusual to our english ears. in spain it would
 pass unnoticed.”
 “i see your point,” i said, grudgingly; “but think of i voodoo in the
 surrey hills.”
 “i am thinking of it, knox, and it affords me much delight to think of it.
 you have placed your finger i upon the very point i was endeavouring to
 make. voodoo in the surrey hills! quite so. voodoo in some island of the
 caribbean seas, yes, but voodoo in the surrey hills, no. yet, my dear
 fellow, there is a regular steamer service between south america and
 england. or one may embark at liverpool and disembark in the spanish main.
 why, then, may not one embark in the west indies and disembark at
 liverpool? this granted, you will also grant that from liverpool to surrey
 is a feasible journey. why, then, should you exclaim, ‘but voodoo in the
 surrey hills!’ you would be surprised to meet an esquimaux in the strand,
 but there is no reason why an esquimaux should not visit the strand. in
 short, the most annoying thing about fact is its resemblance to fiction. i
 am looking forward to the day, knox, when i can retire from my present
 fictitious profession and become a recognized member of the community;
 such as a press agent, a theatrical manager, or some other dealer in
 fact!”
 he burst out laughing, and reaching over to a side-table refilled my glass
 and his own.
 “there lies the wing of a vampire bat,” he said, pointing, “in chancery
 lane. it is impossible. yet,” he raised his glass, “‘pussyfoot’ johnson
 has visited scotland, the home of whisky!”
 we were silent for a while, whilst i considered his remarks.
 “the conclusion to which i have come,” declared harley, “is that nothing
 is so strange as the commonplace. a rod and line, a boat, a luncheon
 hamper, a jar of good ale, and the peculiar peace of a norfolk river—these
 joys i willingly curtail in favour of the unknown things which await us at
 cray’s folly. remember, knox,” he stared at me queerly, “wednesday is the
 night of the full moon.”
 paul harley lay back upon the cushions and glanced at me with a quizzical
 smile. the big, up-to-date car which colonel menendez had placed at our
 disposal was surmounting a steep surrey lane as though no gradient had
 existed.
 “some engine!” he said, approvingly.
 i nodded in agreement, but felt disinclined for conversation, being
 absorbed in watching the characteristically english scenery. this, indeed,
 was very beautiful. the lane along which we were speeding was narrow,
 winding, and over-arched by trees. here and there sunlight penetrated to
 spread a golden carpet before us, but for the most part the way lay in
 cool and grateful shadow.
 on one side a wooded slope hemmed us in blackly, on the other lay dell
 after dell down into the cradle of the valley. it was a poetic corner of
 england, and i thought it almost unbelievable that london was only some
 twenty miles behind. a fit place this for elves and fairies to survive, a
 spot in which the presence of a modern automobile seemed a desecration.
 higher we mounted and higher, the engine running strongly and smoothly;
 then, presently, we were out upon a narrow open road with the crescent of
 the hills sweeping away on the right and dense woods dipping valleyward to
 the left and behind us.
 the chauffeur turned, and, meeting my glance:
 “cray’s folly, sir,” he said.
 he jerked his hand in the direction of a square, gray-stone tower somewhat
 resembling a campanile, which uprose from a distant clump of woods
 cresting a greater eminence.
 “ah,” murmured harley, “the famous tower.”
 following the departure of the colonel on the previous evening, he had
 looked up cray’s folly and had found it to be one of a series of houses
 erected by the eccentric and wealthy man whose name it bore. he had had a
 mania for building houses with towers, in which his rival—and
 contemporary—had been william beckford, the author of “vathek,” a
 work which for some obscure reason has survived as well as two of the
 three towers erected by its writer.
 i became conscious of a keen sense of anticipation. in this, i think, the
 figure of miss val beverley played a leading part. there was something
 pathetic in the presence of this lonely english girl in so singular a
 household; for if the menage at cray’s folly should prove half so strange
 as colonel menendez had led us to believe, then truly we were about to
 find ourselves amid unusual people.
 presently the road inclined southward somewhat and we entered the fringe
 of the trees. i noticed one or two very ancient cottages, but no trace of
 the modern builder. this was a fragment of real old england, and i was not
 sorry when presently we lost sight of the square tower; for amidst such
 scenery it was an anomaly and a rebuke.
 what paul harley’s thoughts may have been i cannot say, but he preserved
 an unbroken silence up to the very moment that we came to the gate lodge.
 the gates were monstrosities of elaborate iron scrollwork, craftsmanship
 clever enough in its way, but of an ornate kind more in keeping with the
 orange trees of the south than with this wooded surrey countryside.
 a very surly-looking girl, quite obviously un-english (a daughter of
 pedro, the butler, i learned later), opened the gates, and we entered upon
 a winding drive literally tunnelled through the trees. of the house we had
 never a glimpse until we were right under its walls, nor should i have
 known that we were come to the main entrance if the car had not stopped.
 “looks like a monastery,” muttered harley.
 indeed that part of the building—the north front—which was
 visible from this point had a strangely monastic appearance, being built
 of solid gray blocks and boasting only a few small, heavily barred
 windows. the eccentricity of the victorian gentleman who had expended
 thousands of pounds upon erecting this house was only equalled, i thought,
 by that of colonel menendez, who had chosen it for a home. an out-jutting
 wing shut us in on the west, and to the east the prospect was closed by
 the tallest and most densely grown box hedge i had ever seen, trimmed most
 perfectly and having an arched opening in the centre. thus, the entrance
 to cray’s folly lay in a sort of bay.
 but even as we stepped from the car, the great church-like oaken doors
 were thrown open, and there, framed in the monkish porch, stood the tall,
 elegant figure of the colonel.
 “gentlemen,” he cried, “welcome to cray’s folly.”
 he advanced smiling, and in the bright sunlight seemed even more
 mephistophelean than he had seemed in harley’s office.
 “pedro,” he called, and a strange-looking spanish butler who wore his
 side-whiskers like a bull fighter appeared behind his master; a sallow,
 furtive fellow with whom i determined i should never feel at ease.
 however, the colonel greeted us heartily enough, and conducted us through
 a kind of paved, covered courtyard into a great lofty hall. indeed it more
 closely resembled a studio, being partly lighted by a most curious dome.
 it was furnished in a manner quite un-english, but very luxuriously. a
 magnificent oaken staircase communicated with a gallery on the left, and
 at the foot of this staircase, in a mechanical chair which she managed
 with astonishing dexterity, sat madame de stämer.
 she had snow-white hair crowning the face of a comparatively young woman,
 and large, dark-brown eyes which reminded me strangely of the eyes of some
 animal although in the first moment of meeting i could not identify the
 resemblance. her hands were very slender and beautiful, and when, as the
 colonel presented us, she extended her fingers, i was not surprised to see
 harley stoop and kiss them in continental fashion; for this madame
 evidently expected. i followed suit; but truth to tell, after that first
 glance at the masterful figure in the invalid chair i had had no eyes for
 madame de stämer, being fully employed in gazing at someone who stood
 beside her.
 this was an evasively pretty girl, or such was my first impression. that
 is to say, that whilst her attractiveness was beyond dispute, analysis of
 her small features failed to detect from which particular quality this
 charm was derived. the contour of her face certainly formed a delightful
 oval, and there was a wistful look in her eyes which was half appealing
 and half impish. her demure expression was not convincing, and there
 rested a vague smile, or promise of a smile, upon lips which were
 perfectly moulded, and indeed the only strictly regular feature of a
 nevertheless bewitching face. she had slightly curling hair and the line
 of her neck and shoulder was most graceful and charming. of one thing i
 was sure: she was glad to see visitors at cray’s folly.
 “and now, gentlemen,” said colonel menendez, “having presented you to
 madame, my cousin, permit me to present you to miss val beverley, my
 cousin’s companion, and our very dear friend.”
 the girl bowed in a formal english fashion, which contrasted sharply with
 the continental manner of madame. her face flushed slightly, and as i met
 her glance she lowered her eyes.
 “now m. harley and m. knox,” said madame, vivaciously, “you are quite at
 home. pedro will show you to your rooms and lunch will be ready in half an
 hour.”
 she waved her white hand coquettishly, and ignoring the proffered aid of
 miss beverley, wheeled her chair away at a great rate under a sort of arch
 on the right of the hall, which communicated with the domestic offices of
 the establishment.
 “is she not wonderful?” exclaimed colonel menendez, taking harley’s left
 arm and my right and guiding us upstairs followed by pedro and the
 chauffeur, the latter carrying our grips. “many women would be prostrated
 by such an affliction, but she—” he shrugged his shoulders.
 harley and i had been placed in adjoining rooms. i had never seen such
 rooms as those in cray’s folly. the place contained enough oak to have
 driven a modern builder crazy. oak had simply been lavished upon it. my
 own room, which was almost directly above the box hedge to which i have
 referred, had a beautiful carved ceiling and a floor as highly polished as
 that of a ballroom. it was tastefully furnished, but the foreign note was
 perceptible everywhere.
 “we have here some grand prospects,” said the colonel, and truly enough
 the view from the great, high, wide window was a very fine one.
 i perceived that the grounds of cray’s folly were extensive and carefully
 cultivated. i had a glimpse of a tudor sunken garden, but the best view of
 this was from the window of harley’s room, which because it was the end
 room on the north front overlooked another part of the grounds, and
 offered a prospect of the east lawns and distant park land.
 when presently colonel menendez and i accompanied my friend there i was
 charmed by the picturesque scene below. here was a real old herbal garden,
 gay with flowers and intersected by tiled moss-grown paths. there were
 bushes exhibiting fantastic examples of the topiary art, and here, too,
 was a sun-dial. my first impression of this beautiful spot was one of
 delight. later i was to regard that enchanted demesne with something akin
 to horror; but as we stood there watching a gardener clipping the bushes i
 thought that although cray’s folly might be adjudged ugly, its grounds
 were delightful.
 suddenly harley turned to our host. “where is the famous tower?” he
 enquired. “it is not visible from the front of the house, nor from the
 drive.”
 “no, no,” replied the colonel, “it is right out at the end of the east
 wing, which is disused. i keep it locked up. there are four rooms in the
 tower and a staircase, of course, but it is inconvenient. i cannot imagine
 why it was built.”
 “the architect may have had some definite object in view,” said harley,
 “or it may have been merely a freak of his client. is there anything
 characteristic about the topmost room, for instance?”
 colonel menendez shrugged his massive shoulders. “nothing,” he replied.
 “it is the same as the others below, except that there is a stair leading
 to a gallery on the roof. presently i will take you up, if you wish.”
 “i should be interested,” murmured harley, and tactfully changed the
 subject, which evidently was not altogether pleasing to our host. i
 concluded that he had found the east wing of the house something of a
 white elephant, and was accordingly sensitive upon the point.
 presently, then, he left us and i returned to my own room, but before long
 i rejoined harley. i did not knock but entered unceremoniously.
 “halloa!” i exclaimed. “what have you seen?”
 he was standing staring out of the window, nor did he turn as i entered.
 “what is it?” i said, joining him.
 he glanced at me oddly.
 “an impression,” he replied; “but it has gone now.”
 “i understand,” i said, quietly.
 familiarity with crime in many guises and under many skies had developed
 in paul harley a sort of sixth sense. it was a fugitive, fickle thing, as
 are all the powers which belong to the realm of genius or inspiration.
 often enough it failed him entirely, he had assured me, that odd, sudden
 chill as of an abrupt lowering of the temperature, which, i understood,
 often advised him of the nearness of enmity actively malignant.
 now, standing at the window, looking down into that old-world garden, he
 was “sensing” the atmosphere keenly, seeking for the note of danger. it
 was sheer intuition, perhaps, but whilst he could never rely upon its
 answering his summons, once active it never misled him.
 “you think some real menace overhangs colonel menendez?”
 “i am sure of it.” he stared into my face. “there is something very, very
 strange about this bat wing business.”
 “do you still incline to the idea that he has been followed to england?”
 paul harley reflected for a moment, then:
 “that explanation would be almost too simple,” he said. “there is
 something bizarre, something unclean—i had almost said unholy—at
 work in this house, knox.”
 “he has foreign servants.”
 harley shook his head.
 “i shall make it my business to become acquainted with all of them,” he
 replied, “but the danger does not come from there. let us go down to
 lunch.”
 the luncheon was so good as to be almost ostentatious. one could not have
 lunched better at the carlton. yet, since this luxurious living was
 evidently customary in the colonel’s household, a charge of ostentation
 would not have been deserved. the sinister-looking pedro proved to be an
 excellent servant; and because of the excitement of feeling myself to
 stand upon the edge of unusual things, the enjoyment of a perfectly served
 repast, and the sheer delight which i experienced in watching the play of
 expression upon the face of miss beverley, i count that luncheon at cray’s
 folly a memorable hour of my life.
 frankly, val beverley puzzled me. it may or may not have been curious,
 that amidst such singular company i selected for my especial study a girl
 so freshly and typically english. i had thought at the moment of meeting
 her that she was provokingly pretty; i determined, as the lunch proceeded,
 that she was beautiful. once i caught harley smiling at me in his
 quizzical fashion, and i wondered guiltily if i were displaying an undue
 interest in the companion of madame.
 many topics were discussed, i remember, and beyond doubt the colonel’s
 cousin-housekeeper dominated the debate. she possessed extraordinary force
 of personality. her english was not nearly so fluent as that spoken by the
 colonel, but this handicap only served to emphasize the masculine strength
 of her intellect. truly she was a remarkable woman. with her blanched hair
 and her young face, and those fine, velvety eyes which possessed a quality
 almost hypnotic, she might have posed for the figure of a sorceress. she
 had unfamiliar gestures and employed her long white hands in a manner that
 was new to me and utterly strange.
 i could detect no family resemblance between the cousins, and i wondered
 if their kinship were very distant. one thing was evident enough: madame
 de stämer was devoted to the colonel. her expression when she looked at
 him changed entirely. for a woman of such intense vitality her eyes were
 uncannily still; that is to say that whilst she frequently moved her head
 she rarely moved her eyes. again and again i found myself wondering where
 i had seen such eyes before. i lived to identify that memory, as i shall
 presently relate.
 in vain i endeavoured to define the relationship between these three
 people, so incongruously set beneath one roof. of the fact that miss
 beverly was not happy i became assured. but respecting her exact position
 in the household i was reduced to surmises.
 the colonel improved on acquaintance. i decided that he belonged to an
 order of spanish grandees now almost extinct. i believed he would have
 made a very staunch friend; i felt sure he would have proved a most
 implacable enemy. altogether, it was a memorable meal, and one notable
 result of that brief companionship was a kind of link of understanding
 between myself and miss beverley.
 once, when i had been studying madame de stämer, and again, as i removed
 my glance from the dark face of colonel menendez, i detected the girl
 watching me; and her eyes said, “you understand; so do i.”
 some things perhaps i did understand, but how few the near future was to
 show.
 the signal for our departure from table was given by madame de stämer. she
 whisked her chair back with extraordinary rapidity, the contrast between
 her swift, nervous movements and those still, basilisk eyes being almost
 uncanny.
 “off you go, juan,” she said; “your visitors would like to see the garden,
 no doubt. i must be away for my afternoon siesta. come, my dear”—to
 the girl—“smoke one little cigarette with me, then i will let you
 go.”
 she retired, wheeling herself rapidly out of the room, and my glance
 lingered upon the graceful figure of val beverley until both she and
 madame were out of sight.
 “now, gentlemen,” said the colonel, resuming his seat and pushing the
 decanter toward paul harley, “i am at your service either for business or
 amusement. i think”—to harley—“you expressed a desire to see
 the tower?”
 “i did,” my friend replied, lighting his cigar, “but only if it would
 amuse you to show me.”
 “decidedly. mr. knox will join us?”
 harley, unseen by the colonel, glanced at me in a way which i knew.
 “thanks all the same,” i said, smiling, “but following a perfect luncheon
 i should much prefer to loll upon the lawn, if you don’t mind.”
 “but certainly i do not mind,” cried the colonel. “i wish you to be
 happy.”
 “join you in a few minutes, knox,” said harley as he went out with our
 host.
 “all right,” i replied, “i should like to take a stroll around the
 gardens. you will join me there later, no doubt.”
 as i walked out into the bright sunshine i wondered why paul harley had
 wished to be left alone with colonel menendez, but knowing that i should
 learn his motive later, i strolled on through the gardens, my mind filled
 with speculations respecting these unusual people with whom fate had
 brought me in contact. i felt that miss beverley needed protection of some
 kind, and i was conscious of a keen desire to afford her that protection.
 in her glance i had read, or thought i had read, an appeal for sympathy.
 not the least mystery of cray’s folly was the presence of this girl. only
 toward the end of luncheon had i made up my mind upon a point which had
 been puzzling me. val beverley’s gaiety was a cloak. once i had detected
 her watching madame de stämer with a look strangely like that of fear.
 puffing contentedly at my cigar i proceeded to make a tour of the house.
 it was constructed irregularly. practically the entire building was of
 gray stone, which created a depressing effect even in the blazing
 sunlight, lending cray’s folly something of an austere aspect. there were
 fine lofty windows, however, to most of the ground-floor rooms overlooking
 the lawns, and some of those above had balconies of the same gray stone.
 quite an extensive kitchen garden and a line of glasshouses adjoined the
 west wing, and here were outbuildings, coach-houses and a garage, all
 connected by a covered passage with the servants’ quarters.
 pursuing my enquiries, i proceeded to the north front of the building,
 which was closely hemmed in by trees, and which as we had observed on our
 arrival resembled the entrance to a monastery.
 passing the massive oaken door by which we had entered and which was now
 closed again, i walked on through the opening in the box hedge into a part
 of the grounds which was not so sprucely groomed as the rest. on one side
 were the yews flanking the tudor garden and before me uprose the famous
 tower. as i stared up at the square structure, with its uncurtained
 windows, i wondered, as others had wondered before me, what could have
 ever possessed any man to build it.
 visible at points for many miles around, it undoubtedly disfigured an
 otherwise beautiful landscape.
 i pressed on, noting that the windows of the rooms in the east wing were
 shuttered and the apartments evidently disused. i came to the base of the
 tower, to the south, the country rose up to the highest point in the
 crescent of hills, and peeping above the trees at no great distance away,
 i detected the red brick chimneys of some old house in the woods. north
 and east, velvet sward swept down to the park.
 as i stood there admiring the prospect and telling myself that no voodoo
 devilry could find a home in this peaceful english countryside, i detected
 a faint sound of voices far above. someone had evidently come out upon the
 gallery of the tower. i looked upward, but i could not see the speakers. i
 pursued my stroll, until, near the eastern base of the tower, i
 encountered a perfect thicket of rhododendrons. finding no path through
 this shrubbery, i retraced my steps, presently entering the tudor garden;
 and there strolling toward me, a book in her hand, was miss beverley.
 “holloa, mr. knox,” she called; “i thought you had gone up the tower?”
 “no,” i replied, laughing, “i lack the energy.”
 “do you?” she said, softly, “then sit down and talk to me.”
 she dropped down upon a grassy bank, looking up at me invitingly, and i
 accepted the invitation without demur.
 “i love this old garden,” she declared, “although of course it is really
 no older than the rest of the place. i always think there should be
 peacocks, though.”
 “yes,” i agreed, “peacocks would be appropriate.”
 “and little pages dressed in yellow velvet.”
 she met my glance soberly for a moment and then burst into a peal of merry
 laughter.
 “do you know, miss beverley,” i said, watching her, “i find it hard to
 place you in the household of the colonel.”
 “yes?” she said simply; “you must.”
 “oh, then you realize that you are—”
 “out of place here?”
 “quite.”
 “of course i am.”
 she smiled, shook her head, and changed the subject.
 “i am so glad mr. paul harley has come down,” she confessed.
 “you know my friend by name, then?”
 “yes,” she replied, “someone i met in nice spoke of him, and i know he is
 very clever.”
 “in nice? did you live in nice before you came here?”
 val beverley nodded slowly, and her glance grew oddly retrospective.
 “i lived for over a year with madame de stämer in a little villa on the
 promenade des anglaise,” she replied. “that was after madame was injured.”
 “she sustained her injuries during the war, i understand?”
 “yes. poor madame. the hospital of which she was in charge was bombed and
 the shock left her as you see her. i was there, too, but i luckily escaped
 without injury.”
 “what, you were there?”
 “yes. that was where i first met madame de stämer. she used to be very
 wealthy, you see, and she established this hospital in france at her own
 expense, and i was one of her assistants for a time. she lost both her
 husband and her fortune in the war, and as if that were not bad enough,
 lost the use of her limbs, too.”
 “poor woman,” i said. “i had no idea her life had been so tragic. she has
 wonderful courage.”
 “courage!” exclaimed the girl, “if you knew all that i know about her.”
 her face grew sweetly animated as she bent toward me excitedly and
 confidentially.
 “really, she is simply wonderful. i learned to respect her in those days
 as i have never respected any other woman in the world; and when, after
 all her splendid work, she, so vital and active, was stricken down like
 that, i felt that i simply could not leave her, especially as she asked me
 to stay.”
 “so you went with her to nice?”
 “yes. then the colonel took this house, and we came here, but—”
 she hesitated, and glanced at me curiously.
 “perhaps you are not quite happy?”
 “no,” she said, “i am not. you see it was different in france. i knew so
 many people. but here at cray’s folly it is so lonely, and madame is—”
 again she hesitated.
 “yes?”
 “well,” she laughed in an embarrassed fashion, “i am afraid of her at
 times.”
 “in what way?”
 “oh, in a silly, womanish sort of way. of course she is a wonderful
 manager; she rules the house with a rod of iron. but really i haven’t
 anything to do here, and i feel frightfully out of place sometimes. then
 the colonel—oh, but what am i talking about?”
 “won’t you tell me what it is that the colonel fears?”
 “you know that he fears something, then?”
 “of course. that is why paul harley is here.”
 a change came over the girl’s face; a look almost of dread.
 “i wish i knew what it all meant.”
 “you are aware, then, that there is something wrong?”
 “naturally i am. sometimes i have been so frightened that i have made up
 my mind to leave the very next day.”
 “you mean that you have been frightened at night?” i asked with curiosity.
 “dreadfully frightened.”
 “won’t you tell me in what way?”
 she looked up at me swiftly, then turned her head aside, and bit her lip.
 “no, not now,” she replied. “i can’t very well.”
 “then at least tell me why you stayed?”
 “well,” she smiled rather pathetically, “for one thing, i haven’t anywhere
 else to go.”
 “have you no friends in england?”
 she shook her head.
 “no. there was only poor daddy, and he died over two years ago. that was
 when i went to nice.”
 “poor little girl,” i said; and the words were spoken before i realized
 their undue familiarity.
 an apology was on the tip of my tongue, but miss beverley did not seem to
 have noticed the indiscretion. indeed my sympathy was sincere, and i think
 she had appreciated the fact.
 she looked up again with a bright smile.
 “why are we talking about such depressing things on this simply heavenly
 day?” she exclaimed.
 “goodness knows,” said i. “will you show me round these lovely gardens?”
 “delighted, sir!” replied the girl, rising and sweeping me a mocking
 curtsey.
 thereupon we set out, and at every step i found a new delight in some
 wayward curl, in a gesture, in the sweet voice of my companion. her merry
 laugh was music, but in wistful mood i think she was even more alluring.
 the menace, if menace there were, which overhung cray’s folly, ceased to
 exist—for me, at least, and i blessed the lucky chance which had led
 to my presence there.
 we were presently rejoined by colonel menendez and paul harley, and i
 gathered that my surmise that it had been their voices which i had heard
 proceeding from the top of the tower to have been only partly accurate.
 “i know you will excuse me, mr. harley,” said the colonel, “for detailing
 the duty to pedro, but my wind is not good enough for the stairs.”
 he used idiomatic english at times with that facility which some
 foreigners acquire, but always smiled in a self-satisfied way when he had
 employed a slang term.
 “i quite understand, colonel,” replied harley. “the view from the top was
 very fine.”
 “and now, gentlemen,” continued the colonel, “if miss beverley will excuse
 us, we will retire to the library and discuss business.”
 “as you wish,” said harley; “but i have an idea that it is your custom to
 rest in the afternoon.”
 colonel menendez shrugged his shoulders. “it used to be,” he admitted,
 “but i have too much to think about in these days.”
 “i can see that you have much to tell me,” admitted harley; “and therefore
 i am entirely at your service.”
 val beverley smiled and walked away swinging her book, at the same time
 treating me to a glance which puzzled me considerably. i wondered if i had
 mistaken its significance, for it had seemed to imply that she had
 accepted me as an ally. certainly it served to awaken me to the fact that
 i had discovered a keen personal interest in the mystery which hung over
 this queerly assorted household.
 i glanced at my friend as the colonel led the way into the house. i saw
 him staring upward with a peculiar expression upon his face, and following
 the direction of his glance i could see an awning spread over one of the
 gray-stone balconies. beneath it, reclining in a long cane chair, lay
 madame de stämer. i think she was asleep; at any rate, she gave no sign,
 but lay there motionless, as harley and i walked in through the open
 french window followed by colonel menendez.
 odd and unimportant details sometimes linger long in the memory. and i
 remember noticing that a needle of sunlight, piercing a crack in the
 gaily-striped awning rested upon a ring which madame wore, so that the
 diamonds glittered like sparks of white-hot fire.
 colonel menendez conducted us to a long, lofty library in which might be
 detected the same note of un-english luxury manifested in the other
 appointments of the house. the room, in common with every other which i
 had visited in cray’s folly, was carried out in oak: doors, window frames,
 mantelpiece, and ceiling representing fine examples of this massive
 woodwork. indeed, if the eccentricity of the designer of cray’s folly were
 not sufficiently demonstrated by the peculiar plan of the building, its
 construction wholly of granite and oak must have remarked him a man of
 unusual if substantial ideas.
 there were four long windows opening on to a veranda which commanded a
 view of part of the rose garden and of three terraced lawns descending to
 a lake upon which i perceived a number of swans. beyond, in the valley,
 lay verdant pastures, where cattle grazed. a lark hung carolling blithely
 far above, and the sky was almost cloudless. i could hear a steam reaper
 at work somewhere in the distance. this, with the more intimate rattle of
 a lawn-mower wielded by a gardener who was not visible from where i stood,
 alone disturbed the serene silence, except that presently i detected the
 droning of many bees among the roses. sunlight flooded the prospect; but
 the veranda lay in shadow, and that long, oaken room was refreshingly cool
 and laden with the heavy perfume of the flowers.
 from the windows, then, one beheld a typical english summer-scape, but the
 library itself struck an altogether more exotic note. there were many
 glazed bookcases of a garish design in ebony and gilt, and these were
 laden with a vast collection of works in almost every european language,
 reflecting perhaps the cosmopolitan character of the colonel’s household.
 there was strange spanish furniture upholstered in perforated leather and
 again displaying much gilt. there were suits of black armour and a great
 number of moorish ornaments. the pictures were fine but sombre, and all of
 the spanish school.
 one velasquez in particular i noted with surprise, reflecting that,
 assuming it to be an authentic work of the master, my entire worldly
 possessions could not have enabled me to buy it. it was the portrait of a
 typical spanish cavalier and beyond doubt a menendez. in fact, the
 resemblance between the haughty spanish grandee, who seemed about to step
 out of the canvas and pick a quarrel with the spectator, and colonel don
 juan himself was almost startling. evidently, our host had imported most
 of his belongings from cuba.
 “gentlemen,” he said, as we entered, “make yourselves quite at home, i
 beg. all my poor establishment contains is for your entertainment and
 service.”
 he drew up two long, low lounge chairs, the arms provided with receptacles
 to contain cooling drinks; and the mere sight of these chairs mentally
 translated me to the spanish main, where i pictured them set upon the
 veranda of that hacienda which had formerly been our host’s residence.
 harley and i became seated and colonel menendez disposed himself upon a
 leather-covered couch, nodding apologetically as he did so.
 “my health requires that i should recline for a certain number of hours
 every day,” he explained. “so you will please forgive me.”
 “my dear colonel menendez,” said harley, “i feel sure that you are
 interrupting your siesta in order to discuss the unpleasant business which
 finds us in such pleasant surroundings. allow me once again to suggest
 that we postpone this matter until, shall we say, after dinner?”
 “no, no! no, no,” protested the colonel, waving his hand deprecatingly.
 “here is pedro with coffee and some curaçao of a kind which i can really
 recommend, although you may be unfamiliar with it.”
 i was certainly unfamiliar with the liqueur which he insisted we must
 taste, and which was contained in a sort of square, opaque bottle unknown,
 i think, to english wine merchants. beyond doubt it was potent stuff; and
 some cigars which the spaniard produced on this occasion and which were
 enclosed in little glass cylinders resembling test-tubes and elaborately
 sealed, i recognized to be priceless. they convinced me, if conviction had
 not visited me already, that colonel don juan sarmiento menendez belonged
 to that old school of west indian planters by whom the tradition of the
 golden americas had been for long preserved in the spanish main.
 we discussed indifferent matters for a while, sipping this wonderful
 curaçao of our host’s. the effect created by the colonel’s story faded
 entirely, and when, the latter being unable to conceal his drowsiness,
 harley stood up, i took the hint with gratitude; for at that moment i did
 not feel in the mood to discuss serious business or indeed business of any
 kind.
 “gentlemen,” said the colonel, also rising, in spite of our protests, “i
 will observe your wishes. my guests’ wishes are mine. we will meet the
 ladies for tea on the terrace.”
 harley and i walked out into the garden together, our courteous host
 standing in the open window, and bowing in that exaggerated fashion which
 in another might have been ridiculous but which was possible in colonel
 menendez, because of the peculiar grace of deportment which was his.
 as we descended the steps i turned and glanced back, i know not why. but
 the impression which i derived of the colonel’s face as he stood there in
 the shadow of the veranda was one i can never forget.
 his expression had changed utterly, or so it seemed to me. he no longer
 resembled velasquez’ haughty cavalier; gone, too, was the debonnaire
 bearing, i turned my head aside swiftly, hoping that he had not detected
 my backward glance.
 i felt that i had violated hospitality. i felt that i had seen what i
 should not have seen. and the result was to bring about that which no
 story of west indian magic could ever have wrought in my mind.
 a dreadful, cold premonition claimed me, a premonition that this was a
 doomed man.
 the look which i had detected upon his face was an indefinable, an
 indescribable look; but i had seen it in the eyes of one who had been
 bitten by a poisonous reptile and who knew his hours to be numbered. it
 was uncanny, unnerving; and whereas at first the atmosphere of colonel
 menendez’s home had seemed to be laden with prosperous security, now that
 sense of ease and restfulness was gone—and gone for ever.
 “harley,” i said, speaking almost at random, “this promises to be the
 strangest case you have ever handled.”
 “promises?” paul harley laughed shortly. “it is the strangest case,
 knox. it is a case of wheels within wheels, of mystery crowning mystery.
 have you studied our host?”
 “closely.”
 “and what conclusion have you formed?”
 “none at the moment; but i think one is slowly crystalizing.”
 “hm,” muttered harley, as we paced slowly on amid the rose trees. “of one
 thing i am satisfied.”
 “what is that?”
 “that colonel menendez is not afraid of bat wing, whoever or whatever bat
 wing may be.”
 “not afraid?”
 “certainly he is not afraid, knox. he has possibly been afraid in the
 past, but now he is resigned.”
 “resigned to what?”
 “resigned to death!”
 “good god, harley, you are right!” i cried. “you are right! i saw it in
 his eyes as we left the library.”
 harley stopped and turned to me sharply.
 “you saw this in the colonel’s eyes?” he challenged.
 “i did.”
 “which corroborates my theory,” he said, softly; “for i had seen it
 elsewhere.”
 “where do you mean, harley?”
 “in the face of madame de stämer.”
 “what?”
 “knox”—harley rested his hand upon my arm and looked about him
 cautiously—“she knows.”
 “but knows what?”
 “that is the question which we are here to answer, but i am as sure as it
 is humanly possible to be sure of anything that whatever colonel menendez
 may tell us to-night, one point at least he will withhold.”
 “what do you expect him to withhold?”
 “the meaning of the sign of the bat wing.”
 “then you think he knows its meaning?”
 “he has told us that it is the death-token of voodoo.”
 i stared at harley in perplexity.
 “then you believe his explanation to be false?”
 “not necessarily, knox. it may be what he claims for it. but he is keeping
 something back. he speaks all the time from behind a barrier which he,
 himself, has deliberately erected against me.”
 “i cannot understand why he should do so,” i declared, as he looked at me
 steadily. “within the last few moments i have become definitely convinced
 that his appeal to you was no idle one. therefore, why should he not offer
 you every aid in his power?”
 “why, indeed?” muttered harley.
 “the same thing,” i continued, “applies to madame de stämer. if ever i
 have seen love-light in a woman’s eyes i have seen it in hers, to-day,
 whenever her glance has rested upon colonel menendez. harley, i believe
 she literally worships the ground he walks upon.”
 “she does, she does!” cried my companion, and emphasized the words with
 beats of his clenched fist. “it is utterly, damnably mystifying. but i
 tell you, she knows, knox, she knows!”
 “you mean she knows that he is a doomed man?”
 harley nodded rapidly.
 “they both know,” he replied; “but there is something which they dare not
 divulge.”
 he glanced at me swiftly, and his bronzed face wore a peculiar expression.
 “have you had an opportunity of any private conversation with miss val
 beverley?” he enquired.
 “yes,” i said. “surely you remember that you found me chatting with her
 when you returned from your inspection of the tower.”
 “i remember perfectly well, but i thought you might have just met. now it
 appears to me, knox, that you have quickly established yourself in the
 good books of a very charming girl. my only reason for visiting the tower
 was to afford you just this opportunity! don’t frown. beyond reminding you
 of the fact that she has been on intimate terms with madame de stämer for
 some years, i will not intrude in any way upon your private plans in that
 direction.”
 i stared at him, and i suppose my expression was an angry one.
 “surely you don’t misunderstand me?” he said. “a cultured english girl of
 that type cannot possibly have lived with these people without learning
 something of the matters which are puzzling us so badly. am i asking too
 much?”
 “i see what you mean,” i said, slowly. “no, i suppose you are right,
 harley.”
 “good,” he muttered. “i will leave that side of the enquiry in your very
 capable hands, knox.”
 he paused, and began to stare about him.
 “from this point,” said he, “we have an unobstructed view of the tower.”
 we turned and stood looking up at the unsightly gray structure, with its
 geometrical rows of windows and the minaret-like gallery at the top.
 “of course”—i broke a silence of some moments duration—“the
 entire scheme of cray’s folly is peculiar, but the rooms, except for a
 uniformity which is monotonous, and an unimaginative scheme of decoration
 which makes them all seem alike, are airy and well lighted, eminently sane
 and substantial. the tower, however, is quite inexcusable, unless the idea
 was to enable the occupant to look over the tops of the trees in all
 directions.”
 “yes,” agreed harley, “it is an ugly landmark. but yonder up the slope i
 can see the corner of what seems to be a very picturesque house of some
 kind.”
 “i caught a glimpse of it earlier to-day,” i replied. “yes, from this
 point a little more of it is visible. apparently quite an old place.”
 i paused, staring up the hillside, but harley, hands locked behind him and
 chin lowered reflectively, was pacing on. i joined him, and we proceeded
 for some little distance in silence, passing a gardener who touched his
 cap respectfully and to whom i thought at first my companion was about to
 address some remark. harley passed on, however, still occupied, it seemed,
 with his reflections, and coming to a gravel path which, bordering one
 side of the lawns, led down from terrace to terrace into the valley,
 turned, and began to descend.
 “let us go and interview the swans,” he murmured absently.
 in certain moods paul harley was impossible as a companion, and i, who
 knew him well, had learned to leave him to his own devices at such times.
 these moods invariably corresponded with his meeting some problem to the
 heart of which the lance of his keen wit failed to penetrate. his humour
 might not display itself in the spoken word, he merely became oblivious of
 everything and everybody around him. people might talk to him and he
 scarce noted their presence, familiar faces appear and he would see them
 not. outwardly he remained the observant harley who could see further into
 a mystery than any other in england, but his observation was entirely
 introspective; although he moved amid the hustle of life he was
 spiritually alone, communing with the solitude which dwells in every man’s
 heart.
 presently, then, as we came to the lake at the foot of the sloping lawns,
 where water lilies were growing and quite a number of swans had their
 habitation, i detected the fact that i had ceased to exist so far as
 harley was concerned. knowing this mood of old, i pursued my way alone,
 pressing on across the valley and making for a swing gate which seemed to
 open upon a public footpath. coming to this gate i turned and looked back.
 paul harley was standing where i had left him by the edge of the lake,
 staring as if hypnotized at the slowly moving swans. but i would have been
 prepared to wager that he saw neither swans nor lake, but mentally was far
 from the spot, deep in some complex maze of reflection through which no
 ordinary mind could hope to follow him.
 i glanced at my watch and found that it was but little after two o’clock.
 luncheon at cray’s folly was early. i therefore had some time upon my
 hands and i determined to employ it in exploring part of the
 neighbourhood. accordingly i filled and lighted my pipe and strolled
 leisurely along the footpath, enjoying the beauty of the afternoon, and
 admiring the magnificent timber which grew upon the southerly slopes of
 the valley.
 larks sang high above me and the air was fragrant with those wonderful
 earthy scents which belong to an english countryside. a herd of very fine
 jersey cattle presently claimed inspection, and a little farther on i
 found myself upon a high road where a brown-faced fellow seated aloft upon
 a hay-cart cheerily gave me good-day as i passed.
 quite at random i turned to the left and followed the road, so that
 presently i found myself in a very small village, the principal building
 of which was a very small inn called the “lavender arms.”
 colonel menendez’s curaçao, combined with the heat of the day, had made me
 thirsty; for which reason i stepped into the bar-parlour determined to
 sample the local ale. i wars served by the landlady, a neat, round, red
 little person, and as she retired, having placed a foam-capped mug upon
 the counter, her glance rested for a moment upon the only other occupant
 of the room, a man seated in an armchair immediately to the right of the
 door. a glass of whisky stood on the window ledge at his elbow, and that
 it was by no means the first which he had imbibed, his appearance seemed
 to indicate.
 having tasted the cool contents of my mug, i leaned back against the
 counter and looked at this person curiously.
 he was apparently of about medium height, but of a somewhat fragile
 appearance. he was dressed like a country gentleman, and a stick and soft
 hat lay upon the ledge near his glass. but the thing about him which had
 immediately arrested my attention was his really extraordinary resemblance
 to paul harley’s engraving of edgar allan poe.
 i wondered at first if harley’s frequent references to the eccentric
 american genius, to whom he accorded a sort of hero-worship, were
 responsible for my imagining a close resemblance where only a slight one
 existed. but inspection of that strange, dark face convinced me of the
 fact that my first impression had been a true one. perhaps, in my
 curiosity, i stared rather rudely.
 “you will pardon me, sir,” said the stranger, and i was startled to note
 that he spoke with a faint american accent, “but are you a literary man?”
 as i had judged to be the case, he was slightly bemused, but by no means
 drunk, and although his question was abrupt it was spoken civilly enough.
 “journalism is one of the several occupations in which i have failed,” i
 replied, lightly.
 “you are not a fiction writer?”
 “i lack the imagination necessary for that craft, sir.”
 the other wagged his head slowly and took a drink of whisky.
 “nevertheless,” he said, and raised his finger solemnly, “you were
 thinking that i resembled edgar allan poe!”
 “good heavens!” i exclaimed, for the man had really amazed me. “you
 clearly resemble him in more ways than one. i must really ask you to
 inform me how you deduced such a fact from a mere glance of mine.”
 “i will tell you, sir,” he replied. “but, first, i must replenish my
 glass, and i should be honoured if you would permit me to replenish
 yours.”
 “thanks very much,” i said, “but i would rather you excused me.”
 “as you wish, sir,” replied the american with grave courtesy, “as you
 wish.”
 he stepped up to the counter and rapped upon it with half a crown, until
 the landlady appeared. she treated me to a pathetic glance, but refilled
 the empty glass.
 my american acquaintance having returned to his seat and having added a
 very little water to the whisky went on:
 “now, sir,” said he, “my name is colin camber, formerly of richmond,
 virginia, united states of america, but now of the guest house, surrey,
 england, at your service.”
 taking my cue from mr. camber’s gloomy but lofty manner, i bowed formally
 and mentioned my name.
 “i am delighted to make your acquaintance, mr. knox,” he assured me; “and
 now, sir, to answer your question. when you came in a few moments ago you
 glanced at me. your eyes did not open widely as is the case when one
 recognizes, or thinks one recognizes, an acquaintance, they narrowed. this
 indicated retrospection. for a moment they turned aside. you were
 focussing a fugitive idea, a memory. you captured it. you looked at me
 again, and your successive glances read as follows: the hair worn
 uncommonly long, the mathematical brow, the eyes of a poet, the slight
 moustache, small mouth, weak chin; the glass at his elbow. the resemblance
 is complete. knowing how complete it is myself, sir, i ventured to test my
 theory, and it proved to be sound.”
 now, as mr. colin camber had thus spoken in the serious manner of a
 slightly drunken man, i had formed the opinion that i stood in the
 presence of a very singular character. here was that seeming mésalliance
 which not infrequently begets genius: a powerful and original mind allied
 to a weak will. i wondered what mr. colin camber’s occupation might be,
 and somewhat, too, i wondered why his name was unfamiliar to me. for that
 the possessor of that brow and those eyes could fail to make his mark in
 any profession which he might take up i was unwilling to believe.
 “your exposition has been very interesting, mr. camber,” i said. “you are
 a singularly close observer, i perceive.”
 “yes,” he replied, “i have passed my life in observing the ways of my
 fellowmen, a study which i have pursued in various parts of the world
 without appreciable benefit to myself. i refer to financial benefit.”
 he contemplated me with a look which had grown suddenly pathetic.
 “i would not have you think, sir,” he added, “that i am an habitual toper.
 i have latterly been much upset by—domestic worries, and—er—”
 he emptied his glass at a draught. “surely, mr. knox, you are going to
 replenish? whilst you are doing so, would you kindly request mrs. wootton
 to extend the same favour to myself?”
 but at that moment mrs. wootton in person appeared behind the counter.
 “time, please, gentlemen,” she said; “it is gone half-past two.”
 “what!” exclaimed mr. camber, rising. “what is that? you decline to serve
 me, mrs. wootton?”
 “why, not at all, mr. camber,” answered the landlady, “but i can serve no
 one now; it’s after time.”
 “you decline to serve me,” he muttered, his speech becoming slurred. “am
 i, then, to be insulted?”
 i caught a glance of entreaty from the landlady. “my dear sir,” i said,
 genially, “we must bow to the law, i suppose. at least we are better off
 here than in america.”
 “ah, that is true,” agreed mr. camber, throwing his head back and speaking
 the words as though they possessed some deep dramatic significance. “yes,
 but such laws are an insult to every intelligent man.”
he sat down again rather heavily, and i stood looking from him to the
landlady, and wondering what i should do. the matter was decided for
me, however, in a way which i could never have foreseen. for, hearing
a light footfall upon the step which led up to the bar-parlour, i
turned—and there almost beside me stood a wrinkled little chinaman!
 he wore a blue suit and a tweed cap, he wore queer, thick-soled
slippers, and his face was like a smiling mask hewn out of very old
ivory. i could scarcely credit the evidence of my senses, since the
lavender arms was one of the last places in which i should have looked
for a native of china.
 mr. colin camber rose again, and fixing his melancholy eyes upon the
 newcomer:
 “ah tsong,” he said in a tone of cold anger, “what are you doing here?”
 quite unmoved the chinaman replied:
 “blingee you chit, sir, vellee soon go back.”
 “what do you mean?” demanded mr. camber. “answer me, ah tsong: who sent
 you?”
 “lilly missee,” crooned the chinaman, smiling up into the other’s face
 with a sort of childish entreaty. “lilly missee.”
 “oh,” said mr. camber in a changed voice. “oh.”
 he stood very upright for a moment, his gaze set upon the wrinkled chinese
 face. then he looked at mrs. wootton and bowed, and looked at me and
 bowed, very stiffly.
 “i must excuse myself, sir,” he announced. “my wife desires my presence at
 home.”
 i returned his bow, and as he walked quite steadily toward the door,
 followed by ah tsong, he paused, turned, and said: “mr. knox, i should
 esteem it a friendly action if you would spare me an hour of your company
 before you leave surrey. my visitors are few. any one, any one, will
 direct you to the guest house. i am persuaded that we have much in common.
 good-day, sir.”
 he went down the steps, disappearing in company with the chinaman, and
 having watched them go, i turned to mrs. wootton, the landlady, in silent
 astonishment.
 she nodded her head and sighed.
 “the same every day and every evening for months past,” she said. “i am
 afraid it’s going to be the death of him.”
 “do you mean that mr. camber comes here every day and is always fetched by
 the chinaman?”
 “twice every day,” corrected the landlady, “and his poor wife sends here
 regularly.”
 “what a tragedy,” i muttered, “and such a brilliant man.”
 “ah,” said she, busily removing jugs and glasses from the counter, “it
 does seem a terrible thing.”
 “has mr. camber lived for long in this neighbourhood?” i ventured to
 inquire.
 “it was about three years ago, sir, that he took the old guest house at
 mid-hatton. i remember the time well enough because of all the trouble
 there was about him bringing a chinaman down here.”
 “i can imagine it must have created something of a sensation,” i murmured.
 “is the guest house a large property?”
 “oh, no, sir, only ten rooms and a garden, and it had been vacant for a
 long time. it belongs to what is called the crayland park estate.”
 “mr. camber, i take it, is a literary man?”
 “so i believe, sir.”
 mrs. wootton, having cleared the counter, glanced up at the clock and then
 at me with a cheery but significant smile.
 “i see that it is after time,” i said, returning the smile, “but the queer
 people who seem to live hereabouts interest me very much.”
 “i can’t wonder at that, sir!” said the landlady, laughing outright.
 “chinamen and spanish men and what-not. if some of the old gentry that
 lived here before the war could see it, they wouldn’t recognize the place,
 of that i am sure.”
 “ah, well,” said i, pausing at the step, “i shall hope to see more of mr.
 camber, and of yourself too, madam, for your ale is excellent.”
 “thank you, sir, i’m sure,” said the landlady much gratified, “but as to
 mr. camber, i really doubt if he would know you if you met him again. not
 if he was sober, i mean.”
 “really?”
 “oh, it’s a fact, believe me. just in the last six months or so he has
 started on the rampage like, but some of the people he has met in here and
 asked to call upon him have done it, thinking he meant it.”
 “and they have not been well received?” said i, lingering.
 “they have had the door shut in their faces!” declared mrs. wootton with a
 certain indignation. “he either does not remember what he says or does
 when he is in drink, or he pretends he doesn’t. oh, dear, it’s a funny
 world. well, good-day, sir.”
 “good-day,” said i, and came out of the lavender arms full of sympathy
 with the views of the “old gentry,” as outlined by mrs. wootton; for
 certainly it would seem that this quiet spot in the surrey hills had
 become a rallying ground for peculiar people.
 of tea upon the veranda of cray’s folly that afternoon i retain several
 notable memories. i got into closer touch with my host and hostess,
 without achieving anything like a proper understanding of either of them,
 and i procured a new viewpoint of miss val beverley. her repose was
 misleading. she deliberately subjugated her own vital personality to that
 of madame de stämer, why, i knew not, unless she felt herself under an
 obligation to do so. that her blue-gray eyes could be wistful was true
 enough, they could also be gay; and once i detected in them a look of
 sadness which dispelled the butterfly illusion belonging to her dainty
 slenderness, to her mobile lips, to the vagabond curling hair of russet
 brown.
 paul harley’s manner remained absent, but i who knew his moods so well
 recognized that this abstraction was no longer real. it was a pose which
 he often adopted when in reality he was keenly interested in his
 surroundings. it baffled me, however, as effectively as it baffled others,
 and whilst at one moment i decided that he was studying colonel menendez,
 in the next i became convinced that madame de stämer was the subject upon
 his mental dissecting table.
 that he should find in madame a fascinating problem did not surprise me.
 she must have afforded tempting study for any psychologist. i could not
 fathom the nature of the kinship existing between herself and the spanish
 colonel, for madame de stämer was french to her fingertips. her
 expressions, her gestures, her whole outlook on life proclaimed the
 fashionable parisienne.
 she possessed a vigorous masculine intelligence and was the most
 entertaining companion imaginable. she was daringly outspoken, and it was
 hard to believe that her gaiety was forced. yet, as the afternoon wore on,
 i became more and more convinced that such was the case.
 i thought that before affliction visited her madame de stämer must have
 been a vivacious and a beautiful woman. her vivacity remained and much of
 her beauty, so that it was difficult to believe her snow-white hair to be
 a product of nature. again and again i found myself regarding it as a
 powdered coiffure of the pompadour period and wondering why madame wore no
 patches.
 that a deep and sympathetic understanding existed between herself and
 colonel menendez was unmistakable. more than once i intercepted glances
 from the dark eyes of madame which were lover-like, yet laden with a
 profound sorrow. she was playing a rôle, and i was convinced that harley
 knew this. it was not merely a courageous fight against affliction on the
 part of a woman of the world, versed in masking her real self from the
 prying eyes of society, it was a studied performance prompted by some
 deeper motive.
 she dressed with exquisite taste, and to see her seated there amid her
 cushions, gesticulating vivaciously, one would never have supposed that
 she was crippled. my admiration for her momentarily increased, the more so
 since i could see that she was sincerely fond of val beverley, whose every
 movement she followed with looks of almost motherly affection. this was
 all the more strange as madame de stämer whose age, i supposed, lay
 somewhere on the sunny side of forty, was of a type which expects, and
 wins, admiration, long after the average woman has ceased to be
 attractive.
 one endowed with such a temperament is as a rule unreasonably jealous of
 youth and good looks in another. i could not determine if madame’s
 attitude were to be ascribed to complacent self-satisfaction or to a
 nobler motive. it sufficed for me that she took an unfeigned joy in the
 youthful sweetness of her companion.
 “val, dear,” she said, presently, addressing the girl, “you should make
 those sleeves shorter, my dear.”
 she had a rapid way of speaking, and possessed a slightly husky but
 fascinatingly vibrant voice.
 “your arms are very pretty. you should not hide them.”
 val beverley blushed, and laughed to conceal her embarrassment.
 “oh, my dear,” exclaimed madame, “why be ashamed of arms? all women have
 arms, but some do well to hide them.”
 “quite right, marie,” agreed the colonel, his thin voice affording an odd
 contrast to the deeper tones of his cousin. “but it is the scraggy ones
 who seem to delight in displaying their angles.”
 “the english, yes,” madame admitted, “but the french, no. they are too
 clever, juan.”
 “frenchwomen think too much about their looks,” said val beverley,
 quietly. “oh, you know they do, madame. they would rather die than be
 without admiration.”
 madame shrugged her shoulders.
 “so would i, my dear,” she confessed, “although i cannot walk. without
 admiration there is”—she snapped her fingers—“nothing. and who
 would notice a linnet when a bird of paradise was about, however sweet her
 voice? tell me that, my dear?”
 paul harley aroused himself and laughed heartily.
 “yet,” he said, “i think with miss beverley, that this love of elegance
 does not always make for happiness. surely it is the cause of half the
 domestic tragedies in france?”
 “ah, the french love elegance,” cried madame, shrugging, “they cannot help
 it. to secure what is elegant a frenchwoman will sometimes forget her
 husband, yes, but never forget herself.”
 “really, marie,” protested the colonel, “you say most strange things!”
 “is that so, juan?” she replied, casting one of her queer glances in his
 direction; “but how would you like to be surrounded by a lot of drabs, eh?
 that man, mr. knox,” she extended one white hand in the direction of
 colonel menendez, the fingers half closed, in a gesture which curiously
 reminded me of sarah bernhardt, “that man would notice if a parlourmaid
 came into the room with a shoe unbuttoned. poof! if we love elegance it is
 because without it the men would never love us.”
 colonel menendez bent across the table and kissed the white fingers in his
 courtier-like fashion.
 “my sweet cousin,” he said, “i should love you in rags.”
 madame smiled and flushed like a girl, but withdrawing her hand she
 shrugged.
 “they would have to be pretty rags!” she added.
 during this little scene i detected val beverley looking at me in a
 vaguely troubled way, and it was easy to guess that she was wondering what
 construction i should place upon it. however:
 “i am going into the town,” declared madame de stämer, energetically.
 “half the things ordered from hartley’s have never been sent.”
 “oh, madame, please let me go,” cried val beverley.
 “my dear,” pronounced madame, “i will not let you go, but i will let you
 come with me if you wish.”
 she rang a little bell which stood upon the tea-table beside the urn, and
 pedro came out through the drawing room.
 “pedro,” she said, “is the car ready?”
 the spanish butler bowed.
 “tell carter to bring it round. hurry, dear,” to the girl, “if you are
 coming with me. i shall not be a minute.”
 thereupon she whisked her mechanical chair about, waved her hand to
 dismiss pedro, and went steering through the drawing room at a great rate,
 with val beverley walking beside her.
 as we resumed our seats colonel menendez lay back with half-closed eyes,
 his glance following the chair and its occupant until both were swallowed
 up in the shadows of the big drawing room.
 “madame de stämer is a very remarkable woman,” said paul harley.
 “remarkable?” replied the colonel. “the spirit of all the old chivalry of
 france is imprisoned within her, i think.”
 he passed cigarettes around, of a long kind resembling cheroots and
 wrapped in tobacco leaf. i thought it strange that having thus emphasized
 madame’s nationality he did not feel it incumbent upon him to explain the
 mystery of their kinship. however, he made no attempt to do so, and almost
 before we had lighted up, a racy little two-seater was driven around the
 gravel path by carter, the chauffeur who had brought us to cray’s folly
 from london.
 the man descended and began to arrange wraps and cushions, and a few
 moments later back came madame again, dressed for driving. carter was
 about to lift her into the car when colonel menendez stood up and
 advanced.
 “sit down, juan, sit down!” said madame, sharply.
 a look of keen anxiety, i had almost said of pain, leapt into her eyes,
 and the colonel hesitated.
 “how often must i tell you,” continued the throbbing voice, “that you must
 not exert yourself.”
 colonel menendez accepted the rebuke humbly, but the incident struck me as
 grotesque; for it was difficult to associate delicacy with such a fine
 specimen of well-preserved manhood as the colonel.
 however, carter performed the duty of assisting madame into her little
 car, and when for a moment he supported her upright, before placing her
 among the cushions, i noted that she was a tall woman, slender and
 elegant.
 all smiles and light, sparkling conversation, she settled herself
 comfortably at the wheel and val beverley got in beside her. madame nodded
 to carter in dismissal, waved her hand to colonel menendez, cried “au
 revoir!” and then away went the little car, swinging around the angle of
 the house and out of sight.
 our host stood bare-headed upon the veranda listening to the sound of the
 engine dying away among the trees. he seemed to be lost in reflection from
 which he only aroused himself when the purr of the motor became inaudible.
 “and now, gentlemen,” he said, and suppressed a sigh, “we have much to
 talk about. this spot is cool, but is it sufficiently private? perhaps,
 mr. harley, you would prefer to talk in the library?”
 paul harley flicked ash from the end of his cigarette.
 “better still in your own study, colonel menendez,” he replied.
 “what, do you suspect eavesdroppers?” asked the colonel, his manner
 becoming momentarily agitated.
 he looked at harley as though he suspected the latter of possessing
 private information.
 “we should neglect no possible precaution,” answered my friend. “that
 agencies inimical to your safety are focussed upon the house your own
 statement amply demonstrates.”
 colonel menendez seemed to be on the point of speaking again, but he
 checked himself and in silence led the way through the ornate library to a
 smaller room which opened out of it, and which was furnished as a study.
 here the motif was distinctly one of officialdom. although the southern
 element was not lacking, it was not so marked as in the library or in the
 hall. the place was appointed for utility rather than ornament. everything
 was in perfect order. in the library, with the blinds drawn, one might
 have supposed oneself in trinidad; in the study, under similar conditions,
 one might equally well have imagined downing street to lie outside the
 windows. essentially, this was the workroom of a man of affairs.
 having settled ourselves comfortably, paul harley opened the conversation.
 “in several particulars,” said he, “i find my information to be
 incomplete.”
 he consulted the back of an envelope, upon which, i presumed during the
 afternoon, he had made a number of pencilled notes.
 “for instance,” he continued, “your detection of someone watching the
 house, and subsequently of someone forcing an entrance, had no visible
 association with the presence of the bat wing attached to your front
 door?”
 “no,” replied the colonel, slowly, “these episodes took place a month
 ago.”
 “exactly a month ago?”
 “they took place immediately before the last full moon.”
 “ah, before the full moon. and because you associate the activities of
 voodoo with the full moon, you believe that the old menace has again
 become active?”
 the colonel nodded emphatically. he was busily engaged in rolling one of
 his eternal cigarettes.
 “this belief of yours was recently confirmed by the discovery of the bat
 wing?”
 “i no longer doubted,” said colonel menendez, shrugging his shoulders.
 “how could i?”
 “quite so,” murmured harley, absently, and evidently pursuing some private
 train of thought. “and now, i take it that your suspicions, if expressed
 in words would amount to this: during your last visit to cuba you (a)
 either killed some high priest of voodoo, or (b) seriously injured
 him? assuming the first theory to be the correct one, your death was
 determined upon by the sect over which he had formerly presided. assuming
 the second to be accurate, however, it is presumably the man himself for
 whom we must look. now, colonel menendez, kindly inform me if you recall
 the name of this man?”
 “i recall it very well,” replied the colonel. “his name was m’kombo, and
 he was a benin negro.”
 “assuming that he is still alive, what, roughly, would his age be to-day?”
 the colonel seemed to meditate, pushing a box of long martinique cigars
 across the table in my direction.
 “he would be an old man,” he pronounced. “i, myself, am fifty-two, and i
 should say that m’kombo if alive to-day would be nearer to seventy than
 sixty.”
 “ah,” murmured harley, “and did he speak english?”
 “a few words, i believe.”
 paul harley fixed his gaze upon the dark, aquiline face.
 “in short,” he said, “do you really suspect that it was m’kombo whose
 shadow you saw upon the lawn, who a month ago made a midnight entrance
 into cray’s folly, and who recently pinned a bat wing to the door?”
 colonel menendez seemed somewhat taken aback by this direct question. “i
 cannot believe it,” he confessed.
 “do you believe that this order or religion of voodooism has any existence
 outside those places where african negroes or descendents of negroes are
 settled?”
 “i should not have been prepared to believe it, mr. harley, prior to my
 experiences in washington and elsewhere.”
 “then you do believe that there are representatives of this cult to be met
 with in europe and america?”
 “i should have been prepared to believe it possible in america, for in
 america there are many negroes, but in england——”
 again he shrugged his shoulders.
 “i would remind you,” said harley, quietly, “that there are also quite a
 number of negroes in england. if you seriously believe voodoo to follow
 negro migration, i can see no objection to assuming it to be a universal
 cult.”
 “such an idea is incredible.”
 “yet by what other hypothesis,” asked harley, “are we to cover the facts
 of your own case as stated by yourself? now,” he consulted his pencilled
 notes, “there is another point. i gather that these african sorcerers rely
 largely upon what i may term intimidation. in other words, they claim the
 power of wishing an enemy to death.”
 he raised his eyes and stared grimly at the colonel.
 “i should not like to suppose that a man of your courage and culture could
 subscribe to such a belief.”
 “i do not, sir,” declared the colonel, warmly. “no obeah man could ever
 exercise his will upon me!”
 “yet, if i may say so,” murmured harley, “your will to live seems to have
 become somewhat weakened.”
 “what do you mean?”
 colonel menendez stood up, his delicate nostrils dilated. he glared
 angrily at harley.
 “i mean that i perceive a certain resignation in your manner of which i do
 not approve.”
 “you do not approve?” said colonel menendez, softly; and i thought
 as he stood looking down upon my friend that i had rarely seen a more
 formidable figure.
 paul harley had roused him unaccountably, and knowing my friend for a
 master of tact i knew also that this had been deliberate, although i could
 not even dimly perceive his object.
 “i occupy the position of a specialist,” harley continued, “and you occupy
 that of my patient. now, you cannot disguise from me that your mental
 opposition to this danger which threatens has become slackened. allow me
 to remind you that the strongest defence is counter-attack. you are angry,
 colonel menendez, but i would rather see you angry than apathetic. to come
 to my last point. you spoke of a neighbour in terms which led me to
 suppose that you suspected him of some association with your enemies. may
 i ask for the name of this person?”
 colonel menendez sat down again, puffing furiously at his cigarette,
 whilst beginning to roll another. he was much disturbed, was fighting to
 regain mastery of himself.
 “i apologize from the bottom of my heart,” he said, “for a breach of good
 behaviour which really was unforgivable. i was angry when i should have
 been grateful. much that you have said is true. because it is true, i
 despise myself.”
 he flashed a glance at paul harley.
 “awake,” he continued, “i care for no man breathing, black or white; but
 asleep”—he shrugged his shoulders. “it is in sleep that these
 dealers in unclean things obtain their advantage.”
 “you excite my curiosity,” declared harley.
 “listen,” colonel menendez bent forward, resting his elbows upon his
 knees. between the yellow fingers of his left hand he held the newly
 completed cigarette whilst he continued to puff vigorously at the old one.
 “you recollect my speaking of the death of a certain native girl?”
 paul harley nodded.
 “the real cause of her death was never known, but i obtained evidence to
 show that on the night after the wing of a bat had been attached to her
 hut, she wandered out in her sleep and visited the black belt. can you
 doubt that someone was calling her?”
 “calling her?”
 “mr. harley, she was obeying the call of m’kombo!”
 “the call of m’kombo? you refer to some kind of hypnotic
 suggestions?”
 “i illustrate,” replied the colonel, “to help to make clear something
 which i have to tell you. on the night when last the moon was full—on
 the night after someone had entered the house—i had retired early to
 bed. suddenly i awoke, feeling very cold. i awoke, i say, and where do you
 suppose i found myself?”
 “i am all anxiety to hear.”
 “on the point of entering the tudor garden—you call it tudor garden?—which
 is visible from the window of your room!”
 “most extraordinary,” murmured harley; “and you were in your night
 attire?”
 “i was.”
 “and what had awakened you?”
 “an accident. i believe a lucky accident. i had cut my bare foot upon the
 gravel and the pain awakened me.”
 “you had no recollection of any dream which had prompted you to go down
 into the garden?”
 “none whatever.”
 “does your room face in that direction?”
 “it does not. it faces the lake on the south of the house. i had descended
 to a side door, unbarred it, and walked entirely around the east wing
 before i awakened.”
 “your room faces the lake,” murmured harley.
 “yes.”
 their glances met, and in paul harley’s expression there seemed to be a
 challenge.
 “you have not yet told me,” said he, “the name of your neighbour.”
 colonel menendez lighted his new cigarette.
 “mr. harley,” he confessed, “i regret that i ever referred to this
 suspicion of mine. indeed it is hardly a suspicion, it is what i may call
 a desperate doubt. do you say that, a desperate doubt?”
 “i think i follow you,” said harley.
 “the fact is this, i only know of one person within ten miles of cray’s
 folly who has ever visited cuba.”
 “ah.”
 “i have no other scrap of evidence to associate him i with my shadowy
 enemy. this being so, you will pardon me if i ask you to forget that i
 ever referred to his existence.”
 he spoke the words with a sort of lofty finality, and accompanied them
 with a gesture of the hands which really left harley no alternative but to
 drop the subject.
 again their glances met, and it was patent to me that underlying all this
 conversation was something beyond my ken. what it was that harley
 suspected i could not imagine, nor what it was that colonel menendez
 desired to conceal; but tension was in the very air. the spaniard was on
 the defensive, and paul harley was puzzled, irritated.
 it was a strange interview, and one which in the light of after events i
 recognized to possess extraordinary significance. that sixth sense of
 harley’s was awake, was prompting him, but to what extent he understood
 its promptings at that hour i did not know, and have never known to this
 day. intuitively, i believe, as he sat there staring at colonel menendez,
 he began to perceive the shadow within a shadow which was the secret of
 cray’s folly, which was the thing called bat wing, which was the devilish
 force at that very hour alive and potent in our midst.
 this conversation in colonel menendez’s study produced a very unpleasant
 impression upon my mind. the atmosphere of cray’s folly seemed to become
 charged with unrest. of madame de stämer and miss beverley i saw nothing
 up to the time that i retired to dress. having dressed i walked into
 harley’s room, anxious to learn if he had formed any theory to account for
 the singular business which had brought us to surrey.
 harley had excused himself directly we had left the study, stating that he
 wished to get to the village post-office in time to send a telegram to
 london. our host had suggested a messenger, but this, as well as the offer
 of a car, harley had declined, saying that the exercise would aid
 reflection. nevertheless, i was surprised to find his room empty, for i
 could not imagine why the sending of a telegram should have detained him
 so long.
 dusk was falling, and viewed from the open window the tudor garden below
 looked very beautiful, part of it lying in a sort of purplish shadow and
 the rest being mystically lighted as though viewed through a golden veil.
 to the whole picture a sort of magic quality was added by a speck of
 high-light which rested upon the face of the old sun-dial.
 i thought that here was a fit illustration for a fairy tale; then i
 remembered the colonel’s account of how he had awakened in the act of
 entering this romantic plaisance, and i was touched anew by an
 unrestfulness, by a sense of the uncanny.
 i observed a book lying upon the dressing table, and concluding that it
 was one which harley had brought with him, i took it up, glancing at the
 title. it was “negro magic,” and switching on the light, for there was a
 private electric plant in cray’s folly, i opened the book at random and
 began to read.
 “the religion of the negro,” said this authority, “is emotional, and more
 often than not associated with beliefs in witchcraft and in the rites
 known as voodoo or obi mysteries. it has been endeavoured by some students
 to show that these are relics of the fetish worship of equatorial africa,
 but such a genealogy has never been satisfactorily demonstrated. the
 cannibalistic rituals, human sacrifices, and obscene ceremonies resembling
 those of the black sabbath of the middle ages, reported to prevail in
 haiti and other of the islands, and by some among the negroes of the
 southern states of america, may be said to rest on doubtful authority.
 nevertheless, it is a fact beyond doubt that among the negroes both of the
 west indies and the united states there is a widespread belief in the
 powers of the obeah man. a native who believes himself to have come under
 the spell of such a sorcerer will sink into a kind of decline and
 sometimes die.”
 at this point i discovered several paragraphs underlined in pencil, and
 concluding that the underlining had been done by paul harley, i read them
 with particular care. they were as follows: “according to hesketh j. bell,
 the term obeah is most probably derived from the substantive obi, a word
 used on the east coast of africa to denote witchcraft, sorcery, and
 fetishism in general. the etymology of obi has been traced to a very
 antique source, stretching far back into egyptian mythology. a serpent in
 the egyptian language was called ob or aub. obion is still the egyptian
 name for a serpent. moses, in the name of god, forbade the israelites ever
 to enquire of the demon, ob, which is translated in our bible: charmer or
 wizard, divinator or sorcerer. the witch of endor is called oub or ob,
 translated pythonissa; and oubois was the name of the basilisk or royal
 serpent, emblem of the sun and an ancient oracular deity of africa.”
 a paragraph followed which was doubly underlined, and pursuing my reading
 i made a discovery which literally caused me to hold my breath. this is
 what i read:
 “in a recent contribution to the occult review, mr. colin camber,
 the american authority, offered some very curious particulars in support
 of a theory to show that whereas snakes and scorpions have always been
 recognized as sacred by voodoo worshippers, the real emblem of their
 unclean religion is the bat, especially the vampire bat of south
 america.
 “he pointed out that the symptoms of one dying beneath the spell of an
 obeah man are closely paralleled in the cases of men and animals who have
 suffered from nocturnal attacks of blood-sucking bats.”
 i laid the open book down upon the bed. my brain was in a tumult. the
 several theories, or outlines of theories which hitherto i had
 entertained, were, by these simple paragraphs, cast into the utmost
 disorder. i thought of the colonel’s covert references to a neighbour whom
 he feared, of his guarded statement that the devotees of voodoo were not
 confined to the west indies, of the attack upon him in washington, of the
 bat wing pinned to the door of cray’s folly.
 incredulously, i thought of my acquaintance of the lavender arms, with his
 bemused expression and his magnificent brow; and a great doubt and wonder
 grew up in my mind.
 i became increasingly impatient for the return of paul harley. i felt that
 a clue of the first importance had fallen into my possession; so that
 when, presently, as i walked impatiently up and down the room, the door
 opened and harley entered, i greeted him excitedly.
 “harley!” i cried, “harley! i have learned a most extraordinary thing!”
 even as i spoke and looked into the keen, eager face, the expression in
 harley’s eyes struck me. i recognized that in him, too, intense excitement
 was pent up. furthermore, he was in one of his irritable moods. but, full
 of my own discoveries:
 “i chanced to glance at this book,” i continued, “whilst i was waiting for
 you. you have underlined certain passages.”
 he stared at me queerly.
 “i discovered the book in my own library after you had gone last night,
 knox, and it was then that i marked the passages which struck me as
 significant.”
 “but, harley,” i cried, “the man who is quoted here, colin camber, lives
 in this very neighbourhood!”
 “i know.”
 “what! you know?”
 “i learned it from inspector aylesbury of the county police half an hour
 ago.”
 harley frowned perplexedly. “then, why, in heaven’s name didn’t you tell
 me?” he exclaimed. “it would have saved me a most disagreeable journey
 into market hilton.”
 “market hilton! what, have you been into the town?”
 “that is exactly where i have been, knox. i ‘phoned through to innes from
 the village post-office after lunch to have the car sent down. there is a
 convenient garage by the lavender arms.”
 “but the colonel has three cars,” i exclaimed.
 “the horse has four legs,” replied harley, irritably, “but although i have
 only two, there are times when i prefer to use them. i am still wondering
 why you failed to mention this piece of information when you had obtained
 it.”
 “my dear harley,” said i, patiently, “how could i possibly be expected to
 attach any importance to the matter? you must remember that at the time i
 had never seen this work on negro sorcery.”
 “no,” said harley, dropping down upon the bed, “that is perfectly true,
 knox. i am afraid i have a liver at times; a distinct indian liver. excuse
 me, old man, but to tell you the truth i feel strangely inclined to pack
 my bag and leave for london without a moment’s delay.”
 “what!” i cried.
 “oh, i know you would be sorry to go, knox,” said harley, smiling, “and
 so, for many reasons, should i. but i have the strongest possible
 objection to being trifled with.”
 “i am afraid i don’t quite understand you, harley.”
 “well, just consider the matter for a moment. do you suppose that colonel
 menendez is ignorant of the fact that his nearest neighbour is a
 recognized authority upon voodoo and allied subjects?”
 “you are speaking, of course, of colin camber?”
 “of none other.”
 “no,” i replied, thoughtfully, “the colonel must know, of course, that
 camber resides in the neighbourhood.”
 “and that he knows something of the nature of camber’s studies his remarks
 sufficiently indicate,” added harley. “the whole theory to account for
 these attacks upon his life rests on the premise that agents of these
 obeah people are established in england and america. then, in spite of my
 direct questions, he leaves me to find out for myself that colin camber’s
 property practically adjoins his own!”
 “really! does he reside so near as that?”
 “my dear fellow,” cried harley, “he lives at a place called the guest
 house. you can see it from part of the grounds of cray’s folly. we were
 looking at it to-day.”
 “what! the house on the hillside?”
 “that’s the guest house! what do you make of it, knox? that menendez
 suspects this man is beyond doubt. why should he hesitate to mention his
 name?”
 “well,” i replied, slowly, “probably because to associate practical
 sorcery and assassination with such a character would be preposterous.”
 “but the man is admittedly a student of these things, knox.”
 “he may be, and that he is a genius of some kind i am quite prepared to
 believe. but having had the pleasure of meeting mr. colin camber, i am not
 prepared to believe him capable of murder.”
 i suppose i spoke with a certain air of triumph, for paul harley regarded
 me silently for a while.
 “you seem to be taking this case out of my hands, knox,” he said. “whilst
 i have been systematically at work racing about the county in quest of
 information you would appear to have blundered further into the labyrinth
 than all my industry has enabled me to do.”
 he remained in a very evil humour, and now the cause of this suddenly came
 to light.
 “i have spent a thoroughly unpleasant afternoon,” he continued,
 “interviewing an impossible country policeman who had never heard of my
 existence!”
 this display of human resentment honestly delighted me. it was refreshing
 to know that the omniscient paul harley was capable of pique.
 “one, inspector aylesbury,” he went on, bitterly, “a large person bearing
 a really interesting resemblance to a walrus, but lacking that creature’s
 intelligence. it was not until superintendent east had spoken to him from
 scotland yard that he ceased to treat me as a suspect. but his new
 attitude was almost more provoking than the old one. he adopted the manner
 of a regimental sergeant-major reluctantly interviewing a private with a
 grievance. if matters should so develop that we are compelled to deal with
 that fish-faced idiot, god help us all!”
 he burst out laughing, his good humour suddenly quite restored, and taking
 out his pipe began industriously to load it.
 “i can smoke while i am changing,” he said, “and you can sit there and
 tell me all about colin camber.”
 i did as he requested, and harley, who could change quicker than any man i
 had ever known, had just finished tying his bow as i completed my story of
 the encounter at the lavender arms.
 “hm,” he muttered, as i ceased speaking. “at every turn i realize that
 without you i should have been lost, knox. i am afraid i shall have to
 change your duties to-morrow.”
 “change my duties? what do you mean?”
 “i warn you that the new ones will be less pleasant than the old! in other
 words, i must ask you to tear yourself away from miss val beverley for an
 hour in the morning, and take advantage of mr. camber’s invitation to call
 upon him.”
 “frankly, i doubt if he would acknowledge me.”
 “nevertheless, you have a better excuse than i. in the circumstances it is
 most important that we should get in touch with this man.”
 “very well,” i said, ruefully. “i will do my best. but you don’t seriously
 think, harley, that the danger comes from there?”
 paul harley took his dinner jacket from the chair upon which the man had
 laid it out, and turned to me.
 “my dear knox,” he said, “you may remember that i spoke, recently, of
 retiring from this profession?”
 “you did.”
 “my retirement will not be voluntary, knox. i shall be kicked out as an
 incompetent ass; for, respecting the connection, if any, between the
 narrative of colonel menendez, the bat wing nailed to the door of the
 house, and mr. colin camber, i have not the foggiest notion. in this, at
 last, i have triumphed over auguste dupin. auguste dupin never confessed
 defeat.”
 if luncheon had seemed extravagant, dinner at cray’s folly proved to be a
 veritable roman banquet. to associate ideas of selfishness with miss
 beverley was hateful, but the more i learned of the luxurious life of this
 queer household hidden away in the surrey hills the less i wondered at any
 one’s consenting to share such exile. i had hitherto counted an american
 freak dinner, organized by a lucky plunger and held at the café de paris,
 as the last word in extravagant feasting. but i learned now that what was
 caviare in monte carlo was ordinary fare at cray’s folly.
 colonel menendez was an epicure with an endless purse. the excellence of
 one of the courses upon which i had commented led to a curious incident.
 “you approve of the efforts of my chef?” said the colonel.
 “he is worthy of his employer,” i replied.
 colonel menendez bowed in his cavalierly fashion and madame de stämer
 positively beamed upon me.
 “you shall speak for him,” said the spaniard. “he was with me in cuba, but
 has no reputation in london. there are hotels that would snap him up.”
 i looked at the speaker in surprise.
 “surely he is not leaving you?” i asked.
 the colonel exhibited a momentary embarrassment.
 “no, no. no, no,” he replied, waving his hand gracefully, “i was only
 thinking that he—” there was a scarcely perceptible pause—“might
 wish to better himself. you understand?”
 i understood only too well; and recollecting the words spoken by paul
 harley that afternoon, respecting the colonel’s will to live, i became
 conscious of an uncomfortable sense of chill.
 if i had doubted that in so speaking he had been contemplating his own
 death, the behaviour of madame de stämer must have convinced me. her
 complexion was slightly but cleverly made up, with all the exquisite art
 of the parisienne, but even through the artificial bloom i saw her cheeks
 blanch. her face grew haggard and her eyes burned unnaturally. she turned
 quickly aside to address paul harley, but i knew that the significance of
 this slight episode had not escaped him.
 he was by no means at ease. in the first place, he was badly puzzled; in
 the second place, he was angry. he felt it incumbent upon him to save this
 man from a menace which he, paul harley, evidently recognized to be real,
 although to me it appeared wildly chimerical, and the very person upon
 whose active coöperation he naturally counted not only seemed resigned to
 his fate, but by deliberate omission of important data added to harley’s
 difficulties.
 how much of this secret drama proceeding in cray’s folly was appreciated
 by val beverley i could not determine. on this occasion, i remember, she
 was simply but perfectly dressed and, in my eyes, seemed the most sweetly
 desirable woman i had ever known. realizing that i had already revealed my
 interest in the girl, i was oddly self-conscious, and a hundred times
 during the progress of dinner i glanced across at harley, expecting to
 detect his quizzical smile. he was very stern, however, and seemed more
 reserved than usual. he was uncertain of his ground, i could see. he
 resented the understanding which evidently existed between colonel
 menendez and madame de stämer, and to which, although his aid had been
 sought, he was not admitted.
 it seemed to me, personally, that an almost palpable shadow lay upon the
 room. although, save for this one lapse, our host throughout talked gaily
 and entertainingly, i was obsessed by a memory of the expression which i
 had detected upon his face that morning, the expression of a doomed man.
 what, in heaven’s name, i asked myself, did it all mean? if ever i saw the
 fighting spirit looking out of any man’s eyes, it looked out of the eyes
 of don juan sarmiento menendez. why, then, did he lie down to the menace
 of this mysterious bat wing, and if he counted opposition futile, why had
 he summoned paul harley to cray’s folly?
 with the passing of every moment i sympathized more fully with the
 perplexity of my friend, and no longer wondered that even his highly
 specialized faculties had failed to detect an explanation.
 remembering colin camber as i had seen him at the lavender arms, it was
 simply impossible to suppose that such a man as menendez could fear such a
 man as camber. true, i had seen the latter at a disadvantage, and i knew
 well enough that many a genius has been also a drunkard. but although i
 was prepared to find that colin camber possessed genius, i found it hard
 to believe that this was of a criminal type. that such a character could
 be the representative of some remote negro society was an idea too
 grotesque to be entertained for a moment.
 i was tempted to believe that his presence in the neighbourhood of this
 haunted cuban was one of those strange coincidences which in criminal
 history have sometimes proved so tragic for their victims.
 madame de stämer, avoiding the colonel’s glances, which were pathetically
 apologetic, gradually recovered herself, and:
 “my dear,” she said to val beverley, “you look perfectly sweet to-night.
 don’t you think she looks perfectly sweet, mr. knox?”
 ignoring a look of entreaty from the blue-gray eyes:
 “perfectly,” i replied.
 “oh, mr. knox,” cried the girl, “why do you encourage her? she says
 embarrassing things like that every time i put on a new dress.”
 her reference to a new dress set me speculating again upon the apparent
 anomaly of her presence at cray’s folly. that she was not a professional
 “companion” was clear enough. i assumed that her father had left her
 suitably provided for, since she wore such expensively simple gowns. she
 had a delightful trick of blushing when attention was focussed upon her,
 and said madame de stämer:
 “to be able to blush like that i would give my string of pearls—no,
 half of it.”
 “my dear marie,” declared colonel menendez, “i have seen you blush
 perfectly.”
 “no, no,” madame disclaimed the suggestion with one of those bernhardt
 gestures, “i blushed my last blush when my second husband introduced me to
 my first husband’s wife.”
 “madame!” exclaimed val beverley, “how can you say such things?” she
 turned to me. “really, mr. knox, they are all fables.”
 “in fables we renew our youth,” said madame.
 “ah,” sighed colonel menendez; “our youth, our youth.”
 “why sigh, juan, why regret?” cried madame, immediately. “old age is only
 tragic to those who have never been young.”
 she directed a glance toward him as she spoke those words, and as i had
 felt when i had seen his tragic face on the veranda that morning i felt
 again in detecting this look of madame de stämer’s. the yearning yet
 selfless love which it expressed was not for my eyes to witness.
 “thank god, marie,” replied the colonel, and gallantly kissed his hand to
 her, “we have both been young, gloriously young.”
 when, at the termination of this truly historic dinner, the ladies left
 us:
 “remember, juan,” said madame, raising her white, jewelled hand, and
 holding the fingers characteristically curled, “no excitement, no
 billiards, no cards.”
 colonel menendez bowed deeply, as the invalid wheeled herself from the
 room, followed by miss beverley. my heart was beating delightfully, for in
 the moment of departure the latter had favoured me with a significant
 glance, which seemed to say, “i am looking forward to a chat with you
 presently.”
 “ah,” said colonel menendez, when we three men found ourselves alone,
 “truly i am blessed in the autumn of my life with such charming
 companionship. beauty and wit, youth and discretion. is he not a happy man
 who possesses all these?”
 “he should be,” said harley, gravely.
 the saturnine pedro entered with some wonderful crusted port, and colonel
 menendez offered cigars.
 “i believe you are a pipe-smoker,” said our courteous host to harley, “and
 if this is so, i know that you will prefer your favourite mixture to any
 cigar that ever was rolled.”
 “many thanks,” said harley, to whom no more delicate compliment could have
 been paid.
 he was indeed an inveterate pipe-smoker, and only rarely did he truly
 enjoy a cigar, however choice its pedigree. with a sigh of content he
 began to fill his briar. his mood was more restful, and covertly i watched
 him studying our host. the night remained very warm and one of the two
 windows of the dining room, which was the most homely apartment in cray’s
 folly, was wide open, offering a prospect of sweeping velvet lawns touched
 by the magic of the moonlight.
 a short silence fell, to be broken by the colonel.
 “gentlemen,” he said, “i trust you do not regret your fishing excursion?”
 “i could cheerfully pass the rest of my days in such ideal surroundings,”
 replied paul harley.
 i nodded in agreement.
 “but,” continued my friend, speaking very deliberately, “i have to
 remember that i am here upon business, and that my professional reputation
 is perhaps at stake.”
 he stared very hard at colonel menendez.
 “i have spoken with your butler, known as pedro, and with some of the
 other servants, and have learned all that there is to be learned about the
 person unknown who gained admittance to the house a month ago, and
 concerning the wing of a bat, found attached to the door more recently.”
 “and to what conclusion have you come?” asked colonel menendez, eagerly.
 he bent forward, resting his elbows upon his knees, a pose which he
 frequently adopted. he was smoking a cigar, but his total absorption in
 the topic under discussion was revealed by the fact that from a pocket in
 his dinner jacket he had taken out a portion of tobacco, had laid it in a
 slip of rice paper, and was busily rolling one of his eternal cigarettes.
 “i might be enabled to come to one,” replied harley, “if you would answer
 a very simple question.”
 “what is this question?”
 “it is this—have you any idea who nailed the bat’s wing to your
 door?”
 colonel menendez’s eyes opened very widely, and his face became more
 aquiline than ever.
 “you have heard my story, mr. harley,” he replied, softly. “if i know the
 explanation, why do i come to you?”
 paul harley puffed at his pipe. his expression did not alter in the
 slightest.
 “i merely wondered if your suspicions tended in the direction of mr. colin
 camber,” he said.
 “colin camber!”
 as the colonel spoke the name either i became victim of a strange delusion
 or his face was momentarily convulsed. if my senses served me aright then
 his pronouncing of the words “colin camber” occasioned him positive agony.
 he clutched the arms of his chair, striving, i thought, to retain
 composure, and in this he succeeded, for when he spoke again his voice was
 quite normal.
 “have you any particular reason for your remark, mr. harley?”
 “i have a reason,” replied paul harley, “but don’t misunderstand me. i
 suggest nothing against mr. camber. i should be glad, however, to know if
 you are acquainted with him?”
 “we have never met.”
 “you possibly know him by repute?”
 “i have heard of him, mr. harley. but to be perfectly frank, i have little
 in common with citizens of the united states.”
 a note of arrogance, which at times crept into his high, thin voice,
 became perceptible now, and the aristocratic, aquiline face looked very
 supercilious.
 how the conversation would have developed i know not, but at this moment
 pedro entered and delivered a message in spanish to the colonel, whereupon
 the latter arose and with very profuse apologies begged permission to
 leave us for a few moments.
 when he had retired:
 “i am going upstairs to write a letter, knox,” said paul harley. “carry on
 with your old duties to-day, your new ones do not commence until
 to-morrow.”
 with that he laughed and walked out of the dining room, leaving me
 wondering whether to be grateful or annoyed. however, it did not take me
 long to find my way to the drawing room where the two ladies were seated
 side by side upon a settee, madame’s chair having been wheeled into a
 corner.
 “ah, mr. knox,” exclaimed madame as i entered, “have the others deserted,
 then?”
 “scarcely deserted, i think. they are merely straggling.”
 “absent without leave,” murmured val beverley.
 i laughed, and drew up a chair. madame de stämer was smoking, but miss
 beverley was not. accordingly, i offered her a cigarette, which she
 accepted, and as i was lighting it with elaborate care, every moment
 finding a new beauty in her charming face, pedro again appeared and
 addressed some remark in spanish to madame.
 “my chair, pedro,” she said; “i will come at once.”
 the spanish butler wheeled the chair across to the settee, and lifting her
 with an ease which spoke of long practice, placed her amidst the cushions
 where she spent so many hours of her life.
 “i know you will excuse me, dear,” she said to val beverley, “because i
 feel sure that mr. knox will do his very best to make up for my absence.
 presently, i shall be back.”
 pedro holding the door open, she went wheeling out, and i found myself
 alone with val beverley.
 at the time i was much too delighted to question the circumstances which
 had led to this tête-à-tête, but had i cared to give the matter any
 consideration, it must have presented rather curious features. the call
 first of host and then of hostess was inconsistent with the courtesy of
 the master of cray’s folly, which, like the appointments of his home and
 his mode of life, was elaborate. but these ideas did not trouble me at the
 moment.
 suddenly, however, indeed before i had time to speak, the girl started and
 laid her hand upon my arm.
 “did you hear something?” she whispered, “a queer sort of sound?”
 “no,” i replied, “what kind of sound?”
 “an odd sort of sound, almost like—the flapping of wings.”
 i saw that she had turned pale, i saw the confirmation of something which
 i had only partly realised before: that her life at cray’s folly was a
 constant fight against some haunting shadow. her gaiety, her lightness,
 were but a mask. for now, in those wide-open eyes, i read absolute horror.
 “miss beverley,” i said, grasping her hand reassuringly, “you alarm me.
 what has made you so nervous to-night?”
 “to-night!” she echoed, “to-night? it is every night. if you had not come—”
 she corrected herself—“if someone had not come, i don’t think i
 could have stayed. i am sure i could not have stayed.”
 “doubtless the attempted burglary alarmed you?” i suggested, intending to
 sooth her fears.
 “burglary?” she smiled unmirthfully. “it was no burglary.”
 “why do you say so, miss beverley?”
 “do you think i don’t know why mr. harley is here?” she challenged. “oh,
 believe me, i know—i know. i, too, saw the bat’s wing nailed to the
 door, mr. knox. you are surely not going to suggest that this was the work
 of a burglar?”
 i seated myself beside her on the settee.
 “you have great courage,” i said. “believe me, i quite understand all that
 you have suffered.”
 “is my acting so poor?” she asked, with a pathetic smile.
 “no, it is wonderful, but to a sympathetic observer only acting,
 nevertheless.”
 i noted that my presence reassured her, and was much comforted by this
 fact.
 “would you like to tell me all about it,” i continued; “or would this
 merely renew your fears?”
 “i should like to tell you,” she replied in a low voice, glancing about
 her as if to make sure that we were alone. “except for odd people,
 friends, i suppose, of the colonel’s, we have had so few visitors since we
 have been at cray’s folly. apart from all sorts of queer happenings which
 really”—she laughed nervously—“may have no significance
 whatever, the crowning mystery to my mind is why colonel menendez should
 have leased this huge house.”
 “he does not entertain very much, then?”
 “scarcely at all. the ‘county’—do you know what i mean by the
 ‘county?’—began by receiving him with open arms and ended by sending
 him to coventry. his lavish style of entertainment they labelled ‘swank’—horrible
 word but very expressive! they concluded that they did not understand him,
 and of everything they don’t understand they disapprove. so after the
 first month or so it became very lonely at cray’s folly. our foreign
 servants—there are five of them altogether—got us a dreadfully
 bad name. then, little by little, a sort of cloud seemed to settle on
 everything. the colonel made two visits abroad, i don’t know exactly where
 he went, but on his return from the first visit madame de stämer changed.”
 “changed?—in what way?”
 “i am afraid it would be hopeless to try to make you understand, mr. knox,
 but in some subtle way she changed. underneath all her vivacity she is a
 tragic woman, and—oh, how can i explain?” val beverley made a little
 gesture of despair.
 “perhaps you mean,” i suggested, “that she seemed to become even less
 happy than before?”
 “yes,” she replied, looking at me eagerly. “has colonel menendez told you
 anything to account for it?”
 “nothing,” i said, “he has left us strangely in the dark. but you say he
 went abroad on a second and more recent occasion?”
 “yes, not much more than a month ago. and after that, somehow or other,
 matters seemed to come to a head. i confess i became horribly frightened,
 but to have left would have seemed like desertion, and madame de stämer
 has been so good to me.”
 “did you actually witness any of the episodes which took place about a
 month ago?”
 val beverley shook her head.
 “i never saw anything really definite,” she replied.
 “yet, evidently you either saw or heard something which alarmed you.”
 “yes, that is true, but it is so difficult to explain.”
 “could you try to explain?”
 “i will try if you wish, for really i am longing to talk to someone about
 it. for instance, on several occasions i have heard footsteps in the
 corridor outside my room.”
 “at night?”
 “yes, at night.”
 “strange footsteps?”
 she nodded.
 “that is the uncanny part of it. you know how familiar one grows with the
 footsteps of persons living in the same house? well, these footsteps were
 quite unfamiliar to me.”
 “and you say they passed your door?”
 “yes. my rooms are almost directly overhead. and right at the end of the
 corridor, that is on the southeast corner of the building, is colonel
 menendez’s bedroom, and facing it a sort of little smoke-room. it was in
 this direction that the footsteps went.”
 “to colonel menendez’s room?”
 “yes. they were light, furtive footsteps.”
 “this took place late at night?”
 “quite late, long after everyone had retired.”
 she paused, staring at me with a sort of embarrassment, and presently:
 “were the footsteps those of a man or a woman?” i asked.
 “of a woman. someone, mr. knox,” she bent forward, and that look of fear
 began to creep into her eyes again, “with whose footsteps i was quite
 unfamiliar.”
 “you mean a stranger to the house?”
 “yes. oh, it was uncanny.” she shuddered. “the first time i heard it i had
 been lying awake listening. i was nervous. madame de stämer had told me
 that morning that the colonel had seen someone lurking about the lawns on
 the previous night. then, as i lay awake listening for the slightest
 sound, i suddenly detected these footsteps; and they paused—right
 outside my door.”
 “good heavens!” i exclaimed. “what did you do?”
 “frankly, i was too frightened to do anything. i just lay still with my
 heart beating horribly, and presently they passed on, and i heard them no
 more.”
 “was your door locked?”
 “no.” she laughed nervously. “but it has been locked every night since
 then!”
 “and these sounds were repeated on other nights?”
 “yes, i have often heard them, mr. knox. what makes it so strange is that
 all the servants sleep out in the west wing, as you know, and pedro locks
 the communicating door every night before retiring.”
 “it is certainly strange,” i muttered.
 “it is horrible,” declared the girl, almost in a whisper. “for what can it
 mean except that there is someone in cray’s folly who is never seen during
 the daytime?”
 “but that is incredible.”
 “it is not so incredible in a big house like this. besides, what other
 explanation can there be?”
 “there must be one,” i said, reassuringly. “have you spoken of this to
 madame de stämer?”
 “yes.”
 val beverley’s expression grew troubled.
 “had she any explanation to offer?”
 “none. her attitude mystified me very much. indeed, instead of reassuring
 me, she frightened me more than ever by her very silence. i grew to dread
 the coming of each night. then—” she hesitated again, looking at me
 pathetically—“twice i have been awakened by a loud cry.”
 “what kind of cry?”
 “i could not tell you, mr. knox. you see i have always been asleep when it
 has come, but i have sat up trembling and dimly aware that what had
 awakened me was a cry of some kind.”
 “you have no idea from whence it proceeded?”
 “none whatever. of course, all these things may seem trivial to you, and
 possibly they can be explained in quite a simple way. but this feeling of
 something pending has grown almost unendurable. then, i don’t understand
 madame and the colonel at all.”
 she suddenly stopped speaking and flushed with embarrassment.
 “if you mean that madame de stämer is in love with her cousin, i agree
 with you,” i said, quietly.
 “oh, is it so evident as that?” murmured val beverley. she laughed to
 cover her confusion. “i wish i could understand what it all means.”
 at this point our tête-à-tête was interrupted by the return of madame de
 stämer.
 “oh, la la!” she cried, “the colonel must have allowed himself to become
 too animated this evening. he is threatened with one of his attacks and i
 have insisted upon his immediate retirement. he makes his apologies, but
 knows you will understand.”
 i expressed my concern, and:
 “i was unaware that colonel menendez’s health was impaired,” i said.
 “ah,” madame shrugged characteristically. “juan has travelled too much of
 the road of life on top speed, mr. knox.” she snapped her white fingers
 and grimaced significantly. “excitement is bad for him.”
 she wheeled her chair up beside val beverley, and taking the girl’s hand
 patted it affectionately.
 “you look pale to-night, my dear,” she said. “all this bogey business is
 getting on your nerves, eh?”
 “oh, not at all,” declared the girl. “it is very mysterious and annoying,
 of course.”
 “but m. paul harley will presently tell us what it is all about,”
 concluded madame. “yes, i trust so. we want no cuban devils here at cray’s
 folly.”
 i had hoped that she would speak further of the matter, but having thus
 apologized for our host’s absence, she plunged into an amusing account of
 parisian society, and of the changes which five years of war had brought
 about. her comments, although brilliant, were superficial, the only point
 i recollect being her reference to a certain baron bergmann, a swedish
 diplomat, who, according to madame, had the longest nose and the shortest
 memory in paris, so that in the cold weather, “he even sometimes forgot to
 blow his nose.”
 her brightness i thought was almost feverish. she chattered and laughed
 and gesticulated, but on this occasion she was overacting. underneath all
 her vivacity lay something cold and grim.
 harley rejoined us in half an hour or so, but i could see that he was as
 conscious of the air of tension as i was. all madame’s high spirits could
 not enable her to conceal the fact that she was anxious to retire. but
 harley’s evident desire to do likewise surprised me very greatly; for from
 the point of view of the investigation the day had been an unsatisfactory
 one. i knew that there must be a hundred and one things which my friend
 desired to know, questions which madame de stämer could have answered.
 nevertheless, at about ten o’clock we separated for the night, and
 although i was intensely anxious to talk to harley, his reticent mood had
 descended upon him again, and:
 “sleep well, knox,” he said, as he paused at my door. “i may be awakening
 you early.”
 with which cryptic remark and not another word he passed on and entered
 his own room.
 perhaps it was childish on my part, but i accepted this curt dismissal
 very ill-humouredly. that harley, for some reason of his own, wished to be
 alone, was evident enough, but i resented being excluded from his
 confidence, even temporarily. it would seem that he had formed a theory in
 the prosecution of which my coöperation was not needed. and what with
 profitless conjectures concerning its nature, and memories of val
 beverley’s pathetic parting glance as we had bade one another good-night,
 sleep seemed to be out of the question, and i stood for a long time
 staring out of the open window.
 the weather remained almost tropically hot, and the moon floated in a
 cloudless sky. i looked down upon the closely matted leaves of the box
 hedge, which rose to within a few feet of my window, and to the left i
 could obtain a view of the close-hemmed courtyard before the doors of
 cray’s folly. on the right the yews began, obstructing my view of the
 tudor garden, but the night air was fragrant, and the outlook one of
 peace.
 after a time, then, as no sound came from the adjoining room, i turned in,
 and despite all things was soon fast asleep.
 almost immediately, it seemed, i was awakened. in point of fact, nearly
 four hours had elapsed. a hand grasped my shoulder, and i sprang up in bed
 with a stifled cry, but:
 “it’s all right, knox,” came harley’s voice. “don’t make a noise.”
 “harley!” i said. “harley! what has happened?”
 “nothing, nothing. i am sorry to have to disturb your beauty sleep, but in
 the absence of innes i am compelled to use you as a dictaphone, knox. i
 like to record impressions while they are fresh, hence my having awakened
 you.”
 “but what has happened?” i asked again, for my brain was not yet fully
 alert.
 “no, don’t light up!” said harley, grasping my wrist as i reached out
 toward the table-lamp.
 his figure showed as a black silhouette against the dim square of the
 window.
 “why not?”
 “well, it’s nearly two o’clock. the light might be observed.”
 “two o’clock?” i exclaimed.
 “yes. i think we might smoke, though. have you any cigarettes? i have left
 my pipe behind.”
 i managed to find my case, and in the dim light of the match which i
 presently struck i saw that paul harley’s face was very fixed and grim. he
 seated himself on the edge of my bed, and:
 “i have been guilty of a breach of hospitality, knox,” he began. “not only
 have i secretly had my own car sent down here, but i have had something
 else sent, as well. i brought it in under my coat this evening.”
 “to what do you refer, harley?”
 “you remember the silken rope-ladder with bamboo rungs which i brought
 from hongkong on one occasion?”
 “yes—”
 “well, i have it in my bag now.”
 “but, my dear fellow, what possible use can it be to you at cray’s folly?”
 “it has been of great use,” he returned, shortly.
 “it enabled me to descend from my window a couple of hours ago and to
 return again quite recently without disturbing the household. don’t
 reproach me, knox. i know it is a breach of confidence, but so is the
 behaviour of colonel menendez.”
 “you refer to his reticence on certain points?”
 “i do. i have a reputation to lose, knox, and if an ingenious piece of
 chinese workmanship can save it, it shall be saved.”
 “but, my dear harley, why should you want to leave the house secretly at
 night?”
 paul harley’s cigarette glowed in the dark, then:
 “my original object,” he replied, “was to endeavour to learn if any one
 were really watching the place. for instance, i wanted to see if all
 lights were out at the guest house.”
 “and were they?” i asked, eagerly.
 “they were. secondly,” he continued, “i wanted to convince myself that
 there were no nocturnal prowlers from within or without.”
 “what do you mean by within or without?”
 “listen, knox.” he bent toward me in the dark, grasping my shoulder
 firmly. “one window in cray’s folly was lighted up.”
 “at what hour?”
 “the light is there yet.”
 that he was about to make some strange revelation i divined. i detected
 the fact, too, that he believed this revelation would be unpleasant to me;
 and in this i found an explanation of his earlier behaviour. he had seemed
 distraught and ill at ease when he had joined madame de stämer, miss
 beverley, and myself in the drawing room. i could only suppose that this
 and the abrupt parting with me outside my door had been due to his holding
 a theory which he had proposed to put to the test before confiding it to
 me. i remember that i spoke very slowly as i asked him the question:
 “whose is the lighted window, harley?”
 “has colonel menendez taken you into a little snuggery or smoke-room which
 faces his bedroom in the southeast corner of the house?”
 “no, but miss beverley has mentioned the room.”
 “ah. well, there is a light in that room, knox.”
 “possibly the colonel has not retired?”
 “according to madame de stämer he went to bed several hours ago, you may
 remember.”
 “true,” i murmured, fumbling for the significance of his words.
 “the next point is this,” he resumed. “you saw madame retire to her own
 room, which, as you know, is on the ground floor, and i have satisfied
 myself that the door communicating with the servants’ wing is locked.”
 “i see. but to what is all this leading, harley?”
 “to a very curious fact, and the fact is this: the colonel is not alone.”
 i sat bolt upright.
 “what?” i cried.
 “not so loud,” warned harley.
 “but, harley—”
 “my dear fellow, we must face facts. i repeat, the colonel is not alone.”
 “why do you say so?”
 “twice i have seen a shadow on the blind of the smoke-room.”
 “his own shadow, probably.”
 again paul harley’s cigarette glowed in the darkness.
 “i am prepared to swear,” he replied, “that it was the shadow of a woman.”
 “harley——”
 “don’t get excited, knox. i am dealing with the strangest case of my
 career, and i am jumping to no conclusions. but just let us look at the
 circumstances judicially. the whole of the domestic staff we may dismiss,
 with the one exception of mrs. fisher, who, so far as i can make out,
 occupies the position of a sort of working housekeeper, and whose rooms
 are in the corner of the west wing immediately facing the kitchen garden.
 possibly you have not met mrs. fisher, knox, but i have made it my
 business to interview the whole of the staff and i may say that mrs.
 fisher is a short, stout old lady, a native of kent, i believe, whose
 outline in no way corresponds to that which i saw upon the blind.
 therefore, unless the door which communicates with the servants’ quarters
 was unlocked again to-night—to what are we reduced in seeking to
 explain the presence of a woman in colonel menendez’s room? madame de
 stämer, unassisted, could not possibly have mounted the stairs.”
 “stop, harley!” i said, sternly. “stop.”
 he ceased speaking, and i watched the steady glow of his cigarette in the
 darkness. it lighted up his bronzed face and showed me the steely gleam of
 his eyes.
 “you are counting too much on the locking of the door by pedro,” i
 continued, speaking very deliberately. “he is a man i would trust no
 farther than i could see him, and if there is anything dark underlying
 this matter you depend that he is involved in it. but the most natural
 explanation, and also the most simple, is this—colonel menendez has
 been taken seriously ill, and someone is in his room in the capacity of a
 nurse.”
 “her behaviour was scarcely that of a nurse in a sick-room,” murmured
 harley.
 “for god’s sake tell me the truth,” i said. “tell me all you saw.”
 “i am quite prepared to do so, knox. on three occasions, then, i saw the
 figure of a woman, who wore some kind of loose robe, quite clearly
 silhouetted upon the linen blind. her gestures strongly resembled those of
 despair.”
 “of despair?”
 “exactly. i gathered that she was addressing someone, presumably colonel
 menendez, and i derived a strong impression that she was in a condition of
 abject despair.”
 “harley,” i said, “on your word of honour did you recognize anything in
 the movements, or in the outline of the figure, by which you could
 identify the woman?”
 “i did not,” he replied, shortly. “it was a woman who wore some kind of
 loose robe, possibly a kimono. beyond that i could swear to nothing,
 except that it was not mrs. fisher.”
 we fell silent for a while. what paul harley’s thoughts may have been i
 know not, but my own were strange and troubled. presently i found my voice
 again, and:
 “i think, harley,” i said, “that i should report to you something which
 miss beverley told me this evening.”
 “yes?” said he, eagerly. “i am anxious to hear anything which may be of
 the slightest assistance. you are no doubt wondering why i retired so
 abruptly to-night. my reason was this: i could see that you were full of
 some story which you had learned from miss beverley, and i was anxious to
 perform my tour of inspection with a perfectly unprejudiced mind.”
 “you mean that your suspicions rested upon an inmate of cray’s folly?”
 “not upon any particular inmate, but i had early perceived a distinct
 possibility that these manifestations of which the colonel complained
 might be due to the agency of someone inside the house. that this person
 might be no more than an accomplice of the prime mover i also recognized,
 of course. but what did you learn to-night, knox?”
 i repeated val beverley’s story of the mysterious footsteps and of the
 cries which had twice awakened her in the night.
 “hm,” muttered harley, when i had ceased speaking. “assuming her account
 to be true——”
 “why should you doubt it?” i interrupted, hotly.
 “my dear knox, it is my business to doubt everything until i have
 indisputable evidence of its truth. i say, assuming her story to be true,
 we find ourselves face to face with the fantastic theory that some woman
 unknown is living secretly in cray’s folly.”
 “perhaps in one of the tower rooms,” i suggested, eagerly. “why, harley,
 that would account for the colonel’s marked unwillingness to talk about
 this part of the house.”
 my sight was now becoming used to the dusk, and i saw harley vigorously
 shake his head.
 “no, no,” he replied; “i have seen all the tower rooms. i can swear that
 no one inhabits them. besides, is it feasible?”
 “then whose were the footsteps that miss beverley heard?”
 “obviously those of the woman who, at this present moment, so far as i
 know, is in the smoking-room with colonel menendez.”
 i sighed wearily.
 “this is a strange business, harley. i begin to think that the mystery is
 darker than i ever supposed.”
 we fell silent again. the weird cry of a night hawk came from somewhere in
 the valley, but otherwise everything within and without the great house
 seemed strangely still. this stillness presently imposed its influence
 upon me, for when i spoke again, i spoke in a low voice.
 “harley,” i said, “my imagination is playing me tricks. i thought i heard
 the fluttering of wings at that moment.”
 “fortunately, my imagination remains under control,” he replied, grimly;
 “therefore i am in a position to inform you that you did hear the
 fluttering of wings. an owl has just flown into one of the trees
 immediately outside the window.”
 “oh,” said i, and uttered a sigh of relief.
 “it is extremely fortunate that my imagination is so carefully trained,”
 continued harley; “otherwise, when the woman whose shadow i saw upon the
 blind to-night raised her arms in a peculiar fashion, i could not well
 have failed to attach undue importance to the shape of the shadow thus
 created.”
 “what was the shape of the shadow, then?”
 “remarkably like that of a bat.”
 he spoke the words quietly, but in that still darkness, with dawn yet a
 long way off, they possessed the power which belongs to certain chords in
 music, and to certain lines in poetry. i was chilled unaccountably, and i
 peopled the empty corridors of cray’s folly with i know not what uncanny
 creatures; nightmare fancies conjured up from memories of haunted manors.
 such was my mood, then, when suddenly paul harley stood up. my eyes were
 growing more and more used to the darkness, and from something strained in
 his attitude i detected the fact that he was listening intently.
 he placed his cigarette on the table beside the bed and quietly crossed
 the room. i knew from his silent tread that he wore shoes with rubber
 soles. very quietly he turned the handle and opened the door.
 “what is it, harley?” i whispered.
 dimly i saw him raise his hand. inch by inch he opened the door. my nerves
 in a state of tension, i sat there watching him, when without a sound he
 slipped out of the room and was gone. thereupon i arose and followed as
 far as the doorway.
 harley was standing immediately outside in the corridor. seeing me, he
 stepped back, and: “don’t move, knox,” he said, speaking very close to my
 ear. “there is someone downstairs in the hall. wait for me here.”
 with that he moved stealthily off, and i stood there, my heart beating
 with unusual rapidity, listening—listening for a challenge, a cry, a
 scuffle—i knew not what to expect.
 cavernous and dimly lighted, the corridor stretched away to my left. on
 the right it branched sharply in the direction of the gallery overlooking
 the hall.
 the seconds passed, but no sound rewarded my alert listening—until,
 very faintly, but echoing in a muffled, church-like fashion around that
 peculiar building, came a slight, almost sibilant sound, which i took to
 be the gentle closing of a distant door.
 whilst i was still wondering if i had really heard this sound or merely
 imagined it:
 “who goes there?” came sharply in harley’s voice.
 i heard a faint click, and knew that he had shone the light of an electric
 torch down into the hall.
 i hesitated no longer, but ran along to join him. as i came to the head of
 the main staircase, however, i saw him crossing the hall below. he was
 making in the direction of the door which shut off the servants’ quarters.
 here he paused, and i saw him trying the handle. evidently the door was
 locked, for he turned and swept the white ray all about the place. he
 tried several other doors, but found them all to be locked, for presently
 he came upstairs again, smiling grimly when he saw me there awaiting him.
 “did you hear it, knox?” he said.
 “a sound like the closing of a door?”
 paul harley nodded.
 “it was the closing of a door,” he replied; “but before that i had
 distinctly heard a stair creak. someone crossed the hall then, knox. yet,
 as you perceive for yourself, it affords no hiding-place.”
 his glance met and challenged mine.
 “the colonel’s visitor has left him,” he murmured. “unless something quite
 unforeseen occurs, i shall throw up the case to-morrow.”
 the man known as manoel awakened me in the morning. although
 characteristically spanish, he belonged to a more sanguine type than the
 butler and spoke much better english than pedro. he placed upon the table
 beside me a tray containing a small pot of china tea, an apple, a peach,
 and three slices of toast.
 “how soon would you like your bath, sir?” he enquired.
 “in about half an hour,” i replied.
 “breakfast is served at . if you wish, sir,” continued manoel, “but the
 ladies rarely come down. would you prefer to breakfast in your room?”
 “what is mr. harley doing?”
 “he tells me that he does not take breakfast, sir. colonel don juan
 menendez will be unable to ride with you this morning, but a groom will
 accompany you to the heath if you wish, which is the best place for a
 gallop. breakfast on the south veranda is very pleasant, sir, if you are
 riding first.”
 “good,” i replied, for indeed i felt strangely heavy; “it shall be the
 heath, then, and breakfast on the veranda.”
 having drunk a cup of tea and dressed i went into harley’s room, to find
 him propped up in bed reading the daily telegraph and smoking a
 cigarette.
 “i am off for a ride,” i said. “won’t you join me?”
 he fixed his pillows more comfortably, and slowly shook his head.
 “not a bit of it, knox,” he replied, “i find exercise to be fatal to
 concentration.”
 “i know you have weird theories on the subject, but this is a beautiful
 morning.”
 “i grant you the beautiful morning, knox, but here you will find me when
 you return.”
 i knew him too well to debate the point, and accordingly i left him to his
 newspaper and cigarette, and made my way downstairs. a housemaid was busy
 in the hall, and in the courtyard before the monastic porch a negro groom
 awaited me with two fine mounts. he touched his hat and grinned
 expansively as i appeared. a spirited young chestnut was saddled for my
 use, and the groom, who informed me that his name was jim, rode a smaller,
 spanish horse, a beautiful but rather wicked-looking creature.
 we proceeded down the drive. pedro was standing at the door of the lodge,
 talking to his surly-looking daughter. he saluted me very ceremoniously as
 i passed.
 pursuing an easterly route for a quarter of a mile or so, we came to a
 narrow lane which branched off to the left in a tremendous declivity.
 indeed it presented the appearance of the dry bed of a mountain torrent,
 and in wet weather a torrent this lane became, so i was informed by jim.
 it was very rugged and dangerous, and here we dismounted, the groom
 leading the horses.
 then we were upon a well-laid main road, and along this we trotted on to a
 tempting stretch of heath-land. there was a heavy mist, but the scent of
 the heather in the early morning was delightful, and there was something
 exhilarating in the dull thud of the hoofs upon the springy turf. the
 negro was a natural horseman, and he seemed to enjoy the ride every bit as
 much as i did. for my own part i was sorry to return. but the vapours of
 the night had been effectively cleared from my mind, and when presently we
 headed again for the hills, i could think more coolly of those problems
 which overnight had seemed well-nigh insoluble.
 we returned by a less direct route, but only at one point was the path so
 steep as that by which we had descended. this brought us out on a road
 above and about a mile to the south of cray’s folly. at one point, through
 a gap in the trees, i found myself looking down at the gray stone building
 in its setting of velvet lawns and gaily patterned gardens. a faint mist
 hovered like smoke over the grass.
 five minutes later we passed a queer old jacobean house, so deeply hidden
 amidst trees that the early morning sun had not yet penetrated to it,
 except for one upstanding gable which was bathed in golden light. i should
 never have recognized the place from that aspect, but because of its
 situation i knew that this must be the guest house. it seemed very gloomy
 and dark, and remembering how i was pledged to call upon mr. colin camber
 that day, i apprehended that my reception might be a cold one.
 presently we left the road and cantered across the valley meadows, in
 which i had walked on the previous day, reentering cray’s folly on the
 south, although we had left it on the north. we dismounted in the
 stable-yard, and i noted two other saddle horses in the stalls, a pair of
 very clean-looking hunters, as well as two perfectly matched ponies,
 which, jim informed me, madame de stämer sometimes drove in a chaise.
 feeling vastly improved by the exercise, i walked around to the veranda,
 and through the drawing room to the hall. manoel was standing there, and:
 “your bath is ready, sir,” he said.
 i nodded and went upstairs. it seemed to me that life at cray’s folly was
 quite agreeable, and such was my mood that the shadowy bat wing menace
 found no place in it save as the chimera of a sick man’s imagination. one
 thing only troubled me: the identity of the woman who had been with
 colonel menendez on the previous night.
 however, such unconscious sun worshippers are we all that in the glory of
 that summer morning i realized that life was good, and i resolutely put
 behind me the dark suspicions of the night.
 i looked into harley’s room ere descending, and, as he had assured me
 would be the case, there he was, propped up in bed, the daily telegraph
 upon the floor beside him and the times now open upon the coverlet.
 “i am ravenously hungry,” i said, maliciously, “and am going down to eat a
 hearty breakfast.”
 “good,” he returned, treating me to one of his quizzical smiles. “it is
 delightful to know that someone is happy.”
 manoel had removed my unopened newspapers from the bedroom, placing them
 on the breakfast table on the south veranda; and i had propped the mail
 up before me and had commenced to explore a juicy grapefruit when
 something, perhaps a faint breath of perfume, a slight rustle of
 draperies, or merely that indefinable aura which belongs to the presence
 of a woman, drew my glance upward and to the left. and there was val
 beverley smiling down at me.
 “good morning, mr. knox,” she said. “oh, please don’t interrupt your
 breakfast. may i sit down and talk to you?”
 “i should be most annoyed if you refused.”
 she was dressed in a simple summery frock which left her round,
 sun-browned arms bare above the elbow, and she laid a huge bunch of roses
 upon the table beside my tray.
 “i am the florist of the establishment,” she explained. “these will
 delight your eyes at luncheon. don’t you think we are a lot of barbarians
 here, mr. knox?”
 “why?”
 “well, if i had not taken pity upon you, here you would have bat over a
 lonely breakfast just as though you were staying at a hotel.”
 “delightful,” i replied, “now that you are here.”
 “ah,” said she, and smiled roguishly, “that afterthought just saved you.”
 “but honestly,” i continued, “the hospitality of colonel menendez is true
 hospitality. to expect one’s guests to perform their parlour tricks around
 a breakfast table in the morning is, on the other hand, true barbarism.”
 “i quite agree with you,” she said, quietly. “there is a perfectly
 delightful freedom about the colonel’s way of living. only some horrid old
 victorian prude could possibly take exception to it. did you enjoy your
 ride?”
 “immensely,” i replied, watching her delightedly as she arranged the roses
 in carefully blended groups.
 her fingers were very delicate and tactile, and such is the character
 which resides in the human hand, that whereas the gestures of madame de
 stämer were curiously stimulating, there was something in the movement of
 val beverley’s pretty fingers amidst the blooms which i found most
 soothing.
 “i passed the guest house on my return,” i continued. “do you know mr.
 camber?”
 she looked at me in a startled way.
 “no,” she replied, “i don’t. do you?”
 “i met him by chance yesterday.”
 “really? i thought he was quite unapproachable; a sort of ogre.”
 “on the contrary, he is a man of great charm.”
 “oh,” said val beverley, “well, since you have said so, i might as well
 admit that he has always seemed a charming man to me. i have never spoken
 to him, but he looks as though he could be very fascinating. have you met
 his wife?”
 “no. is she also american?”
 my companion shook her head.
 “i have no idea,” she replied. “i have seen her several times of course,
 and she is one of the daintiest creatures imaginable, but i know nothing
 about her nationality.”
 “she is young, then?”
 “very young, i should say. she looks quite a child.”
 “the reason of my interest,” i replied, “is that mr. camber asked me to
 call upon him, and i propose to do so later this morning.”
 “really?”
 again i detected the startled expression upon val beverley’s face.
 “that is rather curious, since you are staying here.”
 “why?”
 “well,” she looked about her nervously, “i don’t know the reason, but the
 name of mr. camber is anathema in cray’s folly.”
 “colonel menendez told me last night that he had never met mr. camber.”
 val beverley shrugged her shoulders, a habit which it was easy to see she
 had acquired from madame de stämer.
 “perhaps not,” she replied, “but i am certain he hates him.”
 “hates mr. camber?”
 “yes.” her expression grew troubled. “it is another of those mysteries
 which seem to be part of colonel menendez’s normal existence.”
 “and is this dislike mutual?”
 “that i cannot say, since i have never met mr. camber.”
 “and madame de stämer, does she share it?”
 “fully, i think. but don’t ask me what it means, because i don’t know.”
 she dismissed the subject with a light gesture and poured me out a second
 cup of coffee.
 “i am going to leave you now,” she said. “i have to justify my existence
 in my own eyes.”
 “must you really go?”
 “i must really.”
 “then tell me something before you go.”
 she gathered up the bunches of roses and looked down at me with a wistful
 expression.
 “yes, what is it?”
 “did you detect those mysterious footsteps again last night?”
 the look of wistfulness changed to another which i hated to see in her
 eyes, an expression of repressed fear.
 “no,” she replied in a very low voice, “but why do you ask the question?”
 doubt of her had been far enough from my mind, but that something in the
 tone of my voice had put her on her guard i could see.
 “i am naturally curious,” i replied, gravely.
 “no,” she repeated, “i have not heard the sound for some time now.
 perhaps, after all, my fears were imaginary.”
 there was a constraint in her manner which was all too obvious, and when
 presently, laden with the spoil of the rose garden, she gave me a parting
 smile and hurried into the house, i sat there very still for a while, and
 something of the brightness had faded from the coming, nor did life seem
 so glad a business as i had thought it quite recently.
 i presented myself at the guest house at half-past eleven. my mental state
 was troubled and indescribably complex. perhaps my own uneasy, thoughts
 were responsible for the idea, but it seemed to me that the atmosphere of
 cray’s folly had changed yet again. never before had i experienced a sense
 of foreboding like that which had possessed me throughout the hours of
 this bright summer’s morning.
 colonel menendez had appeared about nine o’clock. he exhibiting no traces
 of illness that were perceptible to me. but this subtle change which i had
 detected, or thought i had detected, was more marked in madame stämer than
 in any one. in her strange, still eyes i had read what i can only describe
 as a stricken look. it had none of the heroic resignation and acceptance
 of the inevitable which had so startled me in the face of the colonel on
 the previous day. there was a bitterness in it, as of one who has made a
 great but unwilling sacrifice, and again i had found myself questing that
 faint but fugitive memory, conjured up by the eyes of madame de stämer.
 never had the shadow lain so darkly upon the house as it lay this morning
 with the sun blazing gladly out of a serene sky. the birds, the flowers,
 and mother earth herself bespoke the joy of summer. but beneath the roof
 of cray’s folly dwelt a spirit of unrest, of apprehension. i thought of
 that queer lull which comes before a tropical storm, and i thought i read
 a knowledge of pending evil even in the glances of the servants.
 i had spoken to harley of this fear. he had smiled and nodded grimly,
 saying:
 “evidently, knox, you have forgotten that to-night is the night of the
 full moon.”
 it was in no easy state of mind, then, that i opened the gate and walked
 up to the porch of the guest house. that the solution of the grand mystery
 of cray’s folly would automatically resolve these lesser mysteries i felt
 assured, and i was supported by the idea that a clue might lie here.
 the house, which from the roadway had an air of neglect, proved on close
 inspection to be well tended, but of an unprosperous aspect. the brass
 knocker, door knob, and letter box were brilliantly polished, whilst the
 windows and the window curtains were spotlessly clean. but the place cried
 aloud for the service of the decorator, and it did not need the deductive
 powers of a paul harley to determine that mr. colin camber was in
 straitened circumstances.
 in response to my ringing the door was presently opened by ah tsong. his
 yellow face exhibited no trace of emotion whatever. he merely opened the
 door and stood there looking at me.
 “is mr. camber at home?” i enquired.
 “master no got,” crooned ah tsong.
 he proceeded quietly to close the door again.
 “one moment,” i said, “one moment. i wish, at any rate, to leave my card.”
 ah tsong allowed the door to remain open, but:
 “no usee palaber so fashion,” he said. “no feller comee here. sabby?”
 “i savvy, right enough,” said i, “but all the same you have got to take my
 card in to mr. camber.”
 i handed him a card as i spoke, and suddenly addressing him in “pidgin,”
 of which, fortunately, i had a smattering:
 “belong very quick, ah tsong,” i said, sharply, “or plenty big trouble,
 savvy?”
 “sabby, sabby,” he muttered, nodding his head; and leaving me standing in
 the porch he retired along the sparsely carpeted hall.
 this hall was very gloomily lighted, but i could see several pieces of
 massive old furniture and a number of bookcases, all looking incredibly
 untidy.
 rather less than a minute elapsed, i suppose, when from some place at the
 farther end of the hallway mr. camber appeared in person. he wore a
 threadbare dressing gown, the silken collar and cuffs of which were very
 badly frayed. his hair was dishevelled and palpably he had not shaved this
 morning.
 he was smoking a corncob pipe, and he slowly approached, glancing from the
 card which he held in his hand in my direction, and then back again at the
 card, with a curious sort of hesitancy. in spite of his untidy appearance
 i could not fail to mark the dignity of his bearing, and the almost
 arrogant angle at which he held his head.
 “mr—er—malcolm knox?” he began, fixing his large eyes upon me
 with a look in which i could detect no sign of recognition. “i am advised
 that you desire to see me?”
 “that is so, mr. camber,” i replied, cheerily. “i fear i have interrupted
 your work, but as no other opportunity may occur of renewing an
 acquaintance which for my part i found extremely pleasant—”
 “of renewing an acquaintance, you say, mr. knox?”
 “yes.”
 “quite.” he looked me up and down critically. “to be sure, we have met
 before, i understand?”
 “we met yesterday, mr. camber, you may recall. having chanced to come
 across a contribution of yours of the occult review, i have availed
 myself of your invitation to drop in for a chat.”
 his expression changed immediately and the sombre eyes lighted up.
 “ah, of course,” he cried, “you are a student of the transcendental.
 forgive my seeming rudeness, mr. knox, but indeed my memory is of the
 poorest. pray come in, sir; your visit is very welcome.”
 he held the door wide open, and inclined his head in a gesture of curious
 old-world courtesy which was strange in so young a man. and congratulating
 myself upon the happy thought which had enabled me to win such instant
 favour, i presently found myself in a study which i despair of describing.
 in some respects it resembled the lumber room of an antiquary, whilst in
 many particulars it corresponded to the interior of one of those
 second-hand bookshops which abound in the neighbourhood of charing cross
 road. the shelves with which it was lined literally bulged with books, and
 there were books on the floor, books on the mantelpiece, and books, some
 open and some shut, some handsomely bound, and some having the covers torn
 off, upon every table and nearly every chair in the place.
 volume seven of burton’s monumental “thousand nights and a night” lay upon
 a littered desk before which i presumed mr. camber had been seated at the
 time of my arrival. some wet vessel, probably a cup of tea or coffee, had
 at some time been set down upon the page at which this volume was open,
 for it was marked with a dark brown ring. a volume of fraser’s “golden
 bough” had been used as an ash tray, apparently, since the binding was
 burned in several places where cigarettes had been laid upon it.
 in this interesting, indeed unique apartment, east met west, unabashed by
 kipling’s dictum. roman tear-vases and egyptian tomb-offerings stood upon
 the same shelf as empty bass bottles; and a hideous wooden idol from the
 south sea islands leered on eternally, unmoved by the presence upon his
 distorted head of a soft felt hat made, i believe, in philadelphia.
 strange implements from early british barrows found themselves in the
 company of thugee daggers there were carved mammals’ tusks and
 snake emblems from yucatan; against a chinese ivory model of the temple of
 ten thousand buddhas rested a coptic crucifix made from a twig of the holy
 rose tree. across an ancient spanish coffer was thrown a persian rug into
 which had been woven the monogram of shah-jehan and a text from the koran.
 it was easy to see that mr. colin camber’s studies must have imposed a
 severe strain upon his purse.
 “sit down, mr. knox, sit down,” he said, sweeping a vellum-bound volume of
 eliphas levi from a chair, and pushing the chair forward. “the visit of a
 fellow-student is a rare pleasure for me. and you find me, sir,” he seated
 himself in a curious, carved chair which stood before the desk, “you find
 me engaged upon enquiries, the result of which will constitute chapter
 forty-two of my present book. pray glance at the contents of this little
 box.”
 he placed in my hands a small box of dark wood, evidently of great age. it
 contained what looked like a number of shrivelled beans.
 having glanced at it curiously i returned it to him, shaking my head
 blankly.
 “you are puzzled?” he said, with a kind of boyish triumph, which lighted
 up his face, which rejuvenated him and gave me a glimpse of another man.
 “these, sir,” he touched the shrivelled objects with a long, delicate
 forefinger “are seeds of the sacred lotus of ancient egypt. they were
 found in the tomb of a priest.”
 “and in what way do they bear upon the enquiry to which you referred, mr.
 camber?”
 “in this way,” he replied, drawing toward him a piece of newspaper upon
 which rested a mound of coarse shag. “i maintain that the vital principle
 survives within them. now, i propose to cultivate these seeds, mr. knox.
 do you grasp the significance, of this experiment?”
 he knocked out the corn-cob upon the heel of his slipper and began to
 refill the hot bowl with shag from the newspaper at his elbow.
 “from a physical point of view, yes,” i replied, slowly. “but i should not
 have supposed such an experiment to come within the scope of your own
 particular activities, mr. camber.”
 “ah,” he returned, triumphantly, at the same time stuffing tobacco into
 the bowl of the corn-cob, “it is for this very reason that chapter
 forty-two of my book must prove to be the hub of the whole, and the whole,
 mr. knox, i am egotist enough to believe, shall establish a new focus for
 thought, an intellectual rome bestriding and uniting the seven hills of
 unbelief.”
 he lighted his pipe and stared at me complacently.
 whilst i had greatly revised my first estimate of the man, my revisions
 had been all in his favour. respecting his genius my first impression was
 confirmed. that he was ahead of his generation, perhaps a new galileo, i
 was prepared to believe. he had a pride of bearing which i think was
 partly racial, but which in part, too, was the insignia of intellectual
 superiority. he stood above the commonplace, caring little for the views
 of those around and beneath him. from vanity he was utterly free. his was
 strangely like the egotism of true genius.
 “now, sir,” he continued, puffing furiously at his corn-cob, “i observed
 you glancing a moment ago at this volume of the ‘golden bough.’” he
 pointed to the scarred book which i have already mentioned. “it is a work
 of profound scholarship. but having perused its hundreds of pages, what
 has the student learned? does he know why the twenty-sixth chapter of the
 ‘book of the dead’ was written upon lapis-lazuli, the twenty-seventh upon
 green felspar, the twenty-ninth upon cornelian, and the thirtieth upon
 serpentine? he does not. having studied part four, has he learned the
 secret of why osiris was a black god, although he typified the sun? has he
 learned why modern christianity is losing its hold upon the nations,
 whilst buddhism, so called, counts its disciples by millions? he has not.
 this is because the scholar is rarely the seer.”
 “i quite agree with you,” i said, thinking that i detected the drift of
 his argument.
 “very well,” said he. “i am an american citizen, mr. knox, which is
 tantamount to stating that i belong to the greatest community of traders
 which has appeared since the phoenicians overran the then known world.
 america has not produced the mystic, yet judæa produced the founder of
 christianity, and gautama buddha, born of a royal line, established the
 creed of human equity. in what way did these magicians, for a
 miracle-worker is nothing but a magician, differ from ordinary men? in one
 respect only: they had learned to control that force which we have to-day
 termed will.”
 as he spoke those words colin camber directed upon me a glance from his
 luminous eyes which frankly thrilled me. the bemused figure of the
 lavender arms was forgotten. i perceived before me a man of power, a man
 of extraordinary knowledge and intellectual daring. his voice, which was
 very beautiful, together with his glance, held me enthralled.
 “what we call will,” he continued, “is what the ancient egyptians called
 khu. it is not mental: it is a property of the soul. at this point,
 mr. knox, i depart from the laws generally accepted by my contemporaries.
 i shall presently propose to you that the eye of the divine architect
 literally watches every creature upon the earth.”
 “literally?”
 “literally, mr. knox. we need no images, no idols, no paintings. all
 power, all light comes from one source. that source is the sun! the sun
 controls will, and the will is the soul. if there were a cavern in the
 earth so deep that the sun could never reach it, and if it were possible
 for a child to be born in that cavern, do you know what that child would
 be?”
 “almost certainly blind,” i replied; “beyond which my imagination fails
 me.”
 “then i will inform you, mr. knox. it would be a demon.”
 “what!” i cried, and was momentarily touched with the fear that this was a
 brilliant madman.
 “listen,” he said, and pointed with the stem of his pipe. “why, in all
 ancient creeds, is hades depicted as below? for the simple reason that
 could such a spot exist and be inhabited, it must be sunless, when
 it could only be inhabited by devils; and what are devils but creatures
 without souls?”
 “you mean that a child born beyond reach of the sun’s influence would have
 no soul?”
 “such is my meaning, mr. knox. do you begin to see the importance of my
 experiment with the lotus seeds?”
 i shook my head slowly. whereupon, laying his corn-cob upon the desk,
 colin camber burst into a fit of boyish laughter, which seemed to
 rejuvenate him again, which wiped out the image of the magus completely,
 and only left before me a very human student of strange subjects, and
 withal a fascinating companion.
 “i fear, sir,” he said, presently, “that my steps have led me farther into
 the wilderness than it has been your fate to penetrate. the whole secret
 of the universe is contained in the words day and night, darkness and
 light. i have studied both the light and the darkness, deliberately and
 without fear. a new age is about to dawn, sir, and a new age requires new
 beliefs, new truths. were you ever in the country of the hill dyaks?”
 this abrupt question rather startled me, but:
 “you refer to the borneo hill-country?”
 “precisely.”
 “no, i was never there.”
 “then this little magical implement will be new to you,” said he.
 standing up, he crossed to a cabinet littered untidily with all sorts of
 strange-looking objects, carved bones, queer little inlaid boxes, images,
 untidy manuscripts, and what-not.
 he took up what looked like a very ungainly tobacco-pipe, made of some
 rich brown wood, and, handing it to me:
 “examine this, mr. knox,” he said, the boyish smile of triumph returning
 again to his face.
 i did as he requested and made no discovery of note. the thing clearly was
 not intended for a pipe. the stem was soiled and, moreover, there was
 carving inside the bowl. so that presently i returned it to him, shaking
 my head.
 “unless one should be informed of the properties of this little
 instrument,” he declared, “discovery by experiment is improbable. now,
 note.”
 he struck the hollow of the bowl upon the palm of his hand, and it
 delivered a high, bell-like note which lingered curiously. then:
 “note again.”
 he made a short striking motion with the thing, similar to that which one
 would employ who had designed to jerk something out of the bowl. and at
 the very spot on the floor where any object contained in the bowl would
 have fallen, came a reprise of the bell note! clearly, from almost at my
 feet, it sounded, a high, metallic ring.
 he struck upward, and the bell-note sounded on the ceiling; to the right,
 and it came from the window; in my direction, and the tiny bell seemed to
 ring beside my ear! i will honestly admit that i was startled, but:
 “dyak magic,” said colin camber; “one of nature’s secrets not yet
 discovered by conventional western science. it was known to the egyptian
 priesthood, of course; hence the vocal memnon. it was known to madame
 blavatsky, who employed an ‘astral bell’; and it is known to me.”
 he returned the little instrument to its place upon the cabinet.
 “i wonder if the fact will strike you as significant,” said he, “that the
 note which you have just heard can only be produced between sunrise and
 sunset?”
 without giving me time to reply:
 “the most notable survival of black magic—that is, the scientific
 employment of darkness against light—is to be met with in haiti and
 other islands of the west indies.”
 “you are referring to voodooism?” i said, slowly.
 he nodded, replacing his pipe between his teeth.
 “a subject, mr. knox, which i investigated exhaustively some years ago.”
 i was watching him closely as he spoke, and a shadow, a strange shadow,
 crept over his face, a look almost of exaltation—of mingled sorrow
 and gladness which i find myself quite unable to describe.
 “in the west indies, mr. knox,” he continued, in a strangely altered
 voice, “i lost all and found all. have you ever realized, sir, that sorrow
 is the price we must pay for joy?”
 i did not understand his question, and was still wondering about it when i
 heard a gentle knock, the door opened, and a woman came in.
 i find it difficult, now, to recapture my first impression of that
 meeting. about the woman, hesitating before me, there was something
 unexpected, something wholly unfamiliar. she belonged to a type with which
 i was not acquainted. nor was it wonderful that she should strike me in
 this fashion, since my wanderings, although fairly extensive, had never
 included the west indies, nor had i been to spain; and this girl—i
 could have sworn that she was under twenty—was one of those rare
 beauties, a golden spaniard.
 that she was not purely spanish i learned later.
 she was small, and girlishly slight, with slender ankles and exquisite
 little feet; indeed i think she had the tiniest feet of any woman i had
 ever met. she wore a sort of white pinafore over her dress, and her arms,
 which were bare because of the short sleeves of her frock, were of a
 child-like roundness, whilst her creamy skin was touched with a faint
 tinge of bronze, as though, i remember thinking, it had absorbed and
 retained something of the southern sunshine. she had the swaying carriage
 which usually belongs to a tall woman, and her head and neck were grecian
 in poise.
 her hair, which was of a curious dull gold colour, presented a mass of
 thick, tight curls, and her beauty was of that unusual character which
 makes a cleopatra a subject of deathless debate. what i mean to say is
 this: whilst no man could have denied, for instance, that val beverley was
 a charmingly pretty woman, nine critics out of ten must have failed to
 classify this golden spaniard correctly or justly. her complexion was
 peach-like in the oriental sense, that strange hint of gold underlying the
 delicate skin, and her dark blue eyes were shaded by really wonderful
 silken lashes.
 emotion had the effect of enlarging the pupils, a phenomenon rarely met
 with, so that now as she entered the room and found a stranger present
 they seemed to be rather black than blue.
 her embarrassment was acute, and i think she would have retired without
 speaking, but:
 “ysola,” said colin camber, regarding her with a look curiously compounded
 of sorrow and pride, “allow me to present mr. malcolm knox, who has
 honoured us with a visit.”
 he turned to me.
 “mr. knox,” he said, “it gives me great pleasure that you should meet my
 wife.”
 perhaps i had expected this, indeed, subconsciously, i think i had.
 nevertheless, at the words “my wife” i felt that i started. the analogy
 with edgar allan poe was complete.
 as mrs. camber extended her hand with a sort of appealing timidity, it
 appeared to me that she felt herself to be intruding. the expression in
 her beautiful eyes when she glanced at her husband could only be described
 as one of adoration; and whilst it was impossible to doubt his love for
 her, i wondered if his colossal egotism were capable of stooping to
 affection. i wondered if he knew how to tend and protect this delicate
 southern girl wife of his.
 remembering the episode of the lavender arms, i felt justified in doubting
 her happiness, and in this i saw an explanation of the mingled sorrow and
 pride with which colin camber regarded her. it might betoken recognition
 of his own shortcomings as a husband.
 “how nice of you to come and see us. mr. knox,” she said.
 she spoke in a faintly husky manner which was curiously attractive,
 although lacking the deep, vibrant tones of madame de stämer’s memorable
 voice. her english was imperfect, but her accent good.
 “your husband has been carrying me to enchanted lands, mrs. camber,” i
 replied. “i have never known a morning to pass so quickly.”
 “oh,” she replied, and laughed with a childish glee which i was glad to
 witness. “did he tell you all about the book which is going to make the
 world good? did he tell you it will make us rich as well?”
 “rich?” said camber, frowning slightly. “nature’s riches are health and
 love. if we hold these the rest will come. now that you have joined us,
 ysola, i shall beg mr. knox, in honour of this occasion, to drink a glass
 of wine and break a biscuit as a pledge of future meetings.”
 i watched him as he spoke, a lean, unkempt figure invested with a curious
 dignity, and i found it almost impossible to believe that this was the
 same man who had sat in the bar of the lavender arms, sipping whisky and
 water. the resemblance to the portrait in harley’s office became more
 marked than ever. there was an air of high breeding about the delicate
 features which, curiously enough, was accentuated by the unshaven chin. i
 recognized that refusal would be regarded as a rebuff, and therefore:
 “you are very kind,” i said.
 colin camber inclined his head gravely and courteously.
 “we are very glad to have you with us, mr. knox,” he replied.
 he clapped his hands, and, silent as a shadow, ah tsong appeared. i noted
 that although it was camber who had summoned him, it was to mrs. camber
 that the chinaman turned for orders. i had thought his yellow face
 incapable of expression, but as his oblique eyes turned in the direction
 of the girl i read in them a sort of dumb worship, such as one sees in the
 eyes of a dog.
 she spoke to him rapidly in chinese.
 “hoi, hoi,” he muttered, “hoi, hoi,” nodded his head, and went out.
 i saw that colin camber had detected my interest, for:
 “ah tsong is really my wife’s servant,” he explained.
 “oh,” she said in a low voice, and looked at me earnestly, “ah tsong
 nursed me when i was a little baby so high.” she held her hand about four
 feet from the floor and laughed gleefully. “can you imagine what a funny
 little thing i was?”
 “you must have been a wonder-child, mrs. camber,” i replied with
 sincerity; “and ah tsong has remained with you ever since?”
 “ever since,” she echoed, shaking her head in a vaguely pathetic way. “he
 will never leave me, do you think, colin?”
 “never,” replied her husband; “you are all he loves in the world. a case,
 mr. knox,” he turned to me, “of deathless fidelity rarely met with
 nowadays and only possible, perhaps, in its true form in an oriental.”
 mrs. camber having seated herself upon one of the few chairs which was not
 piled with books, her husband had resumed his place by the writing desk,
 and i sought in vain to interpret the glances which passed between them.
 the fact that these two were lovers none could have mistaken. but here
 again, as at cray’s folly, i detected a shadow. i felt that something had
 struck at the very root of their happiness, in fact, i wondered if they
 had been parted, and were but newly reunited for there was a sort of
 constraint between them, the more marked on the woman’s side than on the
 man’s. i wondered how long they had been married, but felt that it would
 have been indiscreet to ask.
 even as the idea occurred to me, however, an opportunity arose of learning
 what i wished to know. i heard a bell ring, and:
 “there is someone at the door, colin,” said mrs. camber.
 “i will go,” he replied. “ah tsong has enough to do.”
 without another word he stood up and walked out of the room.
 “you see,” said mrs. camber, smiling in her naive way, “we only have one
 servant, except ah tsong, her name is mrs. powis. she is visiting her
 daughter who is married. we made the poor old lady take a holiday.”
 “it is difficult to imagine you burdened with household responsibilities,
 mrs. camber,” i replied. “please forgive me but i cannot help wondering
 how long you have been married?”
 “for nearly four years.”
 “really?” i exclaimed. “you must have been married very young?”
 “i was twenty. do i look so young?”
 i gazed at her in amazement.
 “you astonish me,” i declared, which was quite true and no mere
 compliment. “i had guessed your age to be eighteen.”
 “oh,” she laughed, and resting her hands upon the settee leaned forward
 with sparkling eyes, “how funny. sometimes i wish i looked older. it is
 dreadful in this place, although we have been so happy here. at all the
 shops they look at me so funny, so i always send mrs. powis now.”
 “you are really quite wonderful,” i said. “you are spanish, are you not,
 mrs. camber?”
 she slightly shook her head, and i saw the pupils begin to dilate.
 “not really spanish,” she replied, haltingly. “i was born in cuba.”
 “in cuba?”
 she nodded.
 “then it was in cuba that you met mr. camber?”
 she nodded again, watching me intently.
 “it is strange that a virginian should settle in surrey.”
 “yes?” she murmured, “you think so? but really it is not strange at all.
 colin’s people are so proud, so proud. do you know what they are like,
 those virginians? oh! i hate them.”
 “you hate them?”
 “no, i cannot hate them, for he is one. but he will never go back.”
 “why should he never go back, mrs. camber?”
 “because of me.”
 “you mean that you do not wish to settle in america?”
 “i could not—not where he comes from. they would not have me.”
 her eyes grew misty, and she quickly lowered her lashes.
 “would not have you?” i exclaimed. “i don’t understand.”
 “no?” she said, and smiled up at me very gravely. “it is simple. i am a
 cuban, one, as they say, of an inferior race—and of mixed blood.”
 she shook her golden head as if to dismiss the subject, and stood up, as
 camber entered, followed by ah tsong bearing a tray of refreshments.
 of the ensuing conversation i remember nothing. my mind was focussed upon
 the one vital fact that mrs. camber was a cuban creole. dimly i felt that
 here was the missing link for which paul harley was groping. for it was in
 cuba that colin camber had met his wife, it was from cuba that the menace
 of bat wing came.
 what could it mean? surely it was more than a coincidence that these two
 families, both associated with the west indies, should reside within sight
 of one another in the surrey hills. yet, if it were the result of design,
 the design must be on the part of colonel menendez, since the cambers had
 occupied the guest house before he had leased cray’s folly.
 i know not if i betrayed my absentmindedness during the time that i was
 struggling vainly with these maddening problems, but presently, mrs.
 camber having departed about her household duties, i found myself walking
 down the garden with her husband.
 “this is the summer house of which i was speaking, mr. knox,” he said, and
 i regret to state that i retained no impression of his having previously
 mentioned the subject. “during the time that sir james appleton resided at
 cray’s folly, i worked here regularly in the summer months. it was sir
 james, of course, who laid out the greater part of the gardens and who
 rescued the property from the state of decay into which it had fallen.”
 i aroused myself from the profitless reverie in which i had become lost.
 we were standing before a sort of arbour which marked the end of the
 grounds of the guest house. it overhung the edge of a miniature ravine, in
 which, over a pebbly course, a little stream pursued its way down the
 valley to feed the lake in the grounds of cray’s folly.
 from this point of vantage i could see the greater part of colonel
 menendez’s residence. i had an unobstructed view of the tower and of the
 tudor garden.
 “i abandoned my work-shop,” pursued colin camber, “when the—er—the
 new tenant took up his residence. i work now in the room in which you
 found me this morning.”
 he sighed, and turning abruptly, led the way back to the house, holding
 himself very erect, and presenting a queer figure in his threadbare
 dressing gown.
 it was now a perfect summer’s day, and i commented upon the beauty of the
 old garden, which in places was bordered by a crumbling wall.
 “yes, a quaint old spot,” said camber. “i thought at one time, because of
 the name of the house, that it might have been part of a monastery or
 convent. this was not the case, however. it derives its name from a
 certain sir jaspar guest, who flourished, i believe, under king charles of
 merry memory.”
 “nevertheless,” i added, “the guest house is a charming survival of more
 spacious days.”
 “true,” returned colin camber, gravely. “here it is possible to lead one’s
 own life, away from the noisy world,” he sighed again wearily. “yes, i
 shall regret leaving the guest house.”
 “what! you are leaving?”
 “i am leaving as soon as i can find another residence, suited both to my
 requirements and to my slender purse. but these domestic affairs can be of
 no possible interest to you. i take it, mr. knox, that you will grant my
 wife and myself the pleasure of your company at lunch?”
 “many thanks,” i replied, “but really i must return to cray’s folly.”
 as i spoke the words i had moved a little ahead at a point where the path
 was overgrown by a rose bush, for the garden was somewhat neglected.
 “you will quite understand,” i said, and turned.
 never can i forget the spectacle which i beheld.
 colin camber’s peculiarly pale complexion had assumed a truly ghastly
 pallor, and he stood with tightly clenched hands, glaring at me almost
 insanely.
 “mr. camber,” i cried, with concern, “are you unwell?”
 he moistened his dry lips, and:
 “you are returning—to cray’s folly?” he said, speaking, it seemed,
 with difficulty.
 “i am, sir. i am staying with colonel menendez.”
 “ah!”
 he clutched the collar of his pyjama jacket and wrenched so strongly that
 the button was torn off. his passion was incredible, insane. the power of
 speech had almost left him.
 “you are a guest of—of devil menendez,” he whispered, and the
 speaking of the name seemed almost to choke him. “of—devil menendez.
 you—you—are a spy. you have stolen my hospitality—you
 have obtained access to my house under false pretences. god! if i had
 known!”
 “mr. camber,” i said, sternly, and realized that i, too, had clenched my
 fists, for the man’s language was grossly insulting, “you forget
 yourself.”
 “perhaps i do,” he muttered, thickly; “and therefore”—he raised a
 quivering forefinger—“go! if you have any spark of compassion in
 your breast, go! leave my house.”
 nostrils dilated, he stood with that quivering finger outstretched, and
 now having become as speechless as he, i turned and walked rapidly up to
 the house.
 “ah tsong! ah tsong!” came a cry from behind me in tones which i can only
 describe as hysterical—“mr. knox’s hat and stick. quickly.”
 as i walked in past the study door the chinaman came to meet me, holding
 my hat and cane. i took them from him without a word, and, the door being
 held open by ah tsong, walked out on to the road.
 my heart was beating rapidly. i did not know what to think nor what to do.
 this ignominious dismissal afforded an experience new to me. i was
 humiliated, mortified, but above all, wildly angry.
 how far i had gone on my homeward journey i cannot say, when the sound of
 quickly pattering footsteps intruded upon my wild reverie. i stopped,
 turned, and there was ah tsong almost at my heels.
 “blinga chit flom lilly missee,” he said, and held the note toward me.
 i hesitated, glaring at him in a way that must have been very unpleasant;
 but recovering myself i tore open the envelope, and read the following
 note, written in pencil and very shakily:
 mr. knox. please forgive him. if you knew what we have suffered from senor
 don juan menendez, i know you would forgive him. please, for my sake.
 the chinaman was watching me, that strangely pathetic expression in his
 eyes, and:
 “tell your mistress that i quite understand and will write to her,” i
 said.
 “hoi, hoi.”
 ah tsong turned, and ran swiftly off, as i pursued my way back to cray’s
 folly in a mood which i shall not attempt to describe.
 i sat in paul harley’s room. luncheon was over, and although, as on the
 previous day, it had been a perfect repast, perfectly served, the sense of
 tension which i had experienced throughout the meal had made me horribly
 ill at ease.
 that shadow of which i have spoken elsewhere seemed to have become almost
 palpable. in vain i had ascribed it to a morbid imagination: persistently
 it lingered.
 madame de stämer’s gaiety rang more false than ever. she twirled the rings
 upon her slender fingers and shot little enquiring glances all around the
 table. this spirit of unrest, from wherever it arose, had communicated
 itself to everybody. madame’s several bon mots one and all were failures.
 she delivered them without conviction like an amateur repeating lines
 learned by heart. the colonel was unusually silent, eating little but
 drinking much. there was something unreal, almost ghastly, about the whole
 affair; and when at last madame de stämer retired, bearing val beverley
 with her, i felt certain that the colonel would make some communication to
 us. if ever knowledge of portentous evil were written upon a man’s face it
 was written upon his, as he sat there at the head of the table, staring
 straightly before him. however:
 “gentlemen,” he said, “if your enquiries here have led to no result of,
 shall i say, a tangible character, at least i feel sure that you must have
 realized one thing.”
 harley stared at him sternly.
 “i have realized, colonel menendez,” he replied, “that something is
 pending.”
 “ah!” murmured the colonel, and he clutched the edge of the table with his
 strong brown hands.
 “but,” continued my friend, “i have realized something more. you have
 asked for my aid, and i am here. now you have deliberately tied my hands.”
 “what do you mean, sir?” asked the other, softly.
 “i will speak plainly. i mean that you know more about the nature of this
 danger than you have ever communicated to me. allow me to proceed, if you
 please, colonel menendez. for your delightful hospitality i thank you. as
 your guest i could be happy, but as a professional investigator whose
 services have been called upon under most unusual circumstances, i cannot
 be happy and i do not thank you.”
 their glances met. both were angry, wilful, and self-confident. following
 a few moments of silence:
 “perhaps, mr. harley,” said the colonel, “you have something further to
 say?”
 “i have this to say,” was the answer: “i esteem your friendship, but i
 fear i must return to town without delay.”
 the colonel’s jaws were clenched so tightly that i could see the muscles
 protruding. he was fighting an inward battle; then:
 “what!” he said, “you would desert me?”
 “i never deserted any man who sought my aid.”
 “i have sought your aid.”
 “then accept it!” cried harley. “this, or allow me to retire from the
 case. you ask me to find an enemy who threatens you, and you withhold
 every clue which could aid me in my search.”
 “what clue have i withheld?”
 paul harley stood up.
 “it is useless to discuss the matter further, colonel menendez,” he said,
 coldly.
 the colonel rose also, and:
 “mr. harley,” he replied, and his high voice was ill-controlled, “if i
 give you my word of honour that i dare not tell you more, and if, having
 done so, i beg of you to remain at least another night, can you refuse
 me?”
 harley stood at the end of the table watching him.
 “colonel menendez,” he said, “this would appear to be a game in which my
 handicap rests on the fact that i do not know against whom i am pitted.
 very well. you leave me no alternative but to reply that i will stay.”
 “i thank you, mr. harley. as i fear i am far from well, dare i hope to be
 excused if i retire to my room for an hour’s rest?”
 harley and i bowed, and the colonel, returning our salutations, walked
 slowly out, his bearing one of grace and dignity. so that memorable
 luncheon terminated, and now we found ourselves alone and faced with a
 problem which, from whatever point one viewed it, offered no single
 opening whereby one might hope to penetrate to the truth.
 paul harley was pacing up and down the room in a state of such nervous
 irritability as i never remembered to have witnessed in him before.
 i had just finished an account of my visit to the guest house and of the
 indignity which had been put upon me, and:
 “conundrums! conundrums!” my friend exclaimed. “this quest of bat wing is
 like the quest of heaven, knox. a hundred open doors invite us, each one
 promising to lead to the light, and if we enter where do they lead?—to
 mystification. for instance, colonel menendez has broadly hinted that he
 looks upon colin camber as an enemy. judging from your reception at the
 guest house to-day, such an enmity, and a deadly enmity, actually exists.
 but whereas camber has resided here for three years, the colonel is a
 newcomer. we are, therefore, offered the spectacle of a trembling victim
 seeking the sacrifice. bah! it is preposterous.”
 “if you had seen colin camber’s face to-day, you might not have thought it
 so preposterous.”
 “but i should, knox! i should! it is impossible to suppose that colonel
 menendez was unaware when he leased cray’s folly that camber occupied the
 guest house.”
 “and mrs. camber is a cuban,” i murmured.
 “don’t, knox!” my friend implored. “this case is driving me mad. i have a
 conviction that it is going to prove my waterloo.”
 “my dear fellow,” i said, “this mood is new to you.”
 “why don’t you advise me to remember auguste dupin?” asked harley,
 bitterly. “that great man, preserving his philosophical calm, doubtless by
 this time would have pieced together these disjointed clues, and have
 produced an elegant pattern ready to be framed and exhibited to the
 admiring public.”
 he dropped down upon the bed, and taking his briar from his pocket, began
 to load it in a manner which was almost vicious. i stood watching him and
 offered no remark, until, having lighted the pipe, he began to smoke. i
 knew that these “indian moods” were of short duration, and, sure enough,
 presently:
 “god bless us all, knox,” he said, breaking into an amused smile, “how we
 bristle when someone tries to prove that we are not infallible! how human
 we are, knox, but how fortunate that we can laugh at ourselves.”
 i sighed with relief, for harley at these times imposed a severe strain
 even upon my easy-going disposition.
 “let us go down to the billiard room,” he continued. “i will play you a
 hundred up. i have arrived at a point where my ideas persistently work in
 circles. the best cure is golf; failing golf, billiards.”
 the billiard room was immediately beneath us, adjoining the last apartment
 in the east wing, and there we made our way. harley played keenly,
 deliberately, concentrating upon the game. i was less successful, for i
 found myself alternately glancing toward the door and the open window, in
 the hope that val beverley would join us. i was disappointed, however. we
 saw no more of the ladies until tea-time, and if a spirit of constraint
 had prevailed throughout luncheon, a veritable demon of unrest presided
 upon the terrace during tea.
 madame de stämer made apologies on behalf of the colonel. he was
 prolonging his siesta, but he hoped to join us at dinner.
 “is the colonel’s heart affected?” harley asked.
 madame de stämer shrugged her shoulders and shook her head, blankly.
 “it is mysterious, the state of his health,” she replied. “an old trouble,
 which began years and years ago in cuba.”
 harley nodded sympathetically, but i could see that he was not satisfied.
 yet, although he might doubt her explanation, he had noted, and so had i,
 that madame de stämer’s concern was very real. her slender hands were
 strangely unsteady; indeed her condition bordered on one of distraction.
 harley concealed his thoughts, whatever they may have been, beneath that
 mask of reserve which i knew so well, whilst i endeavoured in vain to draw
 val beverley into conversation with me.
 i gathered that madame de stämer had been to visit the invalid, and that
 she was all anxiety to return was a fact she was wholly unable to conceal.
 there was a tired look in her still eyes, as though she had undertaken a
 task beyond her powers to perform, and, so unnatural a quartette were we,
 that when presently she withdrew i was glad, although she took val
 beverley with her.
 paul harley resumed his seat, staring at me with unseeing eyes. a sound
 reached us through the drawing room which told us that madame de stämer’s
 chair was being taken upstairs, a task always performed when madame
 desired to visit the upper floors by manoel and pedro’s daughter, nita,
 who acted as madame’s maid. these sounds died away, and i thought how
 silent everything had become. even the birds were still, and presently, my
 eye being attracted to a black speck in the sky above, i learned why the
 feathered choir was mute. a hawk was hovering loftily overhead.
 noting my upward glance, paul harley also raised his eyes.
 “ah,” he murmured, “a hawk. all the birds are cowering in their nests.
 nature is a cruel mistress, knox.”
 over the remainder of that afternoon i will pass in silence. indeed,
 looking backward now, i cannot recollect that it afforded one incident
 worthy of record. but because great things overshadow small, so it may be
 that whereas my recollections of quite trivial episodes are sharp enough
 up to a point, my memories from this point onward to the horrible and
 tragic happening which i have set myself to relate are hazy and
 indistinct. i was troubled by the continued absence of val beverley. i
 thought that she was avoiding me by design, and in harley’s gloomy
 reticence i could find no shadow of comfort.
 we wandered aimlessly about the grounds, harley staring up in a vague
 fashion at the windows of cray’s folly; and presently, when i stopped to
 inspect a very perfect rose bush, he left me without a word, and i found
 myself alone.
 later, as i sauntered toward the tudor garden, where i had hoped to
 encounter miss beverley, i heard the clicking of billiard balls; and there
 was harley at the table, practising fancy shots.
 he glanced up at me as i paused by the open window, stopped to relight his
 pipe, and then bent over the table again.
 “leave me alone, knox,” he muttered; “i am not fit for human society.”
 understanding his moods as well as i did, i merely laughed and withdrew.
 i strolled around into the library and inspected scores of books without
 forming any definite impression of the contents of any of them. manoel
 came in whilst i was there and i was strongly tempted to send a message to
 miss beverley, but common sense overcame the inclination.
 when at last my watch told me that the hour for dressing was arrived, i
 heaved a sigh of relief. i cannot say that i was bored, my ill-temper
 sprang from a deeper source than this. the mysterious disappearance of the
 inmates of cray’s folly, and a sort of brooding stillness which lay over
 the great house, had utterly oppressed me.
 as i passed along the terrace i paused to admire the spectacle afforded by
 the setting sun. the horizon was on fire from north to south and the
 countryside was stained with that mystic radiance which is sometimes
 called the blood of apollo. turning, i saw the disk of the moon coldly
 rising in the heavens. i thought of the silent birds and the hovering
 hawk, and i began my preparations for dinner mechanically, dressing as an
 automaton might dress.
 paul harley’s personality was never more marked than in his evil moods.
 his power to fascinate was only equalled by his power to repel. thus,
 although there was a light in his room and i could hear lim moving about,
 i did not join him when i had finished dressing, but lighting a cigarette
 walked downstairs.
 the beauty of the night called to me, although as i stepped out upon the
 terrace i realized with a sort of shock that the gathering dusk held a
 menace, so that i found myself questioning the shadows and doubting the
 rustle of every leaf. something invisible, intangible yet potent, brooded
 over cray’s folly. i began to think more kindly of the disappearance of
 val beverley during the afternoon. doubtless she, too, had been touched by
 this spirit of unrest and in solitude had sought to dispel it.
 so thinking. i walked on in the direction of the tudor garden. the place
 was bathed in a sort of purple half-light, lending it a fairy air of
 unreality, as though banished sun and rising moon yet disputed for mastery
 over earth. this idea set me thinking of colin camber, of osiris, whom he
 had described as a black god, and of isis, whose silver disk now held
 undisputed sovereignty of the evening sky.
 resentment of the treatment which i had received at the guest house still
 burned hotly within me, but the mystery of it all had taken the keen edge
 off my wrath, and i think a sort of melancholy was the keynote of my
 reflections as, descending the steps to the sunken garden, i saw val
 beverley, in a delicate blue gown, coming toward me. she was the spirit of
 my dreams, and the embodiment of my mood. when she lowered her eyes at my
 approach, i knew by virtue of a sort of inspiration that she had been
 avoiding me.
 “miss beverley,” i said, “i have been looking for you all the afternoon.”
 “have you? i have been in my room writing letters.”
 i paced slowly along beside her.
 “i wish you would be very frank with me,” i said.
 she glanced up swiftly, and as swiftly lowered her lashes again.
 “do you think i am not frank?”
 “i do think so. i understand why.”
 “do you really understand?”
 “i think i do. your woman’s intuition has told you that there is something
 wrong.”
 “in what way?”
 “you are afraid of your thoughts. you can see that madame de stämer and
 colonel menendez are deliberately concealing something from paul harley,
 and you don’t know where your duty lies. am i right?”
 she met my glance for a moment in a startled way, then: “yes,” she said,
 softly; “you are quite right. how have you guessed?”
 “i have tried very hard to understand you,” i replied, “and so perhaps up
 to a point i have succeeded.”
 “oh, mr. knox.” she suddenly laid her hand upon my arm. “i am oppressed
 with such a dreadful foreboding, yet i don’t know how to explain it to
 you.”
 “i understand. i, too, have felt it.”
 “you have?” she paused, and looked at me eagerly. “then it is not just
 morbid imagination on my part. if only i knew what to do, what to believe.
 really, i am bewildered. i have just left madame de stämer—”
 “yes?” i said, for she had paused in evident doubt.
 “well, she has utterly broken down.”
 “broken down?”
 “she came to my room and sobbed hysterically for nearly an hour this
 afternoon.”
 “but what was the cause of her grief?”
 “i simply cannot understand.”
 “is it possible that colonel menendez is dangerously ill?”
 “it may be so, mr. knox, but in that event why have they not sent for a
 physician?”
 “true,” i murmured; “and no one has been sent for?”
 “no one.”
 “have you seen colonel menendez?”
 “not since lunch-time.”
 “have you ever known him to suffer in this way before?”
 “never. it is utterly unaccountable. certainly during the last few months
 he has given up riding practically altogether, and in other ways has
 changed his former habits, but i have never known him to exhibit traces of
 any real illness.”
 “has any medical man attended him?”
 “not that i know of. oh, there is something uncanny about it all. whatever
 should i do if you were not here?”
 she had spoken on impulse, and seeing her swift embarrassment:
 “miss beverley,” i said, “i am delighted to know that my company cheers
 you.”
 truth to tell my heart was beating rapidly, and, so selfish is the nature
 of man, i was more glad to learn that my company was acceptable to val
 beverley than i should have been to have had the riddle of cray’s folly
 laid bare before me.
 those sweetly indiscreet words, however, had raised a momentary barrier
 between us, and we walked on silently to the house, and entered the
 brightly lighted hall.
 the silver peal of a chinese tubular gong rang out just when we reached
 the veranda, and as val beverley and i walked in from the garden, madame
 de stämer came wheeling through the doorway, closely followed by paul
 harley. in her the art of the toilette amounted almost to genius, and she
 had so successfully concealed all traces of her recent grief that i
 wondered if this could have been real.
 “my dear mr. knox,” she cried, “i seem to be fated always to apologize for
 other people. the colonel is truly desolate, but he cannot join us for
 dinner. i have already explained to mr. harley.”
 harley inclined his head sympathetically, and assisted to arrange madame
 in her place.
 “the colonel requests us to smoke a cigar with him after dinner, knox,” he
 said, glancing across to me. “it would seem that troubles never come
 singly.”
 “ah,” madame shrugged her shoulders, which her low gown left daringly
 bare, “they come in flocks, or not at all. but i suppose we should feel
 lonely in the world without a few little sorrows, eh, mr. harley?”
 i loved her unquenchable spirit, and i have wondered often enough what i
 should have thought of her if i had known the truth. france has bred some
 wonderful women, both good and bad, but none i think more wonderful than
 marie de stämer.
 if such a thing were possible, we dined more extravagantly than on the
 previous night. madame’s wit was at its keenest; she was truly brilliant.
 pedro, from the big bouffet at the end of the room, supervised this feast
 of lucullus, and except for odd moments of silence in which madame seemed
 to be listening for some distant sound, there was nothing, i think, which
 could have told a casual observer that a black cloud rested upon the
 house.
 once, interrupting a tête-à-tête between val beverley and paul harley:
 “do not encourage her, mr. harley,” said madame, “she is a desperate
 flirt.”
 “oh, madame,” cried val beverley and blushed deeply.
 “you know you are, my dear, and you are very wise. flirt all your life,
 but never fall in love. it is fatal, don’t you think so, mr. knox?”—turning
 to me in her rapid manner.
 i looked into her still eyes, which concealed so much.
 “say, rather, that it is fate,” i murmured.
 “yes, that is more pretty, but not so true. if i could live my life again,
 m. knox,” she said, for she sometimes used the french and sometimes the
 english mode of address, “i should build a stone wall around my heart. it
 could peep over, but no one could ever reach it.”
 oddly enough, then, as it seems to me now, the spirit of unrest seemed
 almost to depart for awhile, and in the company of the vivacious
 frenchwoman time passed very quickly up to the moment when harley and i
 walked slowly upstairs to join the colonel.
 during the latter part of dinner an idea had presented itself to me which
 i was anxious to mention to harley, and:
 “harley,” i said, “an explanation of the colonel’s absence has occurred to
 me.”
 “really!” he replied; “possibly the same one that has occurred to me.”
 “what is that?”
 paul harley paused on the stairs, turning to me.
 “you are thinking that he has taken cover from the danger which he
 believes particularly to threaten him to-night?”
 “exactly.”
 “you may be right,” he murmured, proceeding upstairs.
 he led the way to a little smoke-room which hitherto i had never visited,
 and in response to his knock:
 “come in,” cried the high voice of colonel menendez.
 we entered to find ourselves in a small and very cosy room. there was a
 handsome oak bureau against one wall, which was littered with papers of
 various kinds, and there was also a large bookcase occupied almost
 exclusively by french novels. it occurred to me that the colonel spent a
 greater part of his time in this little snuggery than in the more formal
 study below. at the moment of our arrival he was stretched upon a settee
 near which stood a little table; and on this table i observed the remains
 of what appeared to me to have been a fairly substantial repast. for some
 reason which i did not pause to analyze at the moment i noted with
 disfavour the presence of a bowl of roses upon the silver tray.
 colonel menendez was smoking a cigarette, and manoel was in the act of
 removing the tray.
 “gentlemen,” said the colonel, “i have no words in which to express my
 sorrow. manoel, pull up those armchairs. help yourself to port, mr.
 harley, and fill mr. knox’s glass. i can recommend the cigars in the long
 box.”
 as we seated ourselves:
 “i am extremely sorry to find you indisposed, sir,” said harley.
 he was watching the dark face keenly, and probably thinking, as i was
 thinking, that it exhibited no trace of illness.
 colonel menendez waved his cigarette gracefully, settling himself amid the
 cushions.
 “an old trouble, mr. harley,” he replied, lightly; “a legacy from
 ancestors who drank too deep of the wine of life.”
 “you are surely taking medical advice?”
 colonel menendez shrugged slightly.
 “there is no doctor in england who would understand the case,” he replied.
 “besides, there is nothing for it but rest and avoidance of excitement.”
 “in that event, colonel,” said harley, “we will not disturb you for long.
 indeed, i should not have consented to disturb you at all, if i had not
 thought that you might have some request to make upon this important
 night.”
 “ah!” colonel menendez shot a swift glance in his direction. “you have
 remembered about to-night?”
 “naturally.”
 “your interest comforts me very greatly, gentlemen, and i am only sorry
 that my uncertain health has made me so poor a host. nothing has occurred
 since your arrival to help you, i am aware. not that i am anxious for any
 new activity on the part of my enemies. but almost anything which should
 end this deathly suspense would be welcome.”
 he spoke the final words with a peculiar intonation. i saw harley watching
 him closely.
 “however,” he continued, “everything is in the hands of fate, and if your
 visit should prove futile, i can only apologize for having interrupted
 your original plans. respecting to-night”—he shrugged—“what
 can i say?”
 “nothing has occurred,” asked harley, slowly, “nothing fresh, i mean, to
 indicate that the danger which you apprehend may really culminate
 to-night?”
 “nothing fresh, mr. harley, unless you yourself have observed anything.”
 “ah,” murmured paul harley, “let us hope that the threat will never be
 fulfilled.”
 colonel menendez inclined his head gravely.
 “let us hope so,” he said.
 on the whole, he was curiously subdued. he was most solicitous for our
 comfort and his exquisite courtesy had never been more marked. i often
 think of him now—his big but graceful figure reclining upon the
 settee, whilst he skilfully rolled his eternal cigarettes and chatted in
 that peculiar, light voice. before the memory of colonel don juan
 sarmiento menendez i sometimes stand appalled. if his maker had but
 endowed him with other qualities of mind and heart equal to his
 magnificent courage, then truly he had been a great man.
 i stood at harley’s open window—looking down in the tudor garden.
 the moon, like a silver mirror, hung in a cloudless sky. over an hour had
 elapsed since i had heard pedro making his nightly rounds. nothing
 whatever of an unusual nature had occurred, and although harley and i had
 listened for any sound of nocturnal footsteps, our vigilance had passed
 unrewarded. harley, unrolling the chinese ladder, had set out upon a
 secret tour of the grounds, warning me that it must be a long business,
 since the brilliance of the moonlight rendered it necessary that he should
 make a wide detour, in order to avoid possible observation from the
 windows. i had wished to join him, but:
 “i count it most important that one of us should remain in the house,” he
 had replied.
 as a result, here was i at the open window, questioning the shadows to
 right and left of me, and every moment expecting to see harley reappear. i
 wondered what discoveries he would make. it would not have surprised me to
 learn that there were lights in many windows of cray’s folly to-night.
 although, when we had rejoined the ladies for half an hour, after leaving
 colonel menendez’s room, there had been no overt reference to the menace
 overhanging the house, yet, as we separated for the night, i had detected
 again in val beverley’s eyes that look of repressed fear. indeed, she was
 palpably disinclined to retire, but was carried off by the masterful
 madame, who declared that she looked tired.
 i wondered now, as i gazed down into the moon-bathed gardens, if harley
 and i were the only wakeful members of the household at that hour. i
 should have been prepared to wager that there were others. i thought of
 the strange footsteps which so often passed miss beverley’s room, and i
 discovered this thought to be an uncomfortable one.
 normally, i was sceptical enough, but on this night of the full moon as i
 stood there at the window, the horrors which colonel menendez had related
 to us grew very real in my eyes, and i thought that the mysteries of
 voodoo might conceal strange and ghastly truths, “the scientific
 employment of darkness against light.” colin camber’s words leapt unbidden
 to my mind; and, such is the magic of moonlight, they became invested with
 a new and a deeper significance. strange, that theories which one rejects
 whilst the sun is shining should assume a spectral shape in the light of
 the moon.
 such were my musings, when suddenly i heard a faint sound as of footsteps
 crunching upon gravel. i leaned farther out of the window, listening
 intently. i could not believe that harley would be guilty of such an
 indiscretion as this, yet who else could be walking upon the path below?
 as i watched, craning from the window, a tall figure appeared, and, slowly
 crossing the gravel path, descended the moss-grown steps to the tudor
 garden.
 it was colonel menendez!
 he was bare-headed, but fully dressed as i had seen him in the
 smoking-room; and not yet grasping the portent of his appearance at that
 hour, but merely wondering why he had not yet retired, i continued to
 watch him. as i did so, something in his gait, something unnatural in his
 movements, caught hold of my mind with a sudden great conviction. he had
 reached the path which led to the sun-dial, and with short, queer, ataxic
 steps was proceeding in its direction, a striking figure in the brilliant
 moonlight which touched his gray hair with a silvery sheen.
 his unnatural, automatic movements told their own story. he was walking in
 his sleep! could it be in obedience to the call of m’kombo?
 my throat grew dry and i knew not how to act. unwillingly it seemed, with
 ever-halting steps, the figure moved onward. i could see that his fists
 were tightly clenched and that he held his head rigidly upright. all
 horrors, real and imaginary, which i had ever experienced, culminated in
 the moment when i saw this man of inflexible character, i could have sworn
 of indomitable will, moving like a puppet under the influence of some
 unnameable force.
 he was almost come to the sun-dial when i determined to cry out. then,
 remembering the shock experienced by a suddenly awakened somnambulist, and
 remembering that the chinese ladder hung from the window at my feet, i
 changed my mind. checking the cry upon my lips, i got astride of the
 window ledge, and began to grope for the bamboo rungs beneath me. i had
 found the first of these, and, turning, had begun to descend, when:
 “knox! knox!” came softly from the opening in the box hedge, “what the
 devil are you about?”
 it was paul harley returned from his tour of the building.
 “harley!” i whispered, descending, “quick! the colonel has just gone into
 the tudor garden!”
 “what!” there was a note of absolute horror in the exclamation. “you
 should have stopped him, knox, you should have stopped him!” cried harley,
 and with that he ran off in the same direction.
 disentangling my foot from the rungs of the ladder which lay upon the
 ground, i was about to follow, when it happened—that strange and
 ghastly thing toward which, secretly, darkly, events had been tending.
 the crack of a rifle sounded sharply in the stillness, echoing and
 re-echoing from wing to wing of cray’s folly and then, more dimly, up the
 wooded slopes beyond! somewhere ahead of me i heard harley cry out:
 “my god, i am too late! they have got him!”
 then, hotfoot, i was making for the entrance to the garden. just as i came
 to it and raced down the steps i heard another sound the memory of which
 haunts me to this day.
 where it came from i had no idea. perhaps i was too confused to judge
 accurately. it might have come from the house, or from the slopes beyond
 the house, but it was a sort of shrill, choking laugh, and it set the
 ultimate touch of horror upon a scène macabre which, even as i
 write of it, seems unreal to me.
 i ran up the path to where harley was kneeling beside the sun-dial.
 analysis of my emotions at this moment were futile; i can only say that i
 had come to a state of stupefaction. face downward on the grass, arms
 outstretched and fists clenched, lay colonel menendez. i think i saw him
 move convulsively, but as i gained his side harley looked up at me, and
 beneath the tan which he never lost his face had grown pale. he spoke
 through clenched teeth.
 “merciful god,” he said, “he is shot through the head.”
 one glance i gave at the ghastly wound in the base of the colonel’s skull,
 and then swayed backward in a sort of nausea. to see a man die in the heat
 of battle, a man one has known and called friend, is strange and terrible.
 here in this moon-bathed tudor garden it was a horror almost beyond my
 powers to endure.
 paul harley, without touching the prone figure, stood up. indeed no
 examination of the victim was necessary. a rifle bullet had pierced his
 brain, and he lay there dead with his head toward the hills.
 i clutched at harley’s shoulder, but he stood rigidly, staring up the
 slope past the angle of the tower, to where a gable of the guest house
 jutted out from the trees.
 “did you hear—that cry?” i whispered, “immediately after the shot?”
 “i heard it.”
 a moment longer he stood fixedly watching, and then:
 “not a wisp of smoke,” he said. “you note the direction in which he was
 facing when he fell?”
 he spoke in a stern and unnatural voice.
 “i do. he must have turned half right when he came to the sun-dial.”
 “where were you when the shot was fired?”
 “running in this direction.”
 “you saw no flash?”
 “none.”
 “neither did i,” groaned harley; “neither did i. and short of throwing a
 cordon round the hills what can be done? how can i move?”
 he had somewhat relaxed, but now as i continued to clutch his arm, i felt
 the muscles grow rigid again.
 “look, knox!” he whispered—“look!”
 i followed the direction of his fixed stare, and through the trees on the
 hillside a dim light shone out. someone had lighted a lamp in the guest
 house.
 a faint, sibilant sound drew my glance upward, and there overhead a bat
 circled—circled—dipped—and flew off toward the distant
 woods. so still was the night that i could distinguish the babble of the
 little stream which ran down into the lake. then, suddenly, came a loud
 flapping of wings. the swans had been awakened by the sound of the shot.
 others had been awakened, too, for now distant voices became audible, and
 then a muffled scream from somewhere within cray’s folly.
 “back to the house, knox,” said harley, hoarsely. “for god’s sake keep the
 women away. get pedro, and send manoel for the nearest doctor. it’s
 useless but usual. let no one deface his footprints. my worst
 anticipations have come true. the local police must be informed.”
 throughout the time that he spoke he continued to search the moon-bathed
 landscape with feverish eagerness, but except for a faint movement of
 birds in the trees, for they, like the swans on the lake, had been alarmed
 by the shot, nothing stirred.
 “it came from the hillside,” he muttered. “off you go, knox.”
 and even as i started on my unpleasant errand, he had set out running
 toward the gate in the southern corner of the garden.
 for my part i scrambled unceremoniously up the bank, and emerged where the
 yews stood sentinel beside the path. i ran through the gap in the box
 hedge just as the main doors were thrown open by pedro.
 he started back as he saw me.
 “pedro! pedro!” i cried, “have the ladies been awakened?”
 “yes, yes! there is terrible trouble, sir. what has happened? what has
 happened?”
 “a tragedy,” i said, shortly. “pull yourself together. where is madame de
 stämer?”
 pedro uttered some exclamation in spanish and stood, pale-faced, swaying
 before me, a dishevelled figure in a dressing gown. and now in the
 background mrs. fisher appeared. one frightened glance she cast in my
 direction, and would have hurried across the hall but i intercepted her.
 “where are you going, mrs. fisher?” i demanded. “what has happened here?”
 “to madame, to madame,” she sobbed, pointing toward the corridor which
 communicated with madame de stämer’s bedchamber.
 i heard a frightened cry proceeding from that direction, and recognized
 the voice of nita, the girl who acted as madame’s maid. then i heard val
 beverley.
 “go and fetch mrs. fisher, nita, at once—and try to behave yourself.
 i have trouble enough.”
 i entered the corridor and pulled up short. val beverley, fully dressed,
 was kneeling beside madame de stämer, who wore a kimono over her
 night-robe, and who lay huddled on the floor immediately outside the door
 of her room!
 “oh, mr. knox!” cried the girl, pitifully, and raised frightened eyes to
 me. “for god’s sake, what has happened?”
 nita, the spanish girl, who was sobbing hysterically, ran along to join
 mrs. fisher.
 “i will tell you in a moment,” i said, quietly, rendered cool, as one
 always is, by the need of others. “but first tell me—how did madame
 de stämer get here?”
 “i don’t know, i don’t know! i was startled by the shot. it has awakened
 everybody. and just as i opened my door to listen, i heard madame cry out
 in the hall below. i ran down, turned on the light, and found her lying
 here. she, too, had been awakened, i suppose, and was endeavouring to drag
 herself from her room when her strength failed her and she swooned. she is
 too heavy for me to lift,” added the girl, pathetically, “and pedro is out
 of his senses, and nita, who was the first of the servants to come, is
 simply hysterical, as you can see.”
 i nodded reassuringly, and stooping, lifted the swooning woman. she was
 much heavier than i should have supposed, but, val beverley leading the
 way, i carried her into her apartment and placed her upon the bed.
 “i will leave her to you,” i said. “you have courage, and so i will tell
 you what has happened.”
 “yes, tell me, oh, tell me!”
 she laid her hands upon my shoulders appealingly, and looked up into my
 eyes in a way that made me long to take her in my arms and comfort her, an
 insane longing which i only crushed with difficulty.
 “someone has shot colonel menendez,” i said, in a low voice, for mrs.
 fisher had just entered.
 “you mean—”
 i nodded.
 “oh!”
 val beverley opened and closed her eyes, clutching at me dizzily for a
 moment, then:
 “i think,” she whispered, “she must have known, and that was why she
 swooned. oh, my god! how horrible.”
 i made her sit down in an armchair, and watched her anxiously, but
 although every speck of colour had faded from her cheeks, she was
 splendidly courageous, and almost immediately she smiled up at me, very
 wanly, but confidently.
 “i will look after her,” she said. “mr. harley will need your assistance.”
 when i returned to the hall i found it already filled with a number of
 servants incongruously attired. carter the chauffeur, who lived at the
 lodge, was just coming in at the door, and:
 “carter,” i said, “get a car out quickly, and bring the nearest doctor. if
 there is another man who can drive, send him for the police. your master
 has been shot.”
 “now, gentlemen,” said inspector aylesbury, “i will take evidence.”
 dawn was creeping grayly over the hills, and the view from the library
 windows resembled a study by bastien-lepage. the lamps burned yellowly,
 and the exotic appointments of the library viewed in that cold light for
 some reason reminded me of a stage set seen in daylight. the velasquez
 portrait mentally translated me to the billiard room where something lay
 upon the settee with a white sheet drawn over it; and i wondered if my own
 face looked as wan and comfortless as did the faces of my companions, that
 is, of two of them, for i must except inspector aylesbury.
 squarely before the oaken mantel he stood, a large, pompous man, but in
 this hour i could find no humour in paul harley’s description of him as
 resembling a walrus. he had a large auburn moustache tinged with gray, and
 prominent brown eyes, but the lower part of his face, which terminated in
 a big double chin, was ill-balanced by his small forehead. he was bulkily
 built, and i had conceived an unreasonable distaste for his puffy hands.
 his official air and oratorical manner were provoking.
 harley sat in the chair which he had occupied during our last interview
 with colonel menendez in the library, and i had realized—a
 realization which had made me uncomfortable—that i was seated upon
 the couch on which the colonel had reclined. only one other was present,
 dr. rolleston of mid-hatton, a slight, fair man with a brisk, military
 manner, acquired perhaps during six years of war service. he was standing
 beside me smoking a cigarette.
 “i have taken all the necessary particulars concerning the position of the
 body,” continued the inspector, “the nature of the wound, contents of
 pockets, etc., and i now turn to you, mr. harley, as the first person to
 discover the murdered man.”
 paul harley lay back in the armchair watching the speaker.
 “before we come to what happened here to-night i should like to be quite
 clear about your own position in the matter, mr. harley. now”—inspector
 aylesbury raised one finger in forensic manner—“now, you visited me
 yesterday afternoon, mr. harley, and asked for certain information
 regarding the neighbourhood.”
 “i did,” said harley, shortly.
 “the questions which you asked me were,” continued the inspector, slowly
 and impressively, “did i know of any negro or coloured people living in,
 or about, mid-hatton, and could i give you a list of the residents within
 a two-mile radius of cray’s folly. i gave you the information which you
 required, and now it is your turn to give me some. why did you ask those
 questions?”
 “for this reason,” was the reply—“i had been requested by colonel
 menendez to visit cray’s folly, accompanied by my friend, mr. knox, in
 order that i might investigate certain occurrences which had taken place
 here.”
 “oh,” said the inspector, raising his eyebrows, “i see. you were here to
 make investigations?”
 “yes.”
 “and these occurrences, will you tell me what they were?”
 “simple enough in themselves,” replied harley. “someone broke into the
 house one night.”
 “broke into the house?”
 “undoubtedly.”
 “but this was never reported to us.”
 “possibly not, but someone broke in, nevertheless. secondly, colonel
 menendez had detected someone lurking about the lawns, and thirdly, the
 wing of a bat was nailed to the main door.”
 inspector aylesbury lowered his eyebrows and concentrated a frowning
 glance upon the speaker.
 “of course, sir,” he said, “i don’t want to jump to conclusions, but you
 are not by any chance trying to be funny at a time like this?”
 “my sense of humour has failed me entirely,” replied harley. “i am merely
 stating bald facts in reply to your questions.”
 “oh, i see.”
 the inspector cleared his throat.
 “someone broke into cray’s folly, then, a fact which was not reported to
 me, a suspicious loiterer was seen in the grounds, again not reported, and
 someone played a silly practical joke by nailing the wing of a bat, you
 say, to the door. might i ask, mr. harley, why you mention this matter?
 the other things are serious, but why you should mention the trick of some
 mischievous boy at a time like this i can’t imagine.”
 “no,” said harley, wearily, “it does sound absurd, inspector; i quite
 appreciate the fact. but, you see, colonel menendez regarded it as the
 most significant episode of them all.”
 “what! the bat wing nailed on the door?”
 “the bat wing, decidedly. he believed it to be the token of a negro secret
 society which had determined upon his death, hence my enquiries regarding
 coloured men in the neighbourhood. do you understand, inspector?”
 inspector aylesbury took a large handkerchief from his pocket and blew his
 nose. replacing the handkerchief he cleared his throat, and:
 “am i to understand,” he enquired, “that the late colonel menendez had
 expected to be attacked?”
 “you may understand that,” replied harley. “it explains my presence in the
 house.”
 “oh,” said the inspector, “i see. it looks as though he might have done
 better if he had applied to me.”
 paul harley glanced across in my direction and smiled grimly.
 “as i had predicted, knox,” he murmured, “my waterloo.”
 “what’s that you say about waterloo, mr. harley?” demanded the inspector.
 “nothing germane to the case,” replied harley. “it was a reference to a
 battle, not to a railway station.”
 inspector aylesbury stared at him dully.
 “you quite understand that you are giving evidence?” he said.
 “it were impossible not to appreciate the fact.”
 “very well, then. the late colonel menendez thought he was in danger from
 negroes. why did he think that?”
 “he was a retired west indian planter,” replied harley, patiently, “and he
 was under the impression that he had offended a powerful native society,
 and that for many years their vengeance had pursued him. attempts to
 assassinate him had already taken place in cuba and in the united states.”
 “what sort of attempts?”
 “he was shot at, several times, and once, in washington, was attacked by a
 man with a knife. he maintained in my presence and in the presence of my
 friend, mr. knox, here, that these various attempts were due to members of
 a sect or religion known as voodoo.”
 “voodoo?”
 “voodoo, inspector, also known as obeah, a cult which has spread from the
 west coast of africa throughout the west indies and to parts of the united
 states. the bat wing is said to be a sign used by these people.”
 inspector aylesbury scratched his chin.
 “now let me get this thing clear,” said he: “colonel menendez believed
 that people called voodoos wanted to kill him? before we go any farther,
 why?”
 “twenty years ago in the west indies he had shot an important member of
 this sect.”
 “twenty years ago?”
 “according to a statement which he made to me, yes.”
 “i see. then for twenty years these voodoos have been trying to kill him?
 then he comes and settles here in surrey and someone nails a bat wing to
 his door? did you see this bat wing?”
 “i did. i have it upstairs in my bag if you would care to examine it.”
 “oh,” said the inspector, “i see. and thinking he had been followed to
 england he came to you to see if you could save him?”
 paul harley nodded grimly.
 “why did he go to you in preference to the local police, the proper
 authorities?” demanded the inspector.
 “he was advised to do so by the spanish ambassador, or so he informed me.”
 “is that so? well, i suppose it had to be. coming from foreign parts. i
 expect he didn’t know what our police are for.” he cleared his throat.
 “very well, i understand now what you were doing here, mr. harley. the
 next thing is, what were you doing tonight, as i see that both you and mr.
 knox are still in evening dress?”
 “we were keeping watch,” i replied.
 inspector aylesbury turned to me ponderously, raising a fat hand. “one
 moment, mr. knox, one moment,” he protested. “the evidence of one witness
 at a time.”
 “we were keeping watch,” said harley, deliberately echoing my words.
 “why?”
 “more or less we were here for that purpose. you see, on the night of the
 full moon, according to colonel menendez, obeah people become particularly
 active.”
 “why on the night of the full moon?”
 “this i cannot tell you.”
 “oh, i see. you were keeping watch. where were you keeping watch?”
 “in my room.”
 “in which part of the house is your room?”
 “northeast. it overlooks the tudor garden.”
 “at what time did you retire?”
 “about half-past ten.”
 “did you leave the colonel well?”
 “no, he had been unwell all day. he had remained in his room.”
 “had he asked you to sit up?”
 “not at all; our vigil was quite voluntary.”
 “very well, then, you were in your room when the shot was fired?”
 “on the contrary, i was on the path in front of the house.”
 “oh, i see. the front door was open, then?”
 “not at all. pedro had locked up for the night.”
 “and locked you out?”
 “no; i descended from my window by means of a ladder which i had brought
 with me for the purpose.”
 “with a ladder? that’s rather extraordinary, mr harley.”
 “it is extraordinary. i have strange habits.”
 inspector aylesbury cleared his throat again and looked frowningly across
 at my friend.
 “what part of the grounds were you in when the shot was fired?” he
 demanded.
 “halfway along the north side.”
 “what were you doing?”
 “i was running.”
 “running?”
 “you see, inspector, i regarded it as my duty to patrol the grounds of the
 house at nightfall, since, for all i knew to the contrary, some of the
 servants might be responsible for the attempts of which the colonel
 complained. i had descended from the window of my room, had passed
 entirely around the house east to west, and had returned to my
 starting-point when mr. knox, who was looking out of the window, observed
 colonel menendez entering the tudor garden.”
 “oh. colonel menendez was not visible to you?”
 “not from my position below, but being informed by my friend, who was
 hurriedly descending the ladder, that the colonel had entered the garden,
 i set off running to intercept him.”
 “why?”
 “he had acquired a habit of walking in his sleep, and i presumed that he
 was doing so on this occasion.”
 “oh, i see. so being told by the gentleman at the window that colonel
 menendez was in the garden, you started to run toward him. while you were
 running you heard a shot?”
 “i did.”
 “where do you think it came from?”
 “nothing is more difficult to judge, inspector, especially when one is
 near to a large building surrounded by trees.”
 “nevertheless,” said the inspector, again raising his finger and frowning
 at harley, “you cannot tell me that you formed no impression on the point.
 for instance, was it near, or a long way off?”
 “it was fairly near.”
 “ten yards, twenty yards, a hundred yards, a mile?”
 “within a hundred yards. i cannot be more exact.”
 “within a hundred yards, and you have no idea from which direction the
 shot was fired?”
 “from the sound i could form none.”
 “oh, i see. and what did you do?”
 “i ran on and down into the sunken garden. i saw colonel menendez lying
 upon his face near the sun-dial. he was moving convulsively. running up to
 him, i that he had been shot through the head.”
 “what steps did you take?”
 “my friend, mr. knox, had joined me, and i sent him for assistance.”
 “but what steps did you take to apprehend the murderer?”
 paul harley looked at him quietly.
 “what steps should you have taken?” he asked.
 inspector aylesbury cleared his throat again, and:
 “i don’t think i should have let my man slip through my fingers like
 that,” he replied. “why! by now he may be out of the county.”
 “your theory is quite feasible,” said harley, tonelessly.
 “you were actually on the spot when the shot was fired, you admit that it
 was fired within a hundred yards, yet you did nothing to apprehend the
 murderer.”
 “no,” replied harley, “i was ridiculously inactive. you see, i am a mere
 amateur, inspector. for my future guidance i should be glad to know what
 the correct procedure would have been.”
 inspector aylesbury blew his nose.
 “i know my job,” he said. “if i had been called in there might have been a
 different tale to tell. but he was a foreigner, and he paid for his
 ignorance, poor fellow.”
 paul harley took out his pipe and began to load it in a deliberate and
 lazy manner.
 inspector aylesbury turned his prominent eyes in my direction.
 “i am afraid of this man aylesbury,” said paul harley. we sat in the
 deserted dining room. i had contributed my account of the evening’s
 happenings, dr. rolleston had made his report, and inspector aylesbury was
 now examining the servants in the library. harley and i had obtained his
 official permission to withdraw, and the physician was visiting madame de
 stämer, who lay in a state of utter prostration.
 “what do you mean, harley?”
 “i mean that he will presently make some tragic blunder. good god, knox,
 to think that this man had sought my aid, and that i stood by idly whilst
 he walked out to his death. i shall never forgive myself.” he banged the
 table with his fist. “even now that these unknown fiends have achieved
 their object, i am helpless, helpless. there was not a wisp of smoke to
 guide me, knox, and one man cannot search a county.”
 i sighed wearily.
 “do you know, harley,” i said, “i am thinking of a verse of kipling’s.”
 “i know!” he interrupted, almost savagely.
 “a snider squibbed in the jungle.
 somebody laughed and fled—”
 “oh, i know, knox. i heard that damnable laughter, too.”
 “my god,” i whispered, “who was it? what was it? where did it come from?”
 “as well ask where the shot came from, knox. out amongst all those trees,
 with a house that might have been built for a sounding-board, who could
 presume to say where either came from? one thing we know, that the shot
 came from the south.”
 he leaned upon a corner of the table, staring at me intently.
 “from the south?” i echoed.
 harley glanced in the direction of the open door.
 “presently,” he said, “we shall have to tell aylesbury everything that we
 know. after all, he represents the law; but unless we can get inspector
 wessex down from scotland yard, i foresee a miscarriage of justice.
 colonel menendez lay on his face, and the line made by his recumbent body
 pointed almost directly toward—”
 i nodded, watching him.
 “i know, harley—toward the guest house.”
 paul harley inclined his head, grimly.
 “the first light which we saw,” he continued, “was in a window of the
 guest house. it may have had no significance. awakened by the sound of a
 rifle-shot near by, any one would naturally get up.”
 “and having decided to come downstairs and investigate,” i continued,
 “would naturally light a lamp.”
 “quite so.” he stared at me very hard. “yet,” he said, “unless mr. colin
 camber can produce an alibi i foresee a very stormy time for him.”
 “so do i, harley. a deadly hatred existed between these two men, and
 probably this horrible deed was done on the spur of the moment. it is of
 his poor little girl-wife that i am thinking. as though her troubles were
 not heavy enough already.”
 “yes,” he agreed. “i am almost tempted to hold my tongue, knox, until i
 have personally interviewed these people. but of course if our blundering
 friend directly questions me, i shall have no alternative. i shall have to
 answer him. his talent for examination, however, scarcely amounts to
 genius, so that we may not be called upon for further details at the
 moment. i wonder how i can induce him to requisition scotland yard?”
 he rested his chin in his hand and stared down reflectively at the carpet.
 i thought that he looked very haggard, as he sat there in the early
 morning light, dressed as for dinner. there was something pathetic in the
 pose of his bowed head.
 leaning across, i placed my hand on his shoulder.
 “don’t get despondent, old chap,” i said. “you have not failed yet.”
 “oh, but i have, knox!” he cried, fiercely, “i have! he came to me for
 protection. now he lies dead in his own house. failed? i have failed
 utterly, miserably.”
 i turned aside as the door opened and dr. rolleston came in.
 “ah, gentlemen,” he said, “i wanted to see you before leaving. i have just
 been to visit madame de stämer again.”
 “yes,” said harley, eagerly; “how is she?”
 dr. rolleston lighted a cigarette, frowning perplexedly the while.
 “to be honest,” he replied, “her condition puzzles me.”
 he walked across to the fireplace and dropped the match, staring at harley
 with a curious expression.
 “has any one told her the truth?” he asked.
 “you mean that colonel menendez is dead?”
 “yes,” replied dr. rolleston. “i understood that no one had told her?”
 “no one has done so to my knowledge,” said harley.
 “then the sympathy between them must have been very acute,” murmured the
 physician, “for she certainly knows!”
 “do you really think she knows?” i asked.
 “i am certain of it. she must have had knowledge of a danger to be
 apprehended, and being awakened by the sound of the rifle shot, have
 realized by a sort of intuition that the expected tragedy had happened. i
 should say, from the presence of a small bruise which i found upon her
 forehead, that she had actually walked out into the corridor.”
 “walked?” i cried.
 “yes,” said the physician. “she is a shell-shock case, of course, and we
 sometimes find that a second shock counteracts the effect of the first.
 this, temporarily at any rate, seems to have happened to-night. she is now
 in a very curious state: a form of hysteria, no doubt, but very curious
 all the same.”
 “miss beverley is with her?” i asked.
 dr. rolleston nodded affirmatively.
 “yes, a very capable nurse. i am glad to know that madame de stämer is in
 such good hands. i am calling again early in the morning, and i have told
 mrs. fisher to see that nothing is said within hearing of the room which
 could enable madame de stämer to obtain confirmation of the idea, which
 she evidently entertains, that colonel menendez is dead.”
 “does she actually assert that he is dead?” asked harley.
 “my dear sir,” replied dr. rolleston, “she asserts nothing. she sits there
 like niobe changed to stone, staring straight before her. she seems to be
 unaware of the presence of everyone except miss beverley. the only words
 she has spoken since recovering consciousness have been, ‘don’t leave
 me!’”
 “hm,” muttered harley. “you have not attended madame de stämer before,
 doctor?”
 “no,” was the reply, “this is the first time i have entered cray’s folly
 since it was occupied by sir james appleton.”
 he was about to take his departure when the door opened and inspector
 aylesbury walked in.
 “ah,” said he, “i have two more witnesses to interview: madame de stämer
 and miss beverley. from these witnesses i hope to get particulars of the
 dead man’s life which may throw some light upon the identity of his
 murderer.”
 “it is impossible to see either of them at present,” replied dr. rolleston
 briskly.
 “what’s that, doctor?” asked the inspector. “are they hysterical, or
 something?”
 “as a result of the shock, madame de stämer is dangerously ill,” replied
 the physician, “and miss beverley is remaining with her.”
 “oh, i see. but miss beverley could come out for a few minutes?”
 “she could,” admitted the physician, sharply, “but i don’t wish her to do
 so.”
 “oh, but the law must be served, doctor.”
 “quite so, but not at the expense of my patient’s reason.”
 he was a resolute man, this country practitioner, and i saw harley smiling
 in grim approval.
 “i have expressed my opinion,” he said, finally, walking out of the room;
 “i shall leave the responsibility to you, inspector aylesbury. good
 morning, gentlemen.”
 inspector aylesbury scratched his chin.
 “that’s awkward,” he muttered. “the evidence of this woman is highly
 important.”
 he turned toward us, doubtingly, whereupon harley stood up, yawning.
 “if i can be of any further assistance to you, inspector,” said my friend,
 “command me. otherwise, i feel sure you will appreciate the fact that both
 mr. knox and myself are extremely tired, and have passed through a very
 trying ordeal.”
 “yes,” replied inspector aylesbury, “that’s all very well, but i find
 myself at a deadlock.”
 “you surprise me,” declared harley.
 “i can see nothing to be surprised about,” cried the inspector. “when i
 was called in it was already too late.”
 “most unfortunate,” murmured harley, disagreeably. “come along, knox, you
 look tired to death.”
 “one moment, gentlemen,” the inspector insisted, as i stood up. “one
 moment. there is a little point which you may be able to clear up.”
 harley paused, his hand on the door knob, and turned.
 “the point is this,” continued the inspector, frowning portentously and
 lowering his chin so that it almost disappeared into the folds of his
 neck, “i have now interviewed all the inmates of cray’s folly except the
 ladies. it appears to me that four people had not gone to bed. there are
 you two gentlemen, who have explained why i found you in evening dress,
 colonel menendez, who can never explain, and there is one other.”
 he paused, looking from harley to myself.
 it had come, the question which i had dreaded, the question which i had
 been asking myself ever since i had seen val beverley kneeling in the
 corridor, dressed as she had been when we had parted for the night.
 “i refer to miss val beverley,” the police-court voice proceeded. “this
 lady had evidently not retired, and neither, it would appear, had the
 colonel.”
 “neither had i,” murmured harley, “and neither had mr. knox.”
 “your reason i understand,” said the inspector, “or at least your
 explanation is a possible one. but if the party broke up, as you say it
 did, somewhere about half-past ten o’clock, and if madame de stämer had
 gone to bed, why should miss beverley have remained up?” he paused
 significantly. “as well as colonel menendez?” he added.
 “look here, inspector aylesbury,” i interrupted, i speaking in a very
 quiet tone, i remember, “your insinuations annoy me.”
 “oh,” said he, turning his prominent eyes in my direction, “i see. they
 annoy you? if they annoy you, sir, perhaps you can explain this point
 which is puzzling me?”
 “i cannot explain it, but doubtless miss beverley can do so when you ask
 her.”
 “i should like to have asked her now, and i can’t make out why she refuses
 to see me.”
 “she has not refused to see you,” replied harley, smoothly. “she is
 probably unaware of the fact that you wish to see her.”
 “i don’t know so much,” muttered the inspector. “in my opinion i am being
 deliberately baffled on all sides. you can throw no light on this matter,
 then?”
 “none,” i answered, shortly, and paul harley shook his head.
 “but you must remember, inspector,” he explained, “that the entire
 household was in a state of unrest.”
 “in other words, everybody was waiting for this very thing to happen?”
 “consciously, or subconsciously, everybody was.”
 “what do you mean by consciously or subconsciously?”
 “i mean that those of us who were aware of the previous attempts on
the life of the colonel apprehended this danger. and i believe that
something of this apprehension had extended even to the servants.”
 “oh, to the servants? now, i have seen all the servants, except the
chef, who lives at a house on the outskirts of mid-hatton, as you may
know. can you give me any information about this man?”
 “i have seen him,” replied harley, “and have congratulated him upon his
 culinary art. his name, i believe, is deronne. he is a spaniard, and a
 little fat man. quite an amiable creature,” he added.
 “hm.” the inspector cleared his throat noisily.
 “if that is all,” said harley, “i should welcome an opportunity of a few
 hours’ sleep.”
 “oh,” said the inspector. “well, i suppose that is quite natural, but i
 shall probably have a lot more questions to ask you later.”
 “quite,” muttered harley, “quite. come on, knox. good-night, inspector
 aylesbury.”
 “good-night.”
 harley walked out of the dining room and across the deserted hall. he
 slowly mounted the stairs and i followed him into his room. it was now
 quite light, and as my friend dropped down upon the bed i thought that he
 looked very tired and haggard.
 “knox,” he said, “shut the door.”
 i closed the door and turned to him.
 “you heard that question about miss beverley?” i began.
 “i heard it, and i am wondering what her answer will be when the inspector
 puts it to her personally.”
 “surely it is obvious?” i cried. “a cloud of apprehension had settled on
 the house last night, harley, which was like the darkness of egypt. the
 poor girl was afraid to go to bed. she was probably sitting up reading.”
 “hm,” said harley, drumming his feet upon the carpet. “of course you
 realize that there is one person in cray’s folly who holds the clue to the
 heart of the mystery?”
 “madame de stämer?”
 he nodded grimly.
 “when the rifle cracked out, knox, she knew! remember, no one had told her
 the truth. yet can you doubt that she knows?”
 “i don’t doubt it.”
 “neither do i.” he clenched his teeth tightly and beat his fists upon the
 coverlet. “i was dreading that our friend the inspector would ask a
 question which to my mind was very obvious.”
 “you mean?—”
 “well, what investigator whose skull contained anything more useful than
 bubbles would have failed to ask if colonel menendez had an enemy in the
 neighbourhood?”
 “no one,” i admitted; “but i fear the poor man is sadly out of his depth.”
 “he is wading hopelessly, knox, but even he cannot fail to learn about
 camber to-morrow.”
 he stared at me in a curiously significant manner.
 “do you mean, harley,” i began, “that you really think——”
 “my dear knox,” he interrupted, “forgetting, if you like, all that
 preceded the tragedy, with what facts are we left? that colonel menendez,
 at the moment when the bullet entered his brain, must have been standing
 facing directly toward the guest house. now, you have seen the direction
 of the wound?”
 “he was shot squarely between the eyes. a piece of wonderful
 marksmanship.”
 “quite,” harley nodded his head. “but the bullet came out just at the
 vertex of the spine.”
 he paused, as if waiting for some comment, and:
 “you mean that the shot came from above?” i said, slowly.
 “obviously it came from above, knox. keep these two points in your mind,
 and then consider the fact that someone lighted a lamp in the guest house
 only a few moments after the shot had been fired.”
 “i remember. i saw it.”
 “so did i,” said harley, grimly, “and i saw something else.”
 “what was that?”
 “when you went off to summon assistance i ran across the lawn, scrambled
 through the bushes, and succeeded in climbing down into the little gully
 in which the stream runs, and up on the other side. i had proceeded
 practically in a straight line from the sun-dial, and do you know where i
 found myself?”
 “i can guess,” i replied.
 “of course you can. you have visited the place. i came out immediately
 beside a little hut, knox, which stands at the end of the garden of the
 guest house. ahead of me, visible through a tangle of bushes in the
 neglected garden, a lamp was burning. i crept cautiously forward, and
 presently obtained a view of the interior of a kitchen. just as i arrived
 at this point of vantage the lamp was extinguished, but not before i had
 had a glimpse of the only occupant of the room—the man who had
 extinguished the lamp.”
 “who was it?” i asked, in a low voice.
 “it was a chinaman.”
 “ah tsong!” i cried.
 “doubtless.”
 “good heavens, harley, do you think—”
 “i don’t know what to think, knox. a possible explanation is that the
 household had been aroused by the sound of the shot, and that ah tsong had
 been directed to go out and see if he could learn what had happened. at
 any rate, i waited no longer, but returned by the same route. if our
 portly friend from market hilton had possessed the eyes of an auguste
 dupin, he could not have failed to note that my dress boots were caked
 with light yellow clay; which also, by the way, besmears my trousers.”
 he stooped and examined the garments as he spoke.
 “a number of thorns are also present,” he continued. “in short, from the
 point of view of an investigation, i am a most provoking object.”
 he sighed wearily, and stared out of the window in the direction of the
 tudor garden. there was a slight chilliness in the air, which, or perhaps
 a sudden memory of that which lay in the billiard room beneath us, may
 have accounted for the fact that i shivered violently.
 harley glanced up with a rather sad smile.
 “the morning after waterloo,” he said. “sleep well, knox.”
 sleep was not for me, despite harley’s injunction, and although i was
 early afoot, the big house was already astir with significant movements
 which set the imagination on fire, to conjure up again the moonlight scene
 in the garden, making mock of the song of the birds and of the glory of
 the morning.
 manoel replied to my ring, and prepared my bath, but it was easy to see
 that he had not slept.
 no sound came from harley’s room, therefore i did not disturb him, but
 proceeded downstairs in the hope of finding miss beverley about. pedro was
 in the hall, talking to mrs. fisher, and:
 “is inspector aylesbury here?” i asked.
 “no, sir, but he will be returning at about half-past eight, so he said.”
 “how is madame de stämer, mrs. fisher?” i enquired.
 “oh, poor, poor madame,” said the old lady, “she is asleep, thank god. but
 i am dreading her awakening.”
 “the blow is a dreadful one,” i admitted; “and miss beverley?”
 “she didn’t go to her room until after four o’clock, sir, but nita tells
 me that she will be down any moment now.”
 “ah,” said i, and lighting a cigarette, i walked out of the open doors
 into the courtyard.
 i dreaded all the ghastly official formalities which the day would bring,
 since i realized that the brunt of the trouble must fall upon the
 shoulders of miss beverley in the absence of madame de stämer.
 i wandered about restlessly, awaiting the girl’s appearance. a little two
 seater was drawn up in the courtyard, but i had not paid much attention to
 it, until, wandering through the opening in the box hedge and on along the
 gravel path, i saw unfamiliar figures moving in the billiard room, and
 turned, hastily retracing my steps. officialdom was at work already, and i
 knew that there would be no rest for any of us from that hour onward.
 as i reëntered the hall i saw val beverley coming down the staircase. she
 looked pale, but seemed to be in better spirits than i could have hoped
 for, although there were dark shadows under her eyes.
 “good morning, miss beverley,” i said.
 “good morning, mr. knox. it was good of you to come down so early.”
 “i had hoped for a chat with you before inspector aylesbury returned,” i
 explained.
 she looked at me pathetically.
 “i suppose he will want me to give evidence?”
 “he will. we had great difficulty in persuading him not to demand your
 presence last night.”
 “it was impossible,” she protested. “it would have been cruel to make me
 leave madame in the circumstances.”
 “we realized this, miss beverley, but you will have to face the ordeal
 this morning.”
 we walked through into the library, where a maid white-faced and
 frightened looking, was dusting in a desultory fashion. she went out as we
 entered, and val beverley stood looking from the open window out into the
 rose garden bathed in the morning sunlight.
 “oh, heavens,” she said, clenching her hands desperately, “even now i
 cannot realize that the horrible thing is true.” she turned to me. “who
 can possibly have committed this cold-blooded crime?” she said in a low
 voice. “what does mr. harley think? has he any idea, any idea whatever?”
 “not that he has confided to me,” i said, watching her intently. “but tell
 me, does madame de stämer know yet?”
 “what do you mean?”
 “i mean has she been told the truth?”
 the girl shook her head.
 “no,” she replied; “i am positive that no one has told her. i was with her
 all the time, up to the very moment that she fell asleep. yet—”
 she hesitated.
 “yes?”
 “she knows! oh, mr. knox! to me that is the most horrible thing of all:
 that she knows, that she must have known all along—that the mere
 sound of the shot told her everything!”
 “you realize, now,” i said, quietly, “that she had anticipated the end?”
 “yes, yes. this was the meaning of the sorrow which i had seen so often in
 her eyes, the meaning of so much that puzzled me in her words, the
 explanation of lots of little things which have made me wonder in the
 past.”
 i was silent for a while, then:
 “if she was so certain that no one could save him,” i said, “she must have
 had information which neither he nor she ever imparted to us.”
 “i am sure she had,” declared val beverley.
 “but can you think of any reason why she should not have confided in paul
 harley?”
 “i cannot, i cannot—unless—”
 “yes?”
 “unless, mr. knox,” she looked at me strangely, “they were both under some
 vow of silence. oh! it sounds ridiculous, wildly ridiculous, but what
 other explanation can there be?”
 “what other, indeed? and now, miss beverley, i know one of the questions
 inspector aylesbury will ask you.”
 “what is it?”
 “he has learned, from one of the servants i presume, as he did not see
 you, that you had not retired last night at the time of the tragedy.”
 “i had not,” said val beverley, quietly. “is that so singular?”
 “to me it is no more than natural.”
 “i have never been so frightened in all my life as i was last night. sleep
 was utterly out of the question. there was mystery in the very air. i
 knew, oh, mr. knox, in some way i knew that a tragedy was going to
 happen.”
 “i believe i knew, too,” i said. “good god, to think that we might have
 saved him!”
 “do you think—” began val beverley, and then paused.
 “yes?” i prompted.
 “oh, i was going to say a strange thing that suddenly occurred to me, but
 it is utterly foolish, i suppose. inspector aylesbury is coming back at
 nine o’clock, is he not?”
 “at half-past eight, so i understand.”
 “i am afraid i have very little to tell him. i was sitting in my room in
 an appalling state of nerves when the shot was fired. i was not even
 reading; i was just waiting, waiting, for something to happen.”
 “i understand. my own experience was nearly identical.”
 “then,” continued the girl, “as i unlocked my door and peeped out, feeling
 too frightened to venture farther in the darkness, i heard madame’s voice
 in the hall below.”
 “crying for help?”
 “no,” replied the girl, a puzzled frown appearing between her brows. “she
 cried out something in french. the intonation told me that it was french,
 although i could not detect a single word. then i thought i heard a moan.”
 “and you ran down?”
 “yes. i summoned up enough courage to turn on the light in the corridor
 and to run down to the hall. and there she was lying just outside the door
 of her room.”
 “was her room in darkness?”
 “yes. i turned on the light and succeeded in partly raising her, but she
 was too heavy for me to lift. i was still trying to revive her when pedro
 opened the door of the servants’ quarters. oh,” she closed her eyes
 wearily, “i shall never forget it.”
 i took her hand and pressed it reassuringly.
 “your courage has been wonderful throughout,” i declared, “and i hope it
 will remain so to the end.”
 she smiled, and flushed slightly, as i released her hand again.
 “i must go and take a peep at madame now,” she said, “but of course i
 shall not disturb her if she is still sleeping.”
 we turned and walked slowly back to the hall, and there just entering from
 the courtyard was inspector aylesbury.
 “ah!” he exclaimed, “good morning, mr. knox. this is miss beverley, i
 presume?”
 “yes, inspector,” replied the girl. “i understand that you wish to speak
 to me?”
 “i do, miss, but i shall not detain you for many minutes.”
 “very well,” she said, and as she turned and retraced her steps, he
 followed her back into the library.
 i walked out to the courtyard, and avoiding the tudor garden and the
 billiard room, turned in the other direction, passing the stables where
 jim, the negro groom, saluted me very sadly, and proceeded round to the
 south side of the house.
 inspector aylesbury, i perceived, had wasted no time. i counted no fewer
 than four men, two of them in uniform, searching the lawns and the slopes
 beyond, although what they were looking for i could not imagine.
 giving the library a wide berth, i walked along the second terrace, and
 presently came in sight of the east wing and the tower. there, apparently
 engaged in studying the rhododendrons, i saw paul harley.
 he signalled to me, and, crossing the lawn, i joined him where he stood.
 without any word of greeting:
 “you see, knox,” he said, speaking in the eager manner which betokened a
 rapidly working brain, “this is the path which the colonel must have
 followed last night. yonder is the door by which, according to his own
 account, he came out on a previous occasion, walking in his sleep. do you
 remember?”
 “i remember,” i replied.
 “well, pedro found it unlocked this morning. you see it faces practically
 due south, and the colonel’s bedroom is immediately above us where we
 stand.” he stared at me queerly. “i must have passed this door last night
 only a few moments before the colonel came out, for i was just crossing
 the courtyard and could see you at my window at the moment when you saw
 poor menendez enter the tudor garden. he must have actually been walking
 around the east wing at the same time that i was walking around the west.
 now, i am going to show you something, knox, something which i have just
 discovered.”
 from his waistcoat pocket he took out a half-smoked cigarette. i stared at
 it uncomprehendingly.
 “of course,” he continued, “the weather has been bone dry for more than a
 week now, and it may have lain there for a long time, but to me, knox, to
 me it looks suspiciously fresh.”
 “what is the point?” i asked, perplexedly.
 “the point is that it is a hand-made cigarette, one of the colonel’s.
 don’t you recognize it?”
 “good heavens!” i said; “yes, of course it is.”
 he returned it to his pocket without another word.
 “it may mean nothing,” he murmured, “or it may mean everything. and now,
 knox, we are going to escape.”
 “to escape?” i cried.
 “precisely. we are going to anticipate the probable movements of our
 blundering aylesbury. in short, i wish you to present me to mr. colin
 camber.”
 “what?” i exclaimed, staring at him incredulously.
 “i am going to ask you,” he began, and then, breaking off: “quick, knox,
 run!” he said.
 and thereupon, to my amazement, he set off through the rhododendron bushes
 in the direction of the tower!
 utterly unable to grasp the meaning of his behaviour, i followed,
 nevertheless, and as we rounded the corner of the tower harley pulled up
 short, and:
 “i am not mad,” he explained rather breathlessly, “but i wanted to avoid
 being seen by that constable who is prowling about at the bottom of the
 lawn making signals in the direction of the library. presumably he is
 replying to inspector aylesbury who wants to talk to us. i am determined
 to interview camber before submitting to further official interrogation.
 it must be a cross-country journey, knox. i am afraid we shall be a very
 muddy pair, but great issues may hang upon the success of our expedition.”
 he set off briskly toward a belt of shrubbery which marked the edge of the
 little stream. appreciating something of his intentions, i followed his
 lead unquestioningly; and, scrambling through the bushes:
 “this was the point at which i descended last night,” he said. “you will
 have to wade, knox, but the water is hardly above one’s ankles.”
 he dropped into the brook, waded across, and began to climb up the
 opposite bank. i imitated his movements, and presently, having scrambled
 up on the farther side, we found ourselves standing on a narrow bank
 immediately under that summer house which colin camber had told me he had
 formerly used as a study.
 “we can scarcely present ourselves at the kitchen door,” murmured harley;
 “therefore we must try to find a way round to the front. there is barbed
 wire here. be careful.”
 i had now entered with zest into the business, and so the pair of us waded
 through rank grass which in places was waist high, and on through a
 perfect wilderness of weeds in which nettles dominated. presently we came
 to a dry ditch, which we negotiated successfully, to find ourselves upon
 the high road some hundred yards to the west of the guest house.
 “i predict an unfriendly reception,” i said, panting from my exertions,
 and surveying my friend, who was a mockery of his ordinarily spruce self.
 “we must face it,” he replied, grimly. “he has everything to gain by being
 civil to us.”
 we proceeded along the dusty high road, almost overarched by trees.
 “harley,” i said, “this is going to be a highly unpleasant ordeal for me.”
 harley stopped short, staring at me sternly.
 “i know, knox,” he replied; “but i suppose you realize that a man’s life
 is at stake.”
 “you mean—?”
 “i mean that when we are both compelled to tell all we know, i doubt if
 there is a counsel in the land who would undertake the defence of mr.
 colin camber.”
 “good god! then you think he is guilty?”
 “did i say so?” asked harley, continuing on his way. “i don’t recollect
 saying so, knox; but i do say that it will be a giant’s task to prove him
 innocent.”
 “then you believe him to be innocent?” i cried, eagerly.
 “my dear fellow,” he replied, somewhat irritably, “i have not yet met mr.
 colin camber. i will answer your question at the conclusion of the
 interview.”
 for a long time our knocking and ringing elicited no response. the
 brilliant state of the door-brass afforded evidence of the fact that ah
 tsong had arisen, even if the other members of the household were still
 sleeping, and harley, growing irritable, executed a loud tattoo upon the
 knocker. this had its effect. the door opened and ah tsong looked out.
 “tell your master that mr. paul harley has called to see him upon urgent
 business.”
 “master no got,” replied ah tsong, and proceeded to close the door.
 paul harley thrust his hand against it and addressed the man rapidly in
 chinese. i could not have supposed the face of ah tsong capable of
 expressing so much animation. at the sound of his native tongue his eyes
 lighted up, and:
 “tchée, tchée,” he said, turned, and disappeared.
 although he had studiously avoided looking at me, that ah tsong would
 inform his master of the identity of his second visitor i did not doubt.
 if i had doubted i should promptly have been disillusioned, for:
 “tell them to go away!” came a muffled cry from somewhere within. “no spy
 of devil menendez shall ever pass my doors again!”
 the chinaman, on retiring, had left the door wide open, and i could see
 right to the end of the gloomy hall. ah tsong presently re-appeared,
 shuffling along in our direction. unemotionally:
 “master no got,” he repeated.
 paul harley stamped his foot irritably.
 “good god, knox,” he said, “this unreasonable fool almost exhausts my
 patience.”
 again he addressed ah tsong in chinese, and although the man’s wrinkled
 ivory face exhibited no trace of emotion, a deep understanding was to be
 read in those oblique eyes; and a second time ah tsong turned and trotted
 back to the study. i could hear a muttered colloquy in progress, and
 suddenly the gaunt figure of colin camber burst into view.
 he was shaved this morning, but arrayed as i had last seen him. whilst he
 was not in that state of incoherent anger which i remembered and still
 resented, he was nevertheless in an evil temper.
 he strode along the hallway, his large eyes widely opened, and fixing a
 cold stare upon the face of harley.
 “i learn that your name is mr. paul harley,” he said, entirely ignoring my
 presence, “and you send me a very strange message. i am used to the ways
 of señor menendez, therefore your message does not deceive me. the
 gateway, sir, is directly behind you.”
 harley clenched his teeth, then:
 “the scaffold, mr. camber,” he replied, “is directly in front of you.”
 “what do you mean, sir?” demanded the other, and despite my resentment of
 the treatment which i had received at his hands, i could only admire the
 lofty disdain of his manner.
 “i mean, mr. camber, that the police are close upon my heels.”
 “the police? of what interest can this be to me?”
 harley’s keen eyes were searching the pale face of the man before him.
 “mr. camber,” he said, “the shot was a good one.”
 not a muscle of colin camber’s face moved, but slowly he looked paul
 harley up and down, then:
 “i have been called a hasty man,” he replied, coldly, “but i can scarcely
 be accused of leaping to a conclusion when i say that i believe you to be
 mad. you have interrupted me, sir. good morning.”
 he stepped back, and would have closed the door, but:
 “mr. camber,” said paul harley, and the tone of his voice was arresting.
 colin camber paused.
 “my name is evidently unfamiliar to you,” harley continued. “you regard
 myself and mr. knox as friends of the late colonel menendez—”
 at that colin camber started forward.
 “the late colonel menendez?” he echoed, speaking almost in a
 whisper.
 but as if he had not heard him harley continued:
 “as a matter of fact, i am a criminal investigator, and mr. knox is
 assisting me in my present case.”
 colin camber clenched his hands and seemed to be fighting with some
 emotion which possessed him, then:
 “do you mean,” he said, hoarsely—“do you mean that menendez is—dead?”
 “i do,” replied harley. “may i request the privilege of ten minutes’ 
 private conversation with you?”
 colin camber stood aside, holding the door open, and inclining his head in
 that grave salutation which i knew, but on this occasion, i think,
 principally with intent to hide his emotion.
 not another word did he speak until the three of us stood in the strange
 study where east grimaced at west, and emblems of remote devil-worship
 jostled the cross of the holy rose. the place was laden with tobacco
 smoke, and scattered on the carpet about the feet of the writing table lay
 twenty or more pages of closely written manuscript. although this was a
 brilliant summer’s morning, an old-fashioned reading lamp, called, i
 believe, a victoria, having a nickel receptacle for oil at one side of the
 standard and a burner with a green glass shade upon the other, still shed
 its light upon the desk. it was only reasonable to suppose that colin
 camber had been at work all night.
 he placed chairs for us, clearing them of the open volumes which they
 bore, and, seating himself at the desk:
 “mr. knox,” he began, slowly, paused, and then stood up, “i accused you of
 something when you last visited my house, something of which i would not
 lightly accuse any man. if i was wrong, i wish to apologize.”
 “only a matter of the utmost urgency could have induced me to cross your
 threshold again,” i replied, coldly. “your behaviour, sir, was
 inexcusable.”
 he rested his long white hands upon the desk, looking across at me.
 “whatever i did and whatever i said,” he continued, “one insult i laid
 upon you more deadly than the rest: i accused you of friendship with juan
 menendez. was i unjust?”
 he paused for a moment.
 “i had been retained professionally by colonel menendez,” replied harley
 without hesitation, “and mr. knox kindly consented to accompany me.”
 colin camber looked very hard at the speaker, and then equally hard at me.
 “was it at behest of colonel menendez that you called upon me, mr. knox?”
 “it was not,” said harley, tersely; “it was at mine. and he is here now at
 my request. come, sir, we are wasting time. at any moment—”
 colin camber held up his hand, interrupting him.
 “by your leave, mr. harley,” he said, and there was something compelling
 in voice and gesture, “i must first perform my duty as a gentleman.”
 he stepped forward in my direction.
 “mr. knox, i have grossly insulted you. yet if you knew what had inspired
 my behaviour i believe you could find it in your heart to forgive me. i do
 not ask you to do so, however; i accept the humiliation of knowing that i
 have mortally offended a guest.”
 he bowed to me formally, and would have returned to his seat, but:
 “pray say no more,” i said, standing up and extending my hand. indeed, so
 impressive was the man’s strange personality that i felt rather as one
 receiving a royal pardon than as an offended party being offered an
 apology. “it was a misunderstanding. let us forget it.”
 his eyes gleamed, and he seized my hand in a warm grip.
 “you are generous, mr. knox, you are generous. and now, sir,” he inclined
 his head in paul harley’s direction, and resumed his seat.
 harley had suffered this odd little interlude in silence but now:
 “mr. camber,” he said, rapidly, “i sent you a message by your chinese
 servant to the effect that the police would be here within ten minutes to
 arrest you.”
 “you did, sir,” replied colin camber, drawing toward him a piece of
 newspaper upon which rested a dwindling mound of shag. “this is most
 disturbing, of course. but since i have not rendered myself amenable to
 the law, it leaves me moderately unmoved. upon your second point, mr.
 harley, i shall beg you, to enlarge. you tell me that don juan menendez is
 dead?”
 he had begun to fill his corn-cob as he spoke the words, but from where i
 sat i could just see his face, so that although his voice was well
 controlled, the gleam in his eyes was unmistakable.
 “he was shot through the head shortly after midnight.”
 “what?”
 colin camber dropped the corn-cob and stood up again, the light of a
 dawning comprehension in his eyes.
 “do you mean that he was murdered?”
 “i do.”
 “good god,” whispered camber, “at last i understand.”
 “that is why we are here, mr. camber, and that is why the police will be
 here at any moment.”
 colin camber stood erect, one hand resting upon the desk.
 “so this was the meaning of the shot which we heard in the night,” he
 said, slowly.
 crossing the room, he closed and locked the study door, then, returning,
 he sat down once more, entirely, master of himself. frowning slightly he
 looked from harley in my direction, and then back again at harley.
 “gentlemen,” he resumed, “i appreciate the urgency of my danger.
 preposterous though i know it to be, nevertheless it is perhaps no more
 than natural that suspicion should fall upon me.”
 he was evidently thinking rapidly. his manner had grown quite cool, and i
 could see that he had focussed his keen brain upon the abyss which he
 perceived to lie in his path.
 “before i commit myself to any statements which might be used as
 evidence,” he said, “doubtless, mr. harley, you will inform me of your
 exact standpoint in this matter. do you represent the late colonel
 menendez, do you represent the law, or may i regard you as a perfectly
 impartial enquirer?”
 “you may regard me, mr. camber, as one to whom nothing but the truth is of
 the slightest interest. i was requested by the late colonel menendez to
 visit cray’s folly.”
 “professionally?”
 “to endeavour to trace the origin of certain occurrences which had led him
 to believe his life to be in danger.”
 harley paused, staring hard at colin camber.
 “since i recognize myself to be standing in the position of a suspect,”
 said the latter, “it is perhaps unfair to request you to acquaint me with
 the nature of these occurrences?”
 “the one, sir,” replied paul harley, “which most intimately concerns
 yourself is this: almost exactly a month ago the wing of a bat was nailed
 to the door of cray’s folly.”
 “what?” exclaimed colin camber, leaning forward eagerly—“the wing of
 a bat? what kind of bat?”
 “of a south american vampire bat.”
 the effect of those words was curious. if any doubt respecting camber’s
 innocence had remained with me at this time i think his expression as he
 leaned forward across the desk must certainly have removed it. that the
 man was intellectually unusual, and intensely difficult to understand,
 must have been apparent to the most superficial observer, but i found it
 hard to believe that these moods of his were simulated. at the words “a
 south american vampire bat” the enthusiasm of the specialist leapt into
 his eyes. personal danger was forgotten. harley had trenched upon his
 particular territory, and i knew that if colin camber had actually killed
 colonel menendez, then it had been the act of a maniac. no man newly come
 from so bloody a deed could have acted as camber acted now.
 “it is the death-sign of voodoo!” he exclaimed, excitedly.
 yet again he arose, and crossing to one of the many cabinets which were in
 the room, he pulled open a drawer and took out a shallow tray.
 my friend was watching him intently, and from the expression upon his
 bronzed face i could deduce the fact that in colin camber he had met the
 supreme puzzle of his career. as camber stood there, holding up an object
 which he had taken from the tray, whilst paul harley sat staring at him, i
 thought the scene was one transcending the grotesque. here was the
 suspected man triumphantly producing evidence to hang himself.
 between his finger and thumb camber held the wing of a bat!
 “i brought this bat wing from haiti,” he explained, replacing it in the
 tray. “it was found beneath the pillow of a negro missionary who had died
 mysteriously during the night.”
 he returned the tray to the drawer, closed the latter, and, standing
 erect, raised clenched hands above his head.
 “with no thought of blasphemy,” he said, “but with reverence, i thank god
 from the bottom of my heart that juan menendez is dead.”
 he reseated himself, whilst harley regarded him silently, then:
 “‘the evil that men do lives after them,’” he murmured. he rested his chin
 upon his hand. “a bat wing,” he continued, musingly, “a bat wing was
 nailed to menendez’s door.” he stared across at harley. “am i to believe,
 sir, that this was the clue which led you to the guest house?”
 paul harley nodded.
 “it was.”
 “i understand. i must therefore take no more excursions into my special
 subject, but must endeavour to regard the matter from the point of view of
 the enquiry. am i to assume that menendez was acquainted with the
 significance of this token?”
 “he had seen it employed in the west indies.”
 “ah, the black-hearted devil! but i fear i am involving myself more deeply
 in suspicion. perhaps, mr. harley, the ends of justice would be better
 served if you were to question me, and i to confine myself to answering
 you.”
 “very well,” harley agreed: “when and where did you meet the late colonel
 menendez?”
 “i never met him in my life.”
 “do you mean that you had never spoken to him?”
 “never.”
 “hm. tell me, mr. camber, where were you at twelve o’clock last night?”
 “here, writing.”
 “and where was ah tsong?”
 “ah tsong?” colin camber stared uncomprehendingly. “ah tsong was in bed.”
 “oh. did anything disturb you?”
 “yes, the sound of a rifle shot.”
 “you knew it for a rifle shot?”
 “it was unmistakable.”
 “what did you do?”
 “i was in the midst of a most important passage, and i should probably
 have taken no steps in the matter but that ah tsong knocked upon the study
 door, to inform me that my wife had been awakened by the sound of the
 shot. she is somewhat nervous and had rung for ah tsong, asking him to see
 if all were well with me.”
 “do i understand that she imagined the sound to have come from this room?”
 “when we are newly awakened from sleep, mr. harley, we retain only an
 imperfect impression of that which awakened us.”
 “true,” replied paul harley; “and did ah tsong return to his room?”
 “not immediately. permit me to say, mr. harley, that the nature of your
 questions surprises me. at the moment i fail to see their bearing upon the
 main issue. he returned and reported to my wife that i was writing, and
 she then requested him to bring her a glass of milk. accordingly, he came
 down again, and going out into the kitchen, executed this order.”
 “ah. he would have to light a candle for that purpose, i suppose?”
 “a candle, or a lamp,” replied colin camber, staring at paul harley. then,
 his expression altering: “of course!” he cried. “you saw the light from
 cray’s folly? i understand at last.”
 we were silent for a while, until:
 “how long a time elapsed between the firing of the shot and ah tsong’s
 knocking at the study door?” asked harley.
 “i could not answer definitely. i was absorbed in my work. but probably
 only a minute or two.”
 “was the sound a loud one?”
 “fairly loud. and very startling, of course, in the silence of the night.”
 “the shot, then, was fired from somewhere quite near the house?”
 “i presume so.”
 “but you thought no more about the matter?”
 “frankly, i had forgotten it. you see, the neighbourhood is rich with
 game; it might have been a poacher.”
 “quite,” murmured harley, but his face was very stern. “i wonder if you
 fully realize the danger of your position, mr. camber?”
 “believe me,” was the reply, “i can anticipate almost every question which
 i shall be called upon to answer.”
 paul harley stared at him in a way which told me that he was comparing his
 features line for line with the etching of edgar allen poe which hung in
 his office in chancery lane, and:
 “i do believe you,” he replied, “and i am wondering if you are in a
 position to clear yourself?”
 “on the contrary,” camber assured him, “i am only waiting to hear that
 juan menendez was shot in the grounds of cray’s folly, and not within the
 house, to propose to you that unless the real assassin be discovered, i
 shall quite possibly pay the penalty of his crime.”
 “he was shot in the tudor garden,” replied harley, “within sight of your
 windows.”
 “ah!” colin camber resumed the task of stuffing shag into his corn-cob.
 “then if it would interest you, mr. harley, i will briefly outline the
 case against myself. i had never troubled to disguise the fact that i
 hated menendez. many witnesses can be called to testify to this. he was in
 cuba when i was in cuba, and evidence is doubtless obtainable to show that
 we stayed at the same hotels in various cities of the united states prior
 to my coming to england and leasing the guest house. finally, he became my
 neighbour in surrey.”
 he carefully lighted his pipe, whilst harley and i watched him silently,
 then:
 “menendez had the bat wing nailed to the door of his house,” he continued.
 “he believed himself to be in danger, and associated this sign with the
 source of his danger. excepting himself and possibly certain other members
 of his household it is improbable that any one else in surrey understands
 the significance of the token save myself. the unholy rites of voodoo are
 a closed book to the western nations. i have opened that book, mr. harley.
 the powers of the obeah man, and especially of the arch-magician known and
 dreaded by every negro as ‘bat wing,’ are familiar to me. since i was
 alone at the time that the shot was fired, and for some few minutes
 afterward, and since the tudor garden of cray’s folly is within easy range
 of the guest house, to fail to place me under arrest would be an act of
 sheer stupidity.”
 he spoke the words with a sort of triumph. like the fakir, he possessed
 the art of spiritual detachment, which is an attribute of genius. from an
 intellectual eminence he was surveying his own peril. colin camber in the
 flesh had ceased to exist; he was merely a pawn in a fascinating game.
 paul harley glanced at his watch.
 “mr. camber,” he said, “i have just sustained the most crushing defeat of
 my career. the man who had summoned me to his aid was killed almost before
 my eyes. one thing i must do or accept professional oblivion.”
 “i understand.” colin camber nodded. “apprehend his murderer?”
 “ultimately, yes. but, firstly, i must see that to the assassination of
 colonel menendez a judicial murder is not added.”
 “you mean—?” asked camber, eagerly.
 “i mean that if you killed menendez, you are a madman, and i have formed
 the opinion during our brief conversation that you are brilliantly sane.”
 colin camber rose and bowed in that old-world fashion which was his.
 “i am obliged to you, mr. harley,” he replied. “but has mr. knox informed
 you of my bibulous habits?”
 paul harley nodded.
 “they will, of course, be ascribed,” continued camber, “and there are many
 suitable analogies, to deliberate contemplation of a murderous deed. i
 would remind you that chronic alcoholism is a recognized form, of
 insanity.”
 his mood changed again, and sighing wearily, he lay back in the chair.
 over his pale face crept an expression which i knew, instinctively, to
 mean that he was thinking of his wife.
 “mr. harley,” he said, speaking in a very low tone which scorned to
 accentuate the beauty of his voice, “i have suffered much in the quest of
 truth. suffering is the gate beyond which we find compassion. perhaps you
 have thought my foregoing remarks frivolous, in view of the fact that last
 night a soul was sent to its reckoning almost at my doors. i revere the
 truth, however, above all lesser laws and above all expediency. i do not,
 and i cannot, regret the end of the man menendez. but for three reasons i
 should regret to pay the penalty of a crime which i did not commit, these
 reasons are—one,” he ticked them off upon his delicate fingers—“it
 would be bitter to know that devil menendez even in death had injured me;
 two—my work in the world, which is unfinished; and, three—my
 wife.”
 i watched and listened, almost awed by the strangeness of the man who sat
 before me. his three reasons were illuminating. a casual observer might
 have regarded colin camber as a monument of selfishness. but it was
 evident to me, and i knew it must be evident to paul harley, that his
 egotism was quite selfless. to a natural human resentment and a pathetic
 love for his wife he had added, as an equal clause, the claim of the world
 upon his genius.
 “i have heard you,” said paul harley, quietly, “and you have led me to the
 most important point of all.”
 “what point is that, mr. harley?”
 “you have referred to your recent lapse from abstemiousness. excuse me if
 i discuss personal matters. this you ascribed to domestic troubles, or so
 mr. knox has informed me. you have also referred to your undisguised
 hatred of the late colonel juan menendez. i am going to ask you, mr.
 camber, to tell me quite frankly what was the nature of those domestic
 troubles, and what had caused this hatred which survives even the death of
 its object?”
 colin camber stood up, angular, untidy, but a figure of great dignity.
 “mr. harley,” he replied, “i cannot answer your questions.”
 paul harley inclined his head gravely.
 “may i suggest,” he said, “that you will be called upon to do so under
 circumstances which will brook no denial.”
 colin camber watched him unflinchingly.
 “‘the fate of every man is hung around his neck,’” he replied.
 “yet, in this secret history which you refuse to divulge, and which
 therefore must count against you, the truth may lie which exculpates you.”
 “it may be so. but my determination remains unaltered.”
 “very well,” answered paul harley, quietly, but i could see that he was
 exercising a tremendous restraint upon himself. “i respect your decision,
 but you have given me a giant’s task, and for this i cannot thank you, mr.
 camber.”
 i heard a car pulled up in the road outside the guest house. colin camber
 clenched his hands and sat down again in the carved chair.
 “the opportunity has passed,” said harley. “the police are here.”
 “oh, i see,” said inspector aylesbury, “a little private confab, eh?”
 he sank his chin into its enveloping folds, treating harley and myself
 each to a stare of disapproval.
 “these gentlemen very kindly called to advise me of the tragic occurrence
 at cray’s folly,” explained colin camber. “won’t you be seated,
 inspector?”
 “thanks, but i can conduct my examination better standing.”
 he turned to paul harley.
 “might i ask, mr. harley,” he said, “what concern this is of yours?”
 “i am naturally interested in anything appertaining to the death of a
 client, inspector aylesbury.”
 “oh, so you slip in ahead of me, having deliberately withheld information
 from the police, and think you are going to get all the credit. is that
 it?”
 “that is it, inspector,” replied harley, smiling. “an instance of
 professional jealousy.”
 “professional jealousy?” cried the inspector. “allow me to remind you that
 you have no official standing in this case whatever. you are merely a
 member of the public, nothing more, nothing less.”
 “i am happy to be recognized as a member of that much-misunderstood body.”
 “ah, well, we shall see. now, mr. camber, your attention, please.”
 he raised his finger impressively.
 “i am informed by miss beverley that the late colonel menendez looked upon
 you as a dangerous enemy.”
 “were those her exact words?” i murmured.
 “mr. knox!”
 the inspector turned rapidly, confronting me. “i have already warned your
 friend. but if i have any interruptions from you, i will have you
 removed.”
 he continued to glare at me for some moments, and then, turning again to
 colin camber:
 “i say, i have information that colonel menendez looked upon you as a
 dangerous neighbour.”
 “in that event,” replied colin camber, “why did he lease an adjoining
 property?”
 “that’s an evasion, sir. answer my first question, if you please.”
 “you have asked me no question, inspector.”
 “oh, i see. that’s your attitude, is it? very well, then. were you, or
 were you not, an enemy of the late colonel menendez?”
 “i was.”
 “what’s that?”
 “i say i was. i hated him, and i hate him no less in death than i hated
 him living.”
 i think that i had never seen a man so taken aback, inspector aylesbury,
 drawing out a large handkerchief blew his nose. replacing the
 handkerchief, he produced a note-book.
 “i am placing that statement on record, sir,” he said.
 he made an entry in the book, and then:
 “where did you first meet colonel menendez?” he asked.
 “i never met him in my life.”
 “what’s that?”
 colin camber merely shrugged his shoulders.
 “i will repeat my question,” said the inspector, pompously. “where did you
 first meet colonel juan menendez?”
 “i have answered you, inspector.”
 “oh, i see. you decline to answer that question. very well, i will make a
 note of this.” he did so. “and now,” said he, “what were you doing at
 midnight last night?”
 “i was writing.”
 “where?”
 “here.”
 “what happened?”
 very succinctly colin camber repeated the statement which he had already
 made to paul harley, and, at its conclusion:
 “send for the man, ah tsong,” directed inspector aylesbury.
 colin camber inclined his head, clapped his bands, and silently ah tsong
 entered.
 the inspector stared at him for several moments as a visitor to the zoo
 might stare at some rare animal; then:
 “your name is ah tsong?” he began.
 “ah tsong,” murmured the chinaman.
 “i am going to ask you to give an exact account of your movements last
 night.”
 “no sabby.”
 inspector aylesbury cleared his throat.
 “i say i wish to know exactly what you did last night. answer me.”
 ah tseng’s face remained quite expressionless, and:
 “no sabby,” he repeated.
 “oh, i see,” said the inspector, “this witness refuses to answer at all.”
 “you are wrong,” explained colin camber, quietly. “ah tsong is a chinaman,
 and his knowledge of english is very limited. he does not understand you.”
 “he understood my first question. you can’t draw wool over my eyes. he
 knows well enough. are you going to answer me?” he demanded, angrily, of
 the chinaman.
 “no sabby, master,” he said, glancing aside at colin camber. “number-one
 p’licee-man gotchee no pidgin.”
 paul harley was leisurely filling his pipe, and:
 “if you think the evidence of ah tsong important, inspector,” he said, “i
 will interpret if you wish.”
 “you will do what?”
 “i will act as interpreter.”
 “do you want me to believe that you speak chinese?”
 “your beliefs do not concern me, inspector; i am merely offering my
 services.”
 “thanks,” said the inspector, dryly, “but i won’t trouble you. i should
 like a few words with mrs. camber.”
 “very good.”
 colin camber bent his head gravely, and gave an order to ah tsong, who
 turned and went out.
 “and what firearms have you in the house?” asked inspector aylesbury.
 “an early dutch arquebus, which you see in the corner,” was the reply.
 “that doesn’t interest me. i mean up-to-date weapons.”
 “and a colt revolver which i have in a drawer here.”
 as he spoke, colin camber opened a drawer in his desk and took out a heavy
 revolver of the american army service pattern.
 “i should like to examine it, if you please.”
 camber passed it to the inspector, and the latter, having satisfied
 himself that none of the chambers were loaded, peered down the barrel, and
 smelled at the weapon suspiciously.
 “if it has been recently used it has been well cleaned,” he said, and
 placed it on a cabinet beside him. “anything else?”
 “nothing.”
 “no sporting rifles?”
 “none. i never shoot.”
 “oh, i see.”
 the door opened and mrs. camber came in. she was very simply dressed, and
 looked even more child-like than she had seemed before. i think ah tsong
 had warned her of the nature of the ordeal which she was to expect, but
 her wide-eyed timidity was nevertheless pathetic to witness.
 she glanced at me with a ghost of a smile, and:
 “ysola,” said colin camber, inclining his head toward me in a grave
 gesture of courtesy, “mr. knox has generously forgiven me a breach of good
 manners for which i shall never forgive myself. i beg you to thank him, as
 i have done.”
 “it is so good of you,” she said, sweetly, and held out her hand. “but i
 knew you would understand that it was just a great mistake.”
 “mr. paul harley,” camber continued, “my wife welcomes you; and this,
 ysola, is inspector aylesbury, who desires a few moments’ conversation
 upon a rather painful matter.”
 “i have heard, i have heard,” she whispered. “ah tsong has told me.”
 the pupils of her eyes dilated, as she fixed an appealing glance upon the
 inspector.
 in justice to the latter he was palpably abashed by the delicate beauty of
 the girl who stood before him, by her naivete, and by that childishness of
 appearance and manner which must have awakened the latent chivalry in
 almost any man’s heart.
 “i am sorry to have to trouble you with this disagreeable business, mrs.
 camber,” he began; “but i believe you were awakened last night by the
 sound of a shot.”
 “yes,” she replied, watching him intently, “that is so.”
 “may i ask at what time this was heard?”
 “ah tsong told me it was after twelve o’clock.”
 “was the sound a loud one?”
 “yes. it must have been to have awakened me.”
 “i see. did you think it was in the house?”
 “oh, no.”
 “in the garden?”
 “i really could not say, but i think that it was farther away than that.”
 “and what did you do?”
 “i rang the bell for ah tsong.”
 “did he come immediately?”
 “almost immediately.”
 “he was dressed, then?”
 “no, i don’t think he was. he had quickly put on an overcoat. he usually
 answers at once, when i ring for him, you see.”
 “i see. what did you do then?”
 “well, i was frightened, you understand, and i told him to find out if all
 was well with my husband. he came back and told me that colin was writing.
 but the sound had alarmed me very much.”
 “oh, and now perhaps you will tell me, mrs. camber, when and where
 your husband first met colonel menendez?”
 every vestige of colour fled from the girl’s face.
 “so far as i know—they never met,” she replied, haltingly.
 “could you swear to that?”
 “yes.”
 i think that hitherto she had not fully realized the nature of the
 situation; but now something in the inspector’s voice, or perhaps in our
 glances, told her the truth. she moved to where colin camber was sitting,
 looking down at him questioningly, pitifully. he put his arm about her and
 drew her close.
 inspector aylesbury cleared his throat and returned his note-book to his
 pocket.
 “i am going to take a look around the garden,” he announced.
 my respect for him increased slightly, and harley and i followed him out
 of the study. a police sergeant was sitting in the hall, and ah tsong was
 standing just outside the door.
 “show me the way to the garden,” directed the inspector.
 ah tsong stared stupidly, whereupon paul harley addressed him in his
 native language, rapidly and in a low voice, in order, as i divined, that
 the inspector should not hear him.
 “i feel dreadfully guilty, knox,” he confessed, in a murmured aside. “for
 any englishman, fictitious characters excepted, to possess a knowledge of
 chinese is almost indecent.”
 presently, then, i found myself once more in that unkempt garden of which
 i retained such unpleasant memories.
 inspector aylesbury stared all about and up at the back of the house,
 humming to himself and generally behaving as though he were alone. before
 the little summer study he stood still, and:
 “oh, i see,” he muttered.
 what he had seen was painfully evident. the right-hand window, beneath
 which there was a permanent wooden seat, commanded an unobstructed view of
 the tudor garden in the grounds of cray’s folly. clearly i could detect
 the speck of high-light upon the top of the sun-dial.
 the inspector stepped into the hut. it contained a bookshelf upon which a
 number of books remained, a table and a chair, with some few other
 dilapidated appointments. i glanced at harley and saw that he was staring
 as if hypnotized at the prospect in the valley below. i observed a
 constable on duty at the top of the steps which led down into the tudor
 garden, but i could see nothing to account for harley’s fixed regard,
 until:
 “pardon me one moment, inspector,” he muttered, brusquely.
 brushing past the indignant aylesbury, who was examining the contents of
 the shelves in the hut, he knelt upon the wooden seat and stared intently
 through the open window.
 “one-two-three-four-five-six-seven,” he chanted. “good! that will
 settle it.”
 “oh, i see,” said inspector aylesbury, standing strictly upright, his
 prominent eyes turned in the direction of the kneeling harley. “one, two,
 three, four, and so on will settle it, eh? if you don’t mind me saying so,
 it was settled already.”
 “yes?” replied harley, standing up, and i saw that his eyes were very
 bright and that his face was slightly flushed. “you think the case is so
 simple as that?”
 “simple?” exclaimed the inspector. “it’s the most cunning thing that was
 ever planned, but i flatter myself that i have a good straight eye which
 can see a fairly long way.”
 “excellent,” murmured harley. “i congratulate you. myopia is so common in
 the present generation. you have decided, of course, that the murder was
 committed by ah tsong?”
 inspector aylesbury’s eyes seemed to protrude extraordinarily.
 “ah tsong!” he exclaimed. “ah tsong!”
 “surely it is palpable,” continued harley, “that of the three people
 residing in the guest house, ah tsong is the only one who could possibly
 have done the deed.”
 “who could possibly—who could possibly——” stuttered the
 inspector, then paused because of sheer lack of words.
 “review the evidence,” continued harley, coolly. “mrs. camber was awakened
 by the sound of a shot. she immediately rang for ah tsong. there was a
 short interval before ah tsong appeared—and when he did appear he
 was wearing an overcoat. note this point, inspector: wearing an overcoat.
 he descended to the study and found mr. camber writing. now, ah tsong
 sleeps in a room adjoining the kitchen on the ground floor. we passed his
 quarters on our way to the garden a moment ago. of course, you had noted
 this? mr. camber is therefore eliminated from our list of suspects.”
 the inspector was growing very red, but ere he had time to speak harley
 continued:
 “the first of these three persons to have heard a shot fired at the end of
 the garden would have been ah tsong, and not mrs. camber, whose room is
 upstairs and in the front of the house. if it had been fired by mr. camber
 from the spot upon which we now stand, he would still have been in the
 garden at the moment when mrs. camber was ringing the bell for ah tsong.
 mr. camber must therefore have returned from the end of the garden to the
 study, and have passed ah tsong’s room—unheard by the occupant—between
 the time that the bell rang and the time that ah tsong went upstairs. this
 i submit to be impossible. there is an alternative: it is that he slipped
 in whilst ah tsong, standing on the landing above, was receiving his
 mistress’s orders. i submit that the alternative is also impossible. we
 thus eliminate mr. camber from the case, as i have already mentioned.”
 “eliminate—eliminate!” cried the inspector, beginning to recover
 power of speech. “do you think you can fuddle me with a mass of words, mr.
 harley? allow me to point out to you, sir, that you are in no way
 officially associated with this matter.”
 “you have already drawn my attention to the fact, inspector, but it can do
 no harm to jog my memory.”
 harley spoke entirely without bitterness, and i, who knew his every mood,
 realized that he was thoroughly enjoying himself. therefore i knew that at
 last he had found a clue.
 “i may add, inspector,” said he, “that upon further reflection i have also
 eliminated ah tsong from the case. i forgot to mention that he lacks the
 first and second fingers of his right hand; and i have yet to meet the
 marksman who can shoot a man squarely between the eyes, by moonlight, at a
 hundred yards, employing his third finger as trigger-finger. there are
 other points, but these will be sufficient to show you that this case is
 more complicated than you had assumed it to be.”
 inspector aylesbury did not deign to reply, or could not trust himself to
 do so. he turned and made his way back to the house.
 we reëntered the study to find mrs. camber sitting in a chair very close
 to her husband. inspector aylesbury stood in the open doorway for a
 moment, and then, stepping back into the hall:
 “sergeant butler,” he said, addressing the man who waited there.
 “yes, sir.”
 “go out to the gate and get edson to relieve you. i shall want you to go
 back to headquarters in a few minutes.”
 “very good, sir.”
 i scented what was coming, and as inspector aylesbury reentered the room:
 “i should like to make a statement,” announced paul harley, quietly.
 the inspector frowned, and lowering his chin, regarded him with little
 favour.
 “i have not invited any statement from you, mr. harley,” said he.
 “quite,” returned harley. “i am volunteering it. it is this: i gather that
 you are about to take an important step officially. having in view certain
 steps which i, also, am about to take, i would ask you to defer action,
 purely in your own interests, for at least twenty-four hours.”
 “i hear you,” said the inspector, sarcastically.
 “very well, inspector. you have come newly into this case, and i assure
 you that its apparent simplicity is illusive. as new facts come into your
 possession you will realize that what i say is perfectly true, and if you
 act now you will be acting hastily. all that i have learned i am prepared
 to place at your disposal. but i predict that the interference of scotland
 yard will be necessary before this enquiry is concluded. therefore i
 suggest, since you have rejected my cooperation, that you obtain that of
 detective inspector wessex, of the criminal investigation department. in
 short, this is no one-man job. you will do yourself harm by jumping to
 conclusions, and cause unnecessary trouble to perfectly innocent people.”
 “is your statement concluded?” asked the inspector.
 “for the moment i have nothing to add.”
 “oh, i see. very good. then we can now get to business. always with your
 permission, mr. harley.”
 he took his stand before the fireplace, very erect, and invested with his
 most official manner. mrs. camber watched him in a way that was pathetic.
 camber seemed to be quite composed, although his face was unusually pale.
 “now, mr. camber,” said the inspector, “i find your answers to the
 questions which i have put to you very unsatisfactory.”
 “i am sorry,” said colin camber, quietly.
 “one moment, inspector,” interrupted paul harley, “you have not warned mr.
 camber.”
 thereupon the long-repressed wrath of inspector aylesbury burst forth.
 “then i will warn you, sir!” he shouted. “one more word and you
 leave this house.”
 “yet i am going to venture on one more word,” continued harley,
 unperturbed. he turned to colin camber. “i happen to be a member of the
 bar, mr. camber,” he said, “although i rarely accept a brief. have i your
 authority to act for you?”
 “i am grateful, mr. harley, and i leave this unpleasant affair in your
 hands with every confidence.”
 camber stood up, bowing formally.
 the expression upon the inflamed face of inspector aylesbury was really
 indescribable, and recognizing his mental limitations, i was almost
 tempted to feel sorry for him. however, he did not lack self-confidence,
 and:
 “i suppose you have scored, mr. harley,” he said, a certain hoarseness
 perceptible in his voice, “but i know my duty and i am not afraid to
 perform it. now, mr. camber, did you, or did you not, at about twelve
 o’clock last night——”
 “warn the accused,” murmured harley.
 inspector aylesbury uttered a choking sound, but:
 “i have to warn you,” he said, “that your answers may be used as evidence.
 i will repeat: did you, or did you not, at about twelve o’clock last
 night, shoot, with intent to murder, colonel juan menendez?”
 ysola camber leapt up, clutching at her husband’s arm as if to hold him
 back.
 “i did not,” he replied, quietly.
 “nevertheless,” continued the inspector, looking aggressively at paul
 harley whilst he spoke, “i am going to detain you pending further
 enquiries.”
 colin camber inclined his head.
 “very well,” he said; “you only do your duty.”
 the little fingers clutching his sleeve slowly relaxed, and mrs. camber,
 uttering a long sigh, sank in a swoon at his feet.
 “ysola! ysola!” he muttered. stooping he raised the child-like figure. “if
 you will kindly open the door, mr. knox,” he said, “i will carry my wife
 to her room.”
 i sprang to the door and held it widely open.
 colin camber, deadly pale, but holding his head very erect, walked in the
 direction of the hallway with his pathetic burden. mis-reading the purpose
 written upon the stern white face, inspector aylesbury stepped forward.
 “let someone else attend to mrs. camber,” he cried, sharply. “i wish you
 to remain here.”
 his detaining hand was already upon camber’s shoulder when harley’s arm
 shot out like a barrier across the inspector’s chest, and colin camber
 proceeded on his way. momentarily, he glanced aside, and i saw that his
 eyes were unnaturally bright.
 “thank you, mr. harley,” he said, and carried his wife from the room.
 harley dropped his arm, and crossing, stood staring out of the window.
 inspector aylesbury ran heavily to the door.
 “sergeant!” he called, “sergeant! keep that man in sight. he must return
 here immediately.”
 i heard the sound of heavy footsteps following camber’s up the stairs,
 then inspector aylesbury turned, a bulky figure in the open doorway, and:
 “now, mr. harley,” said he, entering and reclosing the door, “you are a
 barrister, i understand. very well, then, i suppose you are aware that you
 have resisted and obstructed an officer of the law in the execution of his
 duty.”
 paul harley spun round upon his heel.
 “is that a charge,” he inquired, “or merely a warning?”
 the two glared at one another for a moment, then:
 “from now onward,” continued the inspector, “i am going to have no more
 trouble with you, mr. harley. in the first place, i’ll have you looked up
 in the law list; in the second place, i shall ask you to stick to your
 proper duties, and leave me to look after mine.”
 “i have endeavoured from the outset,” replied harley, his good humour
 quite restored, “to assist you in every way in my power. you have declined
 all my offers, and finally, upon the most flimsy evidence, you have
 detained a perfectly innocent man.”
 “oh, i see. a perfectly innocent man, eh?”
 “perfectly innocent, inspector. there are so many points that you have
 overlooked. for instance, do you seriously suppose that mr. camber had
 been waiting up here night after night on the off-chance that colonel
 menendez would appear in the grounds of cray’s folly?”
 “no, i don’t. i have got that worked out.”
 “indeed? you interest me.”
 “mr. camber has an accomplice at cray’s folly.”
 “what?” exclaimed harley, and into his keen grey eyes crept a look of real
 interest.
 “he has an accomplice,” repeated the inspector. “a certain witness was
 strangely reluctant to mention mr. camber’s name. it was only after very
 keen examination that i got it at last. now, colonel menendez had not
 retired last night, neither had a certain other party. that other party,
 sir, knows why colonel menendez was wandering about the garden at
 midnight.”
 at first, i think, this astonishing innuendo did not fully penetrate to my
 mind, but when it did so, it seemed to galvanize me. springing up from the
 chair in which i had been seated:
 “you preposterous fool!” i exclaimed, hotly.
 it was the last straw. inspector aylesbury strode to the door and throwing
 it open once more, turned to me:
 “be good enough to leave the house, mr. knox,” he said. “i am about to
 have it officially searched, and i will have no strangers present.”
 i think i could have strangled him with pleasure, but even in my rage i
 was not foolhardy enough to lay myself open to that of which the inspector
 was quite capable at this moment.
 without another word i walked out of the study, took my hat and stick, and
 opening the front door, quitted the guest house, from which i had thus a
 second time been dismissed ignominiously.
 appreciation of this fact, which came to me as i stepped into the porch,
 awakened my sense of humour—a gift truly divine which has saved many
 a man from desperation or worse. i felt like a schoolboy who had been
 turned out of a class-room, and i was glad that i could laugh at myself.
 a constable was standing in the porch, and he looked at me suspiciously.
 no doubt he perceived something very sardonic in my merriment.
 i walked out of the gate, before which a car was standing, and as i paused
 to light a cigarette i heard the door of the guest house open and close. i
 glanced back, and there was paul harley coming to join me.
 “now, knox,” he said, briskly, “we have got our hands full.”
 “my dear harley, i am both angry and bewildered. too angry and too
 bewildered to think clearly.”
 “i can quite understand it. i should become homicidal if i were forced to
 submit for long to the company of inspector aylesbury. of course, i had
 anticipated the arrest of colin camber, and i fear there is worse to
 come.”
 “what do you mean, harley?”
 “i mean that failing the apprehension of the real murderer, i cannot see,
 at the moment, upon what the case for the defence is to rest.”
 “but surely you demonstrated out there in the garden that he could not
 possibly have fired the shot?”
 “words, knox, words. i could pick a dozen loopholes in my own argument. i
 had only hoped to defer the inevitable. i tell you, there is worse to
 come. two things we must do at once.”
 “what are they?”
 “we must persuade the man on duty to allow us to examine the tudor garden,
 and we must see the chief constable, whoever he may be, and prevail upon
 him to requisition the assistance of scotland yard. with wessex in charge
 of the case i might have a chance. whilst this disastrous man aylesbury
 holds the keys there is none.”
 “you heard what he said about miss beverley?”
 we were now walking rapidly along the high road, and harley nodded.
 “i did,” he said. “i had expected it. he was inspired with this brilliant
 idea last night, and his ideas are too few to be lightly scrapped. if the
 chief constable is anything like the inspector, what we are going to do
 heaven only knows.”
 “i take it, harley, that you are convinced of colin camber’s innocence?”
 harley did not answer for a moment, whereupon i glanced at him anxiously,
 then:
 “colin camber,” he replied, “is of so peculiar a type that i could not
 presume to say of what he is capable or is not capable. the most
 significant point in his favour is this: he is a man of unusual intellect.
 the planning of this cunning crime to such a man would have been child’s
 play—child’s play, knox. but is it possible to believe that his
 genius would have failed him upon the most essential detail of all,
 namely, an alibi?”
 “it is not.”
 “of course it is not. which, continuing to regard camber as an assassin,
 reduces us to the theory that the crime was committed in a moment of
 passion. this i maintain to be also impossible. it was no deed of
 impulse.”
 “i agree with you.”
 “now, i believe that the enquiry is going to turn upon a very delicate
 point. if i am wrong in this, then perhaps i am wrong in my whole
 conception of the case. but have you considered the mass of evidence
 against colin camber?”
 “i have, harley,” i replied, sadly, “i have.”
 “think of all that we know, and which the inspector does not know. every
 single datum points in the same direction. no prosecution could ask for a
 more perfect case. upon this fact i pin my hopes. where an aylesbury
 rushes in i fear to tread. the analogy with an angel was accidental,
 knox!” he added, smilingly. “in other words, it is all too obvious. yet i
 have failed once, knox, failed disastrously, and it may be that in my
 anxiety to justify myself i am seeking for subtlety where no subtlety
 exists.”
 there were strangers about cray’s folly and a sort of furtive activity,
 horribly suggestive. we had not pursued the circular route by the high
 road which would have brought us to the lodge, but had turned aside where
 the swing-gate opened upon a footpath into the meadows. it was the path
 which i had pursued upon the day of my visit to the lavender arms. a
 second private gate here gave access to the grounds at a point directly
 opposite the lake; and as we crossed the valley, making for the terraced
 lawns, i saw unfamiliar figures upon the veranda, and knew that the
 cumbersome processes of the law were already in motion.
 i was longing to speak to val beverley and to learn what had taken place
 during her interview with inspector aylesbury, but harley led the way
 toward the tower wing, and by a tortuous path through the rhododendrons we
 finally came out on the northeast front and in sight of the tudor garden.
 harley crossed to the entrance, and was about to descend the steps, when
 the constable on duty there held out his arm.
 “excuse me, sir,” he said, “but i have orders to admit no one to this part
 of the garden.”
 “oh,” said harley, pulling up short, “but i am acting in this case. my
 name is paul harley.”
 “sorry, sir,” replied the constable, “but you will have to see inspector
 aylesbury.”
 my friend uttered an impatient exclamation, but, turning aside:
 “very well, constable,” he muttered; “i suppose i must submit. our friend,
 aylesbury,” he added to me, as we walked away, “would appear to be a
 martinet as well as a walrus. at every step, knox, he proves himself a
 tragic nuisance. this means waste of priceless time.”
 “what had you hoped to do, harley?”
 “prove my theory,” he returned; “but since every moment is precious, i
 must move in another direction.”
 he hurried on through the opening in the box hedge and into the courtyard.
 manoel had just opened the doors to a sepulchral-looking person who proved
 to be the coroner’s officer, and:
 “manoel!” cried harley, “tell carter to bring a car round at once.”
 “yes, sir.”
 “i haven’t time to fetch my own,” he explained.
 “where are you off to?”
 “i am off to see the chief constable, knox. aylesbury must be superseded
 at whatever cost. if the chief constable fails i shall not hesitate to go
 higher. i will get along to the garage. i don’t expect to be more than an
 hour. meanwhile, do your best to act as a buffer between aylesbury and the
 women. you understand me?”
 “quite,” i returned, shortly. “but the task may prove no light one,
 harley.”
 “it won’t,” he assured me, smiling grimly. “how you must regret, knox,
 that we didn’t go fishing!”
 with that he was off, eager-eyed and alert, the mood of dreamy abstraction
 dropped like a cloak discarded. he fully realized, as i did, that his
 unique reputation was at stake. i wondered, as i had wondered at the guest
 house, whether, in undertaking to clear colin camber, he had acted upon
 sheer conviction, or, embittered by the death of his client, had taken a
 gambler’s chance. it was unlike him to do so. but now beyond reach of that
 charm of manner which colin camber possessed, and discounting the pathetic
 sweetness of his girl-wife, i realized how black was the evidence against
 him.
 occupied with these, and even more troubled thoughts, i was making my way
 toward the library, undetermined how to act, when i saw val beverley
 coming along the corridor which communicated with madame de stämer’s room.
 i read a welcome in her eyes which made my heart beat the faster.
 “oh, mr. knox,” she cried, “i am so glad you have returned. tell me all
 that has happened, for i feel in some way that i am responsible for it.”
 i nodded gravely.
 “you know, then, where inspector aylesbury went when he left here, after
 his interview with you?”
 she looked at me pathetically.
 “he went to the guest house, of course.”
 “yes,” i said; “he was close behind us.”
 “and”—she hesitated—“mr. camber?”
 “he has been detained.”
 “oh!” she moaned. “i could hate myself! yet what could i say, what could i
 do?”
 “just tell me all about it,” i urged. “what were the inspector’s
 questions?”
 “well,” explained the girl, “he had evidently learned from someone,
 presumably one of the servants, that there was enmity between mr. camber
 and colonel menendez. he asked me if i knew of this, and of course i had
 to admit that i did. but when i told him that i had no idea of its cause,
 he did not seem to believe me.”
 “no,” i murmured. “any evidence which fails to dove-tail with his
 preconceived theories he puts down as a lie.”
 “he seemed to have made up his mind for some reason,” she continued, “that
 i was intimately acquainted with mr. camber. whereas, of course, i have
 never spoken to him in my life, although whenever he has passed me in the
 road he has always saluted me with quite delightful courtesy. oh, mr.
 knox, it is horrible to think of this great misfortune coming to those
 poor people.” she looked at me pleadingly. “how did his wife take it?”
 “poor little girl,” i replied, “it was an awful blow.”
 “i feel that i want to set out this very minute,” declared val beverley,
 “and go to her, and try to comfort her. because i feel in my very soul
 that her husband is innocent. she is such a sweet little thing. i have
 wanted to speak to her since the very first time i ever saw her, but on
 the rare occasions when we have met in the village she has hurried past as
 though she were afraid of me. mr. harley surely knows that her husband is
 not guilty?”
 “i think he does,” i replied, “but he may have great difficulty in proving
 it. and what else did inspector aylesbury wish to know?”
 “how can i tell you?” she said in a low voice; and biting her lip
 agitatedly she turned her head aside.
 “perhaps i can guess.”
 “can you?” she asked, looking at me quickly. “well, then, he seemed to
 attach a ridiculous importance to the fact that i had not retired last
 night at the time of the tragedy.”
 “i know,” said i, grimly. “another preconceived idea of his.”
 “i told him the truth of the matter, which is surely quite simple, and at
 first i was unable to understand the nature of his suspicions. then, after
 a time, his questions enlightened me. he finally suggested, quite openly,
 that i had not come down from my room to the corridor in which madame de
 stämer was lying, but had actually been there at the time!”
 “in the corridor outside her room?”
 “yes. he seemed to think that i had just come in from the door near the
 end of the east wing and beside the tower, which opens into the
 shrubbery.”
 “that you had just come in?” i exclaimed. “he thinks, then, that you had
 been out in the grounds?”
 val beverley’s face had been very pale, but now she flushed indignantly,
 and glanced away from me as she replied:
 “he dared to suggest that i had been to keep an assignation.”
 “the fool!” i cried. “the ignorant, impudent fool!”
 “oh,” she declared, “i felt quite ill with indignation. i am afraid i may
 regard inspector aylesbury as an enemy from now onward, for when i had
 recovered from the shock i told him very plainly what i thought about his
 intellect, or lack of it.”
 “i am glad you did,” i said, warmly. “before inspector aylesbury is
 through with this business i fancy he will know more about his limitations
 than he knows at present. the fact of the matter is that he is badly out
 of his depth, but is not man enough to acknowledge the fact even to
 himself.”
 she smiled at me pathetically.
 “whatever should i have done if i had been alone?” she said.
 i was tempted to direct the conversation into a purely personal channel,
 but common sense prevailed, and:
 “is madame de stämer awake?” i asked.
 “yes.” the girl nodded. “dr. rolleston is with her now.”
 “and does she know?”
 “yes. she sent for me directly she awoke, and asked me.”
 “and you told her?”
 “how could i do otherwise? she was quite composed, wonderfully composed;
 and the way she heard the news was simply heroic. but here is dr.
 rolleston, coming now.”
 i glanced along the corridor, and there was the physician approaching
 briskly.
 “good morning, mr. knox,” he said.
 “good morning, doctor. i hear that your patient is much improved?”
 “wonderfully so,” he answered. “she has enough courage for ten men. she
 wishes to see you, mr. knox, and to hear your account of the tragedy.”
 “do you think it would be wise?”
 “i think it would be best.”
 “do you hold any hope of her permanently recovering the use of her limbs?”
 dr. rolleston shook his head doubtfully.
 “it may have only been temporary,” he replied. “these obscure nervous
 affections are very fickle. it is unsafe to make predictions. but
 mentally, at least, she is quite restored from the effects of last night’s
 shock. you need apprehend no hysteria or anything of that nature, mr.
 knox.”
 “oh, i see,” exclaimed a loud voice behind us.
 we all three turned, and there was inspector aylesbury crossing the hall
 in our direction.
 “good morning, dr. rolleston,” he said, deliberately ignoring my presence.
 “i hear that your patient is quite well again this morning?”
 “she is much improved,” returned the physician, dryly.
 “then i can get her testimony, which is most important to my case?”
 “she is somewhat better. if she cares to see you i do not forbid the
 interview.”
 “oh, that’s good of you, doctor.” he bowed to miss beverley. “perhaps,
 miss, you would ask madame de stämer to see me for a few minutes.”
 val beverley looked at me appealingly then shrugged her shoulders, turned
 aside, and walked in the direction of madame de stämer’s door.
 “well,” said dr. rolleston, in his brisk way, shaking me by the hand, “i
 must be getting along. good morning, mr. knox. good morning, inspector
 aylesbury.”
 he walked rapidly out to his waiting car. the presence of inspector
 aylesbury exercised upon dr. rolleston a similar effect to that which a
 red rag has upon a bull. as he took his departure, the inspector drew out
 his pocket-book, and, humming gently to himself, began to consult certain
 entries therein, with a portentous air of reflection which would have been
 funny if it had not been so irritating.
 thus we stood when val beverley returned, and:
 “madame de stämer will see you, inspector aylesbury,” she said, “but
 wishes mr. knox to be present at the interview.”
 “oh,” said the inspector, lowering his chin, “i see. oh, very well.”
 madame de stämer’s apartment was a large and elegant one. from the
 window-drapings, which were of some light, figured satiny material, to the
 bed-cover, the lampshades and the carpet, it was french. faintly perfumed,
 and decorated with many bowls of roses, it reflected, in its ornaments,
 its pictures, its slender-legged furniture, the personality of the
 occupant. in a large, high bed, reclining amidst a number of silken
 pillows, lay madame de stämer. the theme of the room was violet and
 silver, and to this everything conformed. the toilet service was of dull
 silver and violet enamel. the mirrors and some of the pictures had dull
 silver frames, there was nothing tawdry or glittering. the bed itself,
 which i thought resembled a bed of state, was of the same dull silver,
 with a coverlet of delicate violet i hue. but madame’s décolleté robe was
 trimmed with white fur, so that her hair, dressed high upon her head,
 seemed to be of silver, too.
 reclining there upon her pillows, she looked like some grande dame of that
 france which was swept away by the revolution. immediately above the
 dressing-table i observed a large portrait of colonel menendez dressed as
 i had imagined he should be dressed when i had first set eyes on him, in
 tropical riding kit, and holding a broad-brimmed hat in his hand. a
 strikingly handsome, arrogant figure he made, uncannily like the velasquez
 in the library.
 at the face of madame de stämer i looked long and searchingly. she had not
 neglected the art of the toilette. blinds tempered the sunlight which
 flooded her room; but that, failing the service of rouge, madame had been
 pale this morning, i perceived immediately. in some subtle way the night
 had changed her. something was gone out of her face, and something come
 into it. i thought, and lived to remember the thought, that it was thus
 marie antoinette might have looked when they told her how the drums had
 rolled in the place de la revolution on that morning of the twenty-first
 of january.
 “oh, m. knox,” she said, sadly, “you are there, i see. come and sit here
 beside me, my friend. val, dear, remain. is this inspector aylesbury who
 wishes to speak to me?”
 the inspector, who had entered with all the confidence in the world,
 seemed to lose some of it in the presence of this grand lady, who was so
 little impressed by the dignity of his office.
 she waved one slender hand in the direction of a violet brocaded chair.
 “sit down, monsieur l’inspecteur,” she commanded, for it was rather a
 command than an invitation.
 inspector aylesbury cleared his throat and sat down.
 “ah, m. knox!” exclaimed madame, turning to me with one of her rapid
 movements, “is your friend afraid to face me, then? does he think that he
 has failed? does he think that i condemn him?”
 “he knows that he has failed, madame de stämer,” i replied, “but his
 absence is due to the fact that at this hour he is hot upon the trail of
 the assassin.”
 “what!” she exclaimed, “what!”—and bending forward touched my arm.
 “tell me again! tell me again!”
 “he is following a clue, madame de stämer, which he hopes will lead to the
 truth.”
 “ah! if i could believe it would lead to the truth,” she said. “if i dared
 to believe this.”
 “why should it not?”
 she shook her head, smiling with such a resigned sadness that i averted my
 gaze and glanced across at val beverley who was seated on the opposite
 side of the bed.
 “if you knew—if you knew.”
 i looked again into the tragic face, and realized that this was an older
 woman than the brilliant hostess i had known. she sighed, shrugged, and:
 “tell me, m. knox,” she continued, “it was swift and merciful, eh?”
 “instantaneous,” i replied, in a low voice.
 “a good shot?” she asked, strangely.
 “a wonderful shot,” i answered, thinking that she imposed unnecessary
 torture upon herself.
 “they say he must be taken away, m. knox, but i reply: not until i have
 seen him.”
 “madame,” began val beverley, gently.
 “ah, my dear!” madame de stämer, without looking at the speaker, extended
 one hand in her direction, the fingers characteristically curled. “you do
 not know me. perhaps it is a good job. you are a man, mr. knox, and men,
 especially men who write, know more of women than they know of themselves,
 is it not so? you will understand that i must see him again?”
 “madame de stämer,” i said, “your courage is almost terrible.”
 she shrugged her shoulders.
 “i am not proud to be brave, my friend. the animals are brave, but many
 cowards are proud. listen again. he suffered no pain, you think?”
 “none, madame de stämer.”
 “so dr. rolleston assures me. he died in his sleep? you do not think he
 was awake, eh?”
 “most certainly he was not awake.”
 “it is the best way to die,” she said, simply. “yet he, who was brave and
 had faced death many times, would have counted it”——she
 snapped her white fingers, glancing across the room to where inspector
 aylesbury, very subdued, sat upon the brocaded chair twirling his cap
 between his hands. “and now, inspector aylesbury,” she asked, “what is it
 you wish me to tell you?”
 “well, madame,” began the inspector, and stood up, evidently in an
 endeavour to recover his dignity, but:
 “sit down, mr. inspector! i beg of you be seated,” cried madame. “i will
 not be questioned by one who stands. and if you were to walk about i
 should shriek.”
 he resumed his seat, clearing his throat nervously.
 “very well, madame,” he continued, “i have come to you particularly for
 information respecting a certain mr. camber.”
 “oh, yes,” said madame.
 her vibrant voice was very low.
 “you know him, no doubt?”
 “i have never met him.”
 “what?” exclaimed the inspector.
 madame shrugged and glanced at me eloquently.
 “well,” he continued, “this gets more and more funny. i am told by pedro,
 the butler, that colonel menendez looked upon mr. camber as an enemy, and
 miss beverley, here, admitted that it was true. yet although he was an
 enemy, nobody ever seems to have spoken to him, and he swears that he had
 never spoken to colonel menendez.”
 “yes?” said madame, listlessly, “is that so?”
 “it is so, madame, and now you tell me that you have never met him.”
 “i did tell you so, yes.”
 “his wife, then?”
 “i never met his wife,” said madame, rapidly.
 “but it is a fact that colonel menendez regarded him as an enemy?”
 “it is a fact-yes.”
 “ah, now we are coming to it. what was the cause of this?”
 “i cannot tell you.”
 “do you mean that you don’t know?”
 “i mean that i cannot tell you.”
 “oh,” said the inspector, blankly, “i see. that’s not helping me very
 much, is it?”
 “no, it is no help,” said madame, twirling a ring upon her finger.
 the inspector cleared his throat again, then:
 “there had been other attempts, i believe, at assassination?” he asked.
 madame nodded.
 “several.”
 “did you witness any of these?”
 “none of them.”
 “but you know that they took place?”
 “juan—colonel menendez—had told me so.”
 “and he suspected that there was someone lurking about this house?”
 “yes.”
 “also, someone broke in?”
 “there were doors unfastened, and a great disturbance, so i suppose
 someone must have done so.”
 i wondered if he would refer to the bat wing nailed to the door, but he
 had evidently decided that this clue was without importance, nor did he
 once refer to the aspect of the case which concerned voodoo. he possessed
 a sort of mulish obstinacy, and was evidently determined to use no scrap
 of information which he had obtained from paul harley.
 “now, madame,” said he, “you heard the shot fired last night?”
 “i did.”
 “it woke you up?”
 “i was already awake.”
 “oh, i see: you were awake?”
 “i was awake.”
 “where did you think the sound came from?”
 “from back yonder, beyond the east wing.”
 “beyond the east wing?” muttered inspector aylesbury. “now, let me see.”
 he turned ponderously in his chair, gazing out of the windows. “we look
 out on the south here? you say the sound of the shot came from the east?”
 “so it seemed to me.”
 “oh.” this piece of information seemed badly to puzzle him. “and what
 then?”
 “i was so startled that i ran to the door before i remembered that i could
 not walk.”
 she glanced aside at me with a tired smile, and laid her hand upon my arm
 in an oddly caressing way, as if to say, “he is so stupid; i should not
 have expressed myself in that way.”
 truly enough the inspector misunderstood, for:
 “i don’t follow what you mean, madame,” he declared. “you say you forgot
 that you could not walk?”
 “no, no, i expressed myself wrongly,” madame replied in a weary voice.
 “the fright, the terror, gave me strength to stagger to the door, and
 there i fell and swooned.”
 “oh, i see. you speak of fright and terror. were these caused by the sound
 of the shot?”
 “for some reason my cousin believed himself to be in peril,” explained
 madame. “he went in dread of assassination, you understand? very well, he
 caused me to feel this dread, also. when i heard the shot, something told
 me, something told me that—” she paused, and suddenly placing her
 hands before her face, added in a whisper—“that it had come.”
 val beverley was watching madame de stämer anxiously, and the fact that
 she was unfit to undergo further examination was so obvious that any other
 than an inspector aylesbury would have withdrawn. the latter, however,
 seemed now to be glued to his chair, and:
 “oh, i see,” he said; “and now there’s another point: have you any idea
 what took colonel menendez out into the grounds last night?”
 madame de stämer lowered her hands and gazed across at the speaker.
 “what is that, monsieur l’inspecteur?”
 “well, you don’t think he might have gone out to talk to someone?”
 “to someone? to what one?” demanded madame, scornfully.
 “well, it isn’t natural for a man to go walking about the garden at
 midnight, when he’s unwell, is it? not alone. but if there was a lady in
 the case he might go.”
 “a lady?” said madame, softly. “yes—continue.”
 “well,” resumed the inspector, deceived by the soft voice, “the young lady
 sitting beside you was still wearing her evening dress when i arrived here
 last night. i found that out, although she didn’t give me a chance to see
 her.”
 his words had an effect more dramatic than he could have foreseen.
 madame de stämer threw her arm around val beverley, and hugged her so
 closely to her side that the girl’s curly brown head was pressed against
 madame’s shoulder. thus holding her, she sat rigidly upright, her strange,
 still eyes glaring across the room at inspector aylesbury. her whole pose
 was instinct with challenge, with defiance, and in that moment i
 identified the illusive memory which the eyes of madame so often had
 conjured up in my mind.
 once, years before, i had seen a wounded tigress standing over her cubs, a
 beautiful, fearless creature, blazing defiance with dying eyes upon those
 who had destroyed her, the mother-instinct supreme to the last; for as she
 fell to rise no more she had thrown her paw around the cowering cubs. it
 was not in shape, nor in colour, but in expression and in their stillness,
 that the eyes of madame de stämer resembled the eyes of the tigress.
 “oh, madame, madame,” moaned the girl, “how dare he!”
 “ah!” madame de stämer raised her head yet higher, a royal gesture, that
 unmoving stare set upon the face of the discomfited inspector aylesbury.
 “leave my apartment.” her left hand shot out dramatically in the direction
 of the door, but even yet the fingers remained curled. “stupid, gross
 fool!”
 inspector aylesbury stood up, his face very flushed.
 “i am only doing my duty, madame,” he said.
 “go, go!” commanded madame, “i insist that you go!”
 convulsively she held val beverley to her side, and although i could not
 see the girl’s face, i knew that she was weeping.
 those implacable flaming eyes followed with their stare the figure of the
 inspector right to the doorway, for he essayed no further speech, but
 retired.
 i, also, rose, and:
 “madame de stämer,” i said, speaking, i fear, very unnaturally, “i love
 your spirit.”
 she threw back her head, smiling up at me. i shall never forget that look,
 nor shall i attempt to portray all which it conveyed—for i know i
 should fail.
 “my friend!” she said, and extended her hand to be kissed.
 inspector aylesbury had disappeared when i came out of the hall, but pedro
 was standing there to remind me of the fact that i had not breakfasted. i
 realized that despite all tragic happenings, i was ravenously hungry, and
 accordingly i agreed to his proposal that i should take breakfast on the
 south veranda, as on the previous morning.
 to the south veranda accordingly i made my way, rather despising myself
 because i was capable of hunger at such a time and amidst such horrors.
 the daily papers were on my table, for carter drove into market hilton
 every morning to meet the london train which brought them down; but i did
 not open any of them.
 pedro waited upon me in person. i could see that the man was pathetically
 anxious to talk. accordingly, when he presently brought me a fresh supply
 of hot rolls:
 “this has been a dreadful blow to you, pedro?” i said.
 “dreadful, sir,” he returned; “fearful. i lose a splendid master, i lose
 my place, and i am far, far from home.”
 “you are from cuba?”
 “yes, yes. i was with señor the colonel don juan in cuba.”
 “and do you know anything of the previous attempts which had been made
 upon his life, pedro?”
 “nothing, sir. nothing at all.”
 “but the bat wing, pedro?”
 he looked at me in a startled way.
 “yes, sir,” he replied. “i found it pinned to the door here.”
 “and what did you think it meant?”
 “i thought it was a joke, sir—not a nice joke—by someone who
 knew cuba.”
 “you know the meaning of bat wing, then?”
 “it is obeah. i have never seen it before, but i have heard of it.”
 “and what did you think?” said i, proceeding with my breakfast.
 “i thought it was meant to frighten.”
 “but who did you think had done it?”
 “i had heard señor don juan say that mr. camber hated him, so i thought
 perhaps he had sent someone to do it.”
 “but why should mr. camber have hated the colonel?”
 “i cannot say, sir. i wish i could tell.”
 “was your master popular in the west indies?” i asked.
 “well, sir—” pedro hesitated—“perhaps not so well liked.”
 “no,” i said. “i had gathered as much.”
 the man withdrew, and i continued my solitary meal, listening to the song
 of the skylarks, and thinking how complex was human existence, compared
 with any other form of life beneath the sun.
 how to employ my time until harley should return i knew not. common
 delicacy dictated an avoidance of val beverley until she should have
 recovered from the effect of inspector aylesbury’s gross insinuations, and
 i was curiously disinclined to become involved in the gloomy formalities
 which ensue upon a crime of violence. nevertheless, i felt compelled to
 remain within call, realizing that there might be unpleasant duties which
 pedro could not perform, and which must therefore devolve upon val
 beverley.
 i lighted my pipe and walked out on to the sloping lawn. a gardener was at
 work with a big syringe, destroying a patch of weeds which had appeared in
 one corner of the velvet turf. he looked up in a sort of startled way as i
 passed, bidding me good morning, and then resuming his task. i thought
 that this man’s activities were symbolic of the way of the world, in whose
 eternal progression one poor human life counts as nothing.
 presently i came in sight of that door which opened into the rhododendron
 shrubbery, the door by which colonel menendez had come out to meet his
 death. his bedroom was directly above, and as i picked my way through the
 closely growing bushes, which at an earlier time i had thought to be
 impassable, i paused in the very shadow of the tower and glanced back and
 upward. i could see the windows of the little smoke-room in which we had
 held our last interview with menendez; and i thought of the shadow which
 harley had seen upon the blind. i was unable to disguise from myself the
 fact that when inspector aylesbury should learn of this occurrence, as
 presently he must do, it would give new vigour to his ridiculous and
 unpleasant suspicions.
 i passed on, and considering the matter impartially, found myself faced by
 the questions—whose was the shadow which harley had seen upon the
 blind? and with what purpose did colonel menendez leave the house at
 midnight?
 somnambulism might solve the second riddle, but to the first i could find
 no answer acceptable to my reason. and now, pursuing my aimless way, i
 presently came in sight of a gable of the guest house. i could obtain a
 glimpse of the hut which had once been colin camber’s workroom. the
 window, through which paul harley had stared so intently, possessed
 sliding panes. these were closed, and a ray of sunlight, striking upon the
 glass, produced, because of an over-leaning branch which crossed the top
 of the window, an effect like that of a giant eye glittering evilly
 through the trees. i could see a constable moving about in the garden.
 ever and anon the sun shone upon the buttons of his tunic.
 by such steps my thoughts led me on to the pathetic figure of ysola
 camber. save for the faithful ah tsong she was alone in that house to
 which tragedy had come unbidden, unforeseen. i doubted if she had a woman
 friend in all the countryside. doubtless, i reflected, the old
 housekeeper, to whom she had referred, would return as speedily as
 possible, but pending the arrival of someone to whom she could confide all
 her sorrows, i found it almost impossible to contemplate the loneliness of
 the tragic little figure.
 such was my mental state, and my thoughts were all of compassion, when
 suddenly, like a lurid light, an inspiration came to me.
 i had passed out from the shadow of the tower and was walking in the
 direction of the sentinel yews when this idea, dreadfully complete, leapt
 to my mind. i pulled up short, as though hindered by a palpable barrier.
 vague musings, evanescent theories, vanished like smoke, and a ghastly,
 consistent theory of the crime unrolled itself before me, with all the
 cold logic of truth.
 “my god!” i groaned aloud, “i see it all. i see it all.”
 the afternoon was well advanced before paul harley returned.
 so deep was my conviction that i had hit upon the truth, and so well did
 my theory stand every test which i could apply to it, that i felt
 disinclined for conversation with any one concerned in the tragedy until i
 should have submitted the matter to the keen analysis of harley. upon the
 sorrow of madame de stämer i naturally did not intrude, nor did i seek to
 learn if she had carried out her project of looking upon the dead man.
 about mid-day the body was removed, after which an oppressive and awesome
 stillness seemed to descend upon cray’s folly.
 inspector aylesbury had not returned from his investigations at the guest
 house, and learning that miss beverley was remaining with madame de
 stämer, i declined to face the ordeal of a solitary luncheon in the dining
 room, and merely ate a few sandwiches, walking over to the lavender arms
 for a glass of mrs. wootton’s excellent ale.
 here i found the bar-parlour full of local customers, and although a
 heated discussion was in progress as i opened the door, silence fell upon
 my appearance. mrs. wootton greeted me sadly.
 “ah, sir,” she said, as she placed a mug before me; “of course you’ve
 heard?”
 “i have, madam,” i replied, perceiving that she did not know me to be a
 guest at cray’s folly.
 “well, well!” she shook her head. “it had to come, with all these foreign
 folk about.”
 she retired to some sanctum at the rear of the bar, and i drank my beer
 amid one of those silences which sometimes descend upon such a gathering
 when a stranger appears in its midst. not until i moved to depart was this
 silence broken, then:
 “ah, well,” said an old fellow, evidently a farm-hand, “we know now why he
 was priming of hisself with the drink, we do.”
 “aye!” came a growling chorus.
 i came out of the lavender arms full of a knowledge that so far as
 mid-hatton was concerned, colin camber was already found guilty.
 i had hoped to see something of val beverley on my return, but she
 remained closeted with madame de stämer, and i was left in loneliness to
 pursue my own reflections, and to perfect that theory which had presented
 itself to my mind.
 in harley’s absence i had taken it upon myself to give an order to pedro
 to the effect that no reporters were to be admitted; and in this i had
 done well. so quickly does evil news fly that, between mid-day and the
 hour of harley’s return, no fewer than five reporters, i believe,
 presented themselves at cray’s folly. some of the more persistent
 continued to haunt the neighbourhood, and i had withdrawn to the deserted
 library, in order to avoid observation, when i heard a car draw up in the
 courtyard, and a moment later heard harley asking for me.
 i hurried out to meet him, and as i appeared at the door of the library:
 “hullo, knox,” he called, running up the steps. “any developments?”
 “no actual development?” i replied, “except that several members of the
 press have been here.”
 “you told them nothing?” he asked, eagerly.
 “no; they were not admitted.”
 “good, good,” he muttered.
 “i had expected you long before this, harley.”
 “naturally,” he said, with a sort of irritation. “i have been all the way
 to whitehall and back.”
 “to whitehall! what, you have been to london?”
 “i had half anticipated it, knox. the chief constable, although quite a
 decent fellow, is a stickler for routine. on the strength of those facts
 which i thought fit to place before him he could see no reason for
 superseding aylesbury. accordingly, without further waste of time, i
 headed straight for whitehall. you may remember a somewhat elaborate
 report which i completed upon the eve of our departure from chancery
 lane?”
 i nodded.
 “a very thankless job for the home office, knox. but i received my reward
 to-day. inspector wessex has been placed in charge of the case and i hope
 he will be down here within the hour. pending his arrival i am tied hand
 and foot.”
 we had walked into the library, and, stopping, suddenly, harley stared me
 very hard in the face.
 “you are bottling something up, knox,” he declared. “out with it. has
 aylesbury distinguished himself again?”
 “no,” i replied; “on the contrary. he interviewed madame de stämer, and
 came out with a flea in his ear.”
 “good,” said harley, smiling. “a clever woman, and a woman of spirit,
 knox.”
 “you are right,” i replied, “and you are also right in supposing that i
 have a communication to make to you.”
 “ah, i thought so. what is it?”
 “it is a theory, harley, which appears to me to cover the facts of the
 case.”
 “indeed?” said he, continuing to stare at me. “and what inspired it?”
 “i was staring up at the window of the smoke-room to-day, and i remembered
 the shadow which you had seen upon the blind.”
 “yes?” he cried, eagerly; “and does your theory explain that, too?”
 “it does, harley.”
 “then i am all anxiety to hear it.”
 “very well, then, i will endeavour to be brief. do you recollect miss
 beverley’s story of the unfamiliar footsteps which passed her door on
 several occasions?”
 “perfectly.”
 “you recollect that you, yourself, heard someone crossing the hall, and
 that both of us heard a door close?”
 “we did.”
 “and finally you saw the shadow of a woman upon the blind of the colonel’s
 private study. very well. excluding the preposterous theory of inspector
 aylesbury, there is no woman in cray’s folly whose footsteps could
 possibly have been heard in that corridor, and whose shadow could possibly
 have been seen upon the blind of colonel menendez’s room.”
 “i agree,” said harley, quietly. “i have definitely eliminated all the
 servants from the case. therefore, proceed, knox, i am all attention.”
 “i will do so. there is a door on the south side of the house, close to
 the tower and opening into the rhododendron shrubbery. this was the door
 used by colonel menendez in his somnambulistic rambles, according to his
 own account. now, assuming his statement to have been untrue in one
 particular, that is, assuming he was not walking in his sleep, but was
 fully awake—”
 “eh?” exclaimed harley, his expression undergoing a subtle change. “do you
 think his statement was untrue?”
 “according to my theory, harley, his statement was untrue, in this
 particular, at least. but to proceed: might he not have employed this door
 to admit a nocturnal visitor?”
 “it is feasible,” muttered harley, watching me closely.
 “for the colonel to descend to this side door when the household was
 sleeping,” i continued, “and to admit a woman secretly to cray’s folly,
 would have been a simple matter. indeed, on the occasions of these visits
 he might even have unbolted the door himself after pedro had bolted it, in
 order to enable her to enter without his descending for the purpose of
 admitting her.”
 “by heavens! knox,” said harley, “i believe you have it!”
 his eyes were gleaming excitedly, and i proceeded:
 “hence the footsteps which passed miss beverley’s door, hence the shadow
 which you saw upon the blind; and the sounds which you detected in the
 hall were caused, of course, by this woman retiring. it was the door
 leading into the shrubbery which we heard being closed!”
 “continue,” said harley; “although i can plainly see to what this is
 leading.”
 “you can see, harley?” i cried; “of course you can see! the enmity between
 camber and menendez is understandable at last.”
 “you mean that menendez was mrs. camber’s lover?”
 “don’t you agree with me?”
 “it is feasible, knox, dreadfully feasible. but go on.”
 “my theory also explains colin camber’s lapse from sobriety. it is
 legitimate to suppose that his wife, who was a cuban, had been intimate
 with menendez before her meeting with camber. perhaps she had broken the
 tie at the time of her marriage, but this is mere supposition. then, her
 old lover, his infatuation by no means abated, leases the property
 adjoining that of his successful rival.”
 “knox!” exclaimed paul harley, “this is brilliant. i am all impatience for
 the dénouement.”
 “it is coming,” i said, triumphantly. “relations are reëstablished,
 clandestinely. colin camber learns of these. a passionate quarrel ensues,
 resulting in a long drinking bout designed to drown his sorrows. his love
 for his wife is so great that he has forgiven her this infidelity.
 accordingly, she has promised to see her lover no more. hers was the
 figure which you saw outlined upon the blind on the night before the
 tragedy, harley! the gestures, which you described as those of despair,
 furnish evidence to confirm my theory. it was a final meeting!”
 “hm,” muttered harley. “it would be taking big chances, because we have to
 suppose, knox, that these visits to cray’s folly were made whilst her
 husband was at work in the study. if he had suddenly decided to turn in,
 all would have been discovered.”
 “true,” i agreed, “but is it impossible?”
 “no, not a bit. women are dreadful gamblers. but continue, knox.”
 “very well. colonel menendez has refused to accept his dismissal, and mrs.
 camber had been compelled to promise, without necessarily intending to
 carry out the promise, that she would see him again on the following
 night. she failed to come; whereupon he, growing impatient, walked out
 into the grounds of cray’s folly to look for her. she may even have
 intended to come and have been intercepted by her husband. but in any
 event, the latter, seeing the man who had wronged him, standing out there
 in the moonlight, found temptation to be too strong. on the whole, i
 favour the idea that he had intercepted his wife, and snatching up a
 rifle, had actually gone out into the garden with the intention of
 shooting menendez.”
 “i see,” murmured harley in a low voice. “this hypothesis, knox, does not
 embrace the bat wing episodes.”
 “if menendez has lied upon one point,” i returned, “it is permissible to
 suppose that his entire story was merely a tissue of falsehood.”
 “i see. but why did he bring me to cray’s folly?”
 “don’t you understand, harley?” i cried, excitedly. “he really feared for
 his life, since he knew that camber had discovered the intrigue.”
 paul harley heaved a long sigh.
 “i must congratulate you, knox,” he said, gravely, “upon a really splendid
 contribution to my case. in several particulars i find myself nearer to
 the truth. but the definite establishment or shattering of your theory
 rests upon one thing.”
 “what’s that?” i asked. “you are surely not thinking of the bat wing
 nailed upon the door?”
 “not at all,” he replied. “i am thinking of the seventh yew tree from the
 northeast corner of the tudor garden.”
 what reply i should have offered to this astonishing remark i cannot say,
 but at that moment the library door burst open unceremoniously, and
 outlined against the warmly illuminated hall, where sunlight poured down
 through the dome, i beheld the figure of inspector aylesbury.
 “ah!” he cried, loudly, “so you have come back, mr. harley? i thought you
 had thrown up the case.”
 “did you?” said harley, smilingly. “no, i am still persevering in my
 ineffectual way.”
 “oh, i see. and have you quite convinced yourself that colin camber is
 innocent?”
 “in one or two particulars my evidence remains incomplete.”
 “oh, in one or two particulars, eh? but generally speaking you don’t doubt
 his innocence?”
 “i don’t doubt it for a moment.”
 harley’s words surprised me. i recognized, of course, that he might merely
 be bluffing the inspector, but it was totally alien to his character to
 score a rhetorical success at the expense of what he knew to be the truth;
 and so sure was i of the accuracy of my deductions that i no longer
 doubted colin camber to be the guilty man.
 “at any rate,” continued the inspector, “he is in detention, and likely to
 remain there. if you are going to defend him at the assizes, i don’t envy
 you your job, mr. harley.”
 he was blatantly triumphant, so that the fact was evident enough that he
 had obtained some further piece of evidence which he regarded as
 conclusive.
 “i have detained the man ah tsong as well,” he went on. “he was an
 accomplice of your innocent friend, mr. harley.”
 “was he really?” murmured harley.
 “finally,” continued the inspector, “i have only to satisfy myself
 regarding the person who lured colonel menendez out into the grounds last
 night, to have my case complete.”
 i turned aside, unable to trust myself, but harley remarked quite coolly:
 “your industry is admirable, inspector aylesbury, but i seem to perceive
 that you have made a very important discovery of some kind.”
 “ah, you have got wind of it, have you?”
 “i have no information on the point,” replied harley, “but your manner
 urges me to suggest that perhaps success has crowned your efforts?”
 “it has,” replied the inspector. “i am a man that doesn’t do things by
 halves. i didn’t content myself with just staring out of the window of
 that little hut in the grounds of the guest house, like you did, mr.
 harley, and saying ‘twice one are two’—i looked at every book on the
 shelves, and at every page of those books.”
 “you must have materially added to your information?”
 “ah, very likely, but my enquiries didn’t stop there. i had the floor up.”
 “the floor of the hut?”
 “the floor of the hut, sir. the planks were quite loose. i had satisfied
 myself that it was a likely hiding place.”
 “what did you find there, a dead rat?”
 inspector aylesbury turned, and:
 “sergeant butler,” he called.
 the sergeant came forward from the hall, carrying a cricket bag. this
 inspector aylesbury took from him, placing it upon the floor of the
 library at his feet.
 “new, sir,” said he, “i borrowed this bag in which to bring the evidence
 away—the hanging evidence which i discovered beneath the floor of
 the hut.”
 i had turned again, when the man had referred to his discovery; and now,
 glancing at harley, i saw that his face had grown suddenly very stern.
 “show me your evidence, inspector?” he asked, shortly.
 “there can be no objection,” returned the inspector.
 opening the bag, he took out a rifle!
 paul harley’s hands were thrust in his coat pockets, by the movement of
 the cloth i could see that he had clenched his fists. here was
 confirmation of my theory!
 “a service rifle,” said the inspector, triumphantly, holding up the
 weapon. “a lee-enfield charger-loader. it contains four cartridges, three
 undischarged, and one discharged. he had not even troubled to eject it.”
 the inspector dropped the weapon into the bag with a dramatic movement.
 “fancy theories about bat wings and voodoos,” he said, scornfully, “may
 satisfy you, mr. harley, but i think this rifle will prove more
 satisfactory to the coroner.”
 he picked up the bag and walked out of the library.
 harley stood posed in a curiously rigid way, looking after him. even when
 the door had closed he did not change his position at once. then, turning
 slowly, he walked to an armchair and sat down.
 “harley,” i said, hesitatingly, “has this discovery surprised you?”
 “surprised me?” he returned in a low voice. “it has appalled me.”
 “then, although you seemed to regard my theory as sound,” i continued
 rather resentfully, “all the time you continued to believe colin camber to
 be innocent?”
 “i believe so still.”
 “what?”
 “i thought we had determined, knox,” he said, wearily, “that a man of
 camber’s genius, having decided upon murder, must have arranged for an
 unassailable alibi. very well. are we now to leap to the other end of the
 scale, and to credit him with such utter stupidity as to place hanging
 evidence where it could not fail to be discovered by the most idiotic
 policeman? preserve your balance, knox. theories are wild horses. they run
 away with us. i know that of old, for which very reason i always avoid
 speculation until i have a solid foundation of fact upon which to erect
 it.”
 “but, my dear fellow,” i cried, “was camber to foresee that the floor of
 the hut would be taken up?”
 harley sighed, and leaned back in his chair.
 “do you recollect your first meeting with this man, knox?”
 “perfectly.”
 “what occurred?”
 “he was slightly drunk.”
 “yes, but what was the nature of his conversation?”
 “he suggested that i had recognized his resemblance to edgar allan poe.”
 “quite. what had led him to make this suggestion?”
 “the manner in which i had looked at him, i suppose.”
 “exactly. although not quite sober, from a mere glance he was able to
 detect what you were thinking. do you wish me to believe, knox, that this
 same man had not foreseen what the police would think when colonel
 menendez was found shot within a hundred yards of the garden of the guest
 house?”
 i was somewhat taken aback, for harley’s argument was strictly logical,
 and:
 “it is certainly very puzzling,” i admitted.
 “puzzling!” he exclaimed; “it is maddening. this case is like a syrian
 village-mound. stratum lies under stratum, and in each we meet with
 evidence of more refined activity than in the last. it seems we have yet
 to go deeper.”
 he took out his pipe and began to fill it.
 “tell me about the interview with madame de stämer,” he directed.
 i took a seat facing him, and he did not once interrupt me throughout my
 account of inspector aylesbury’s examination of madame.
 “good,” he commented, when i had told how the inspector was dismissed.
 “but at least, knox, he has a working theory, to which he sticks like an
 express to the main line, whereas i find myself constantly called upon to
 readjust my perspective. directly i can enjoy freedom of movement,
 however, i shall know whether my hypothesis is a house of cards or a
 serviceable structure.”
 “your hypothesis?” i said. “then you really have a theory which is
 entirely different from mine?”
 “not entirely different, knox, merely not so comprehensive. i have
 contented myself thus far with a negative theory, if i may so express it.”
 “negative theory?”
 “exactly. we are dealing, my dear fellow, with a case of bewildering
 intricacies. for the moment i have focussed upon one feature only.”
 “what is that?”
 “upon proving that colin camber did not do the murder.”
 “did not do it?”
 “precisely, knox. respecting the person or persons who did do it, i had
 preserved a moderately open mind, up to the moment that inspector
 aylesbury entered the library with the lee-enfield.”
 “and then?” i said, eagerly.
 “then,” he replied, “i began to think hard. however, since i practise what
 i preach, or endeavour to do so, i must not permit myself to speculate
 upon this aspect of the matter until i have tested my theory of camber’s
 innocence.”
 “in other words,” i said, bitterly, “although you encouraged me to unfold
 my ideas regarding mrs. camber, you were merely laughing at me all the
 time!”
 “my dear knox!” exclaimed harley, jumping up impulsively, “please don’t be
 unjust. is it like me? on the contrary, knox”—he looked me squarely
 in the eyes—“you have given me a platform on which already i have
 begun to erect one corner of a theory of the crime. without new facts i
 can go no further. but this much at least you have done.”
 “thanks, harley,” i murmured, and indeed i was gratified; “but where do
 your other corners rest?”
 “they rest,” he said, slowly, “they rest, respectively, upon a bat wing, a
 yew tree, and a lee-enfield charger-loader.”
 detective-inspector wessex arrived at about five o’clock; a quiet,
 resourceful man, highly competent, and having the appearance of an
 ex-soldier. his respect for the attainments of paul harley alone marked
 him a student of character. i knew wessex well, and was delighted when
 pedro showed him into the library.
 “thank god you are here, wessex,” said harley, when we had exchanged
 greetings. “at last i can move. have you seen the local officer in
 charge?”
 “no,” replied the inspector, “but i gather that i have been requisitioned
 over his head.”
 “you have,” said harley, grimly, “and over the head of the chief
 constable, too. but i suppose it is unfair to condemn a man for the
 shortcoming with which nature endowed him, therefore we must endeavour to
 let inspector aylesbury down as lightly as possible. i have an idea that i
 heard him return a while ago.”
 he walked out into the hall to make enquiries, and a few moments later i
 heard inspector aylesbury’s voice.
 “ah, there you are, inspector aylesbury,” said harley, cheerily. “will you
 please step into the library for a moment?”
 the inspector entered, frowning heavily, followed by my friend.
 “there is no earthly reason why we should get at loggerheads over this
 business,” harley continued; “but the fact of the matter is, inspector
 aylesbury, that there are depths in this case to which neither you nor i
 have yet succeeded in penetrating. you have a reputation to consider, and
 so have i. therefore i am sure you will welcome the cooperation of
 detective-inspector wessex of scotland yard, as i do.”
 “what’s this, what’s this?” said aylesbury. “i have made no application to
 london.”
 “nevertheless, inspector, it is quite in order,” declared wessex. “i have
 my instructions here, and i have reported to market hilton already. you
 see, the man you have detained is an american citizen.”
 “what of that?”
 “well, he seems to have communicated with his embassy.” wessex glanced
 significantly at paul harley. “and the embassy communicated with the home
 office. you mustn’t regard my arrival as any reflection on your ability,
 inspector aylesbury. i am sure we can work together quite agreeably.”
 “oh,” muttered the other, in evident bewilderment, “i see. well, if that’s
 the way of it, i suppose we must make the best of things.”
 “good,” cried wessex, heartily. “now perhaps you would like to state your
 case against the detained man?”
 “a sound idea, wessex,” said paul harley. “but perhaps, inspector
 aylesbury, before you begin, you would be good enough to speak to the
 constable on duty at the entrance to the tudor garden. i am anxious to
 take another look at the spot where the body was found.”
 inspector aylesbury took out his handkerchief and blew his nose loudly,
 continuing throughout the operation to glare at paul harley, and finally:
 “you are wasting your time, mr. harley,” he declared, “as
 detective-inspector wessex will be the first to admit when i have given
 him the facts of my case. nevertheless, if you want to examine the garden,
 do so by all means.”
 he turned without another word and stamped out of the library across the
 hall and into the courtyard.
 “i will join you again in a few minutes, wessex,” said paul harley,
 following.
 “very good, mr. harley,” wessex answered. “i know you wouldn’t have had me
 down if the case had been as simple as he seems to think it is.”
 i joined harley, and we walked together up the gravelled path, meeting
 inspector aylesbury and the constable returning.
 “go ahead, mr. harley!” cried the inspector. “if you can find any stronger
 evidence than the rifle, i shall be glad to take a look at it.”
 harley nodded good-humouredly, and together we descended the steps to the
 sunken garden. i was intensely curious respecting the investigation which
 harley had been so anxious to make here, for i recognized that it was
 associated with something which he had seen from the window of camber’s
 hut.
 he walked along the moss-grown path to the sun-dial, and stood for a
 moment looking down at the spot where menendez had lain. then he stared up
 the hill toward the guest house; and finally, directing his attention to
 the yews which lined the sloping bank:
 “one, two, three, four,” he counted, checking them with his fingers—“five,
 six, seven.”
 he mounted the bank and began to examine the trunk of one of the trees,
 whilst i watched him in growing astonishment.
 presently he turned and looked down at me.
 “not a trace, knox,” he murmured; “not a trace. let us try again.”
 he moved along to the yew adjoining that which he had already inspected,
 but presently shook his head and passed to the next. then:
 “ah!” he cried. “come here, knox!”
 i joined him where he was kneeling, staring at what i took to be a large
 nail, or bolt, protruding from the bark of the tree.
 “you see!” he exclaimed, “you see!”
 i stooped, in order to examine the thing more closely, and as i did so, i
 realized what it was. it was the bullet which had killed colonel menendez!
 harley stood upright, his face slightly flushed and his eyes very bright.
 “we shall not attempt to remove it, knox,” he said. “the depth of
 penetration may have a tale to tell. the wood of the yew tree is one of
 the toughest british varieties.”
 “but, harley,” i said, blankly, as we descended to the path, “this is
 merely another point for the prosecution of camber. unless”—i turned
 to him in sudden excitement, “the bullet was of different—”
 “no, no,” he murmured, “nothing so easy as that, knox. the bullet was
 fired from a lee-enfield beyond doubt.”
 i stared at him uncomprehendingly.
 “then i am utterly out of my depth, harley. it, appears to me that the
 case against camber is finally and fatally complete. only the motive
 remains to be discovered, and i flatter myself that i have already
 detected this.”
 “i am certainly inclined to think,” admitted harley, “that there is a good
 deal in your theory.”
 “then, harley,” i said in bewilderment, “you do believe that camber
 committed the murder?”
 “on the contrary,” he replied, “i am certain that he did not.”
 i stood quite still.
 “you are certain?” i began.
 “i told you that the test of my theory, knox, was to be looked for in the
 seventh yew from the northeast corner of the tudor garden, did i not?”
 “you did. and it is there. a bullet fired from a lee-enfield rifle; beyond
 any possible shadow of doubt the bullet which killed colonel menendez.”
 “beyond any possible shadow of doubt, as you say, knox, the bullet which
 killed colonel menendez.”
 “therefore camber is guilty?”
 “on the contrary, therefore camber is innocent!”
 “what!”
 “you are persistently overlooking one little point, knox,” said harley,
 mounting the steps on to the gravel path. “i spoke of the seventh yew tree
 from the northeast corner of the garden.”
 “well?”
 “well, my dear fellow, surely you observed that the bullet was embedded in
 the ninth?”
 i was still groping for the significance of this point when, re-crossing
 the hall, we entered the library again, to find inspector aylesbury posed
 squarely before the mantelpiece stating his case to wessex.
 “you see,” he was saying, in his most oratorical manner, as we entered,
 “every little detail fits perfectly into place. for instance, i find that
 a woman, called mrs. powis, who for the past two years had acted as
 housekeeper at the guest house and never taken a holiday, was sent away
 recently to her married daughter in london. see what that means? her room
 is at the back of the house, and her evidence would have been fatal. ah
 tsong, of course, is a liar. i made up my mind about that the moment i
 clapped eyes on him. mrs. camber is the only innocent party. she was
 asleep in the front of the house when the shot was fired, and i believe
 her when she says that she cannot swear to the matter of distance.”
 “a very interesting case, inspector,” said wessex, glancing at harley. “i
 have not examined the body yet, but i understand that it was a clean wound
 through the head.”
 “the bullet entered at the juncture of the nasal and frontal bones,”
 explained harley, rapidly, “and it came out between the base of the
 occipital and first cervical. without going into unpleasant surgical
 details, the wound was a perfectly straight one. there was no
 ricochet.”
 “i understand that a regulation rifle was used?”
 “yes,” said inspector aylesbury; “we have it.”
 “and at what range did you say, inspector?”
 “roughly, a hundred yards.”
 “possibly less,” murmured harley.
 “hundred yards or less,” said wessex, musingly; “and the obstruction met
 with in the case of a man shot in that way would be—” he looked
 towards paul harley.
 “less than if the bullet had struck the skull higher up,” was the reply.
 “it passed clean through.”
 “therefore,” continued wessex, “i am waiting to hear, inspector, where you
 found the bullet lodged?”
 “eh?” said the inspector, and he slowly turned his prominent eyes in
 harley’s direction. “oh, i see. that’s why you wanted to examine the tudor
 garden, is it?”
 “exactly,” replied harley.
 the face of inspector aylesbury grew very red.
 “i had deferred looking for the bullet,” he explained, “as the case was
 already as clear as daylight. probably mr. harley has discovered it.”
 “i have,” said harley, shortly.
 “is it the regulation bullet?” asked wessex.
 “it is. i found it embedded in one of the yew trees.”
 “there you are!” exclaimed aylesbury. “there isn’t the ghost of a doubt.”
 wessex looked at harley in undisguised perplexity.
 “i must say, mr. harley,” he admitted, “that i have never met with a
 clearer case.”
 “neither have i,” agreed harley, cheerfully. “i am going to ask inspector
 aylesbury to return here after nightfall. there is a little experiment
 which i should like to make, and which would definitely establish my
 case.”
 “your case?” said aylesbury.
 “my case, yes.”
 “you are not going to tell me that you still persist in believing camber
 to be innocent?”
 “not at all. i am merely going to ask you to return at nightfall to assist
 me in this minor investigation.”
 “if you ask my opinion,” said the inspector, “no further evidence is
 needed.”
 “i don’t agree with you,” replied harley, quietly. “whatever your own
 ideas upon the subject may be, i, personally, have not yet discovered one
 single piece of convincing evidence for the prosecution of camber.”
 “what!” exclaimed aylesbury, and even detective-inspector wessex stared at
 the speaker incredulously.
 “my dear inspector aylesbury,” concluded harley, “when you have witnessed
 the experiment which i propose to make this evening you will realize, as i
 have already realized that we are faced by a tremendous task.”
 “what tremendous task?”
 “the task of discovering who shot colonel menendez.”
 paul harley, with wessex and inspector aylesbury, presently set out for
 market hilton, where colin camber and ah tsong were detained and where the
 body of colonel menendez had been conveyed for the purpose of the
 post-mortem. i had volunteered to remain at cray’s folly, my motive being
 not wholly an unselfish one.
 “refer reporters to me, mr. knox,” said inspector wessex. “don’t let them
 trouble the ladies. and tell them as little as possible, yourself.”
 the drone of the engine having died away down the avenue, i presently
 found myself alone, but as i crossed the hall in the direction of the
 library, intending to walk out upon the southern lawns, i saw val beverley
 coming toward me from madame de stämer’s room.
 she remained rather pale, but smiled at me courageously.
 “have they all gone, mr. knox?” she asked. “i have really been hiding. i
 suppose you knew?”
 “i suspected it,” i said, smiling. “yes, they are all gone. how is madame
 de stämer, now?”
 “she is quite calm. curiously, almost uncannily calm. she is writing. tell
 me, please, what does mr. harley think of inspector aylesbury’s
 preposterous ideas?”
 “he thinks he is a fool,” i replied, hotly, “as i do.”
 “but whatever will happen if he persists in dragging me into this horrible
 case?”
 “he will not drag you into it,” i said, quietly. “he has been superseded
 by a cleverer man, and the case is practically under harley’s direction
 now.”
 “thank heaven for that,” she murmured. “i wonder——” she looked
 at me hesitatingly.
 “yes?” i prompted.
 “i have been thinking about poor mrs. camber all alone in that gloomy
 house, and wondering——”
 “perhaps i know. you are going to visit her?”
 val beverley nodded, watching me.
 “can you leave madame de stämer with safety?”
 “oh, yes, i think so. nita can attend to her.”
 “and may i accompany you, miss beverley? for more reasons than one, i,
 too, should like to call upon mrs. camber.”
 “we might try,” she said, hesitatingly. “i really only wanted to be kind.
 you won’t begin to cross-examine her, will you?”
 “certainly not,” i answered; “although there are many things i should like
 her to tell us.”
 “well, suppose we go,” said the girl, “and let events take their own
 course.”
 as a result, i presently found myself, val beverley by my side, walking
 across the meadow path. with the unpleasant hush of cray’s folly left
 behind, the day seemed to grow brighter. i thought that the skylarks had
 never sung more sweetly. yet in this same instant of sheerly physical
 enjoyment i experienced a pang of remorse, remembering the tragic woman we
 had left behind, and the poor little sorrowful girl we were going to
 visit. my emotions were very mingled, then, and i retain no recollection
 of our conversation up to the time that we came to the guest house.
 we were admitted by a really charming old lady, who informed us that her
 name was mrs. powis and that she was but an hour returned from london,
 whither she had been summoned by telegram.
 she showed us into a quaint, small drawing room which owed its atmosphere
 quite clearly to mrs. camber, for whereas the study was indescribably
 untidy, this was a model of neatness without being formal or unhomely.
 here, in a few moments, mrs. camber joined us, an appealing little figure
 of wistful, almost elfin, beauty. i was surprised and delighted to find
 that an instant bond of sympathy sprang up between the two girls. i
 diplomatically left them together for a while, going into camber’s room to
 smoke my pipe. and when i returned:
 “oh, mr. knox,” said val beverley, “mrs. camber has something to tell you
 which she thinks you ought to know.”
 “concerning colonel menendez?” i asked, eagerly.
 mrs. camber nodded her golden head.
 “yes,” she replied, but glancing at val beverley as if to gather
 confidence. “the truth can never hurt colin. he has nothing to conceal.
 may i tell you?”
 “i am all anxiety to hear,” i assured her.
 “would you rather i went, mrs. camber?” asked val beverley.
 mrs. camber reached across and took her hand.
 “please, no,” she replied. “stay here with me. i am afraid it is rather a
 long story.”
 “never mind,” i said. “it will be time well spent if it leads us any
 nearer to the truth.”
 “yes?” she questioned, watching me anxiously, “you think so? i think so,
 too.”
 she became silent, sitting looking straight before her, the pupils of her
 blue eyes widely dilated. then, at first in a queer, far-away voice, she
 began to speak again.
 “i must tell you,” she commenced “that before—my marriage, my name
 was isabella de valera.”
 i started.
 “ysola was my baby way of saying it, and so i came to be called ysola. my
 father was manager of one of señor don juan’s estates, in a small island
 near the coast of cuba. my mother”—she raised her little hands
 eloquently—“was half-caste. do you know? and she and my father—”
 she looked pleadingly at val beverley.
 “i understand,” whispered the latter with deep sympathy; “but you don’t
 think it makes any difference, do you?”
 “no?” said mrs. camber with a quaint little gesture. “to you, perhaps not,
 but there, where i was born, oh! so much. well, then, my mother died when
 i was very little. ah tsong was her servant. there are many chinese in the
 west indies, you see, and i can just remember he carried me in to see her.
 of course i didn’t understand. my father quarrelled bitterly with the
 priests because they would not bury her in holy ground. i think he no
 longer believed afterward. i loved him very much. he was good to me; and i
 was a queen in that little island. all the negroes loved me, because of my
 mother, i think, who was partly descended from slaves, as they were. but i
 had not begun to understand how hard it was all going to be when my father
 sent me to a convent in cuba.
 “i hated to go, but while i was there i learned all about myself. i knew
 that i was outcast. it was”—she raised her hand—“not possible
 to stay. i was only fifteen when i came home, but all the same i was a
 woman. i was no more a child, and happy no longer. after a while, perhaps,
 when i forgot what i had suffered at the convent, i became less miserable.
 my father did all in his power to make me happy, and i was glad the
 work-people loved me. but i was very lonely. ah tsong understood.”
 her eyes filled with tears.
 “can you imagine,” she asked, “that when my father was away in distant
 parts of the island at night, ah tsong slept outside my door? some of them
 say, ‘do not trust the chinese’ i say, except my husband and my father, i
 have never known another one to trust but ah tsong. now they have taken
 him away from me.”
 tears glittered on her lashes, but she brushed them aside angrily, and
 continued:
 “i was still less than twenty, and looked, they told me, only fourteen,
 when señor menendez came to inspect his estate. i had never seen him
 before. there had been a rising in the island, in the year after i was
 born, and he had only just escaped with his life. he was hated. people
 called him devil menendez. especially, no woman was safe from him, and in
 the old days, when his power had been great, he had used it for
 wickedness.
 “my father was afraid when he heard he was coming. he would have sent me
 away, but before it could be arranged señor the colonel arrived. he had in
 his company a french lady. i thought her very beautiful and elegant. it
 was madame de stämer. it is only four years ago, a little more, but her
 hair was dark brown. she was splendidly dressed and such a wonderful
 horsewoman. the first time i saw her i felt as they had made me feel at
 the convent. i wanted to hide from her. she was so grand a lady, and i
 came from slaves.”
 she paused hesitatingly and stared down at her own tiny feet.
 “pardon me interrupting you, mrs. camber,” i said, “but can you tell me in
 what way these two are related?”
 she looked up with her naïve smile.
 “i can tell you, yes. a cousin of señor menendez married a sister of
 madame de stämer.”
 “good heavens!” i exclaimed, “a very remote kinship.”
 “it was in this way they met, in paris, i think, and”—she raised her
 hands expressively—“she came with him to the west indies, although
 it was during the great war. i think she loved him more than her soul, and
 me—me she hated. as señor menendez dismounted from his horse in
 front of the house he saw me.”
 she sighed and ceased speaking again. then:
 “that very night,” she continued, “he began. do you know? i was trying to
 escape from him when madame de stämer found us. she called me a shameful
 name, and my father, who heard it, ordered her out of the house. señor
 menendez spoke sharply, and my father struck him.”
 she paused once more, biting her lip agitatedly, but presently proceeded:
 “do you know what they are like, the spanish, when their blood is hot?
 senor menendez had a revolver, but my father knocked it from his grasp.
 then they fought with their bare hands. i was too frightened even to cry
 out. it was all a horrible dream. what madame de stämer did, i do not
 know. i could see nothing but two figures twined together on the floor. at
 last one of them arose. i saw it was my father, and i remember no more.”
 she was almost overcome by her tragic recollections, but presently, with a
 wonderful courage, which, together with her daintiness of form, spoke
 eloquently of good blood on one side at any rate, continued to speak:
 “my father found he must go to cuba to make arrangements for the future.
 of course, our life there was finished. ah tsong stayed with me. you have
 heard how it used to be in those islands in the old days, but now you
 think it is so different? i used to think it was different, too. on the
 first night my father was away, ah tsong, who had gone out, was so long
 returning i became afraid. then a strange negro came with news that he had
 been taken ill with cholera, and was lying at a place not far from the
 house. i forgot my fears and hurried off with this man. ah!”
 she laughed wildly.
 “i did not know i should never return, and i did not know i should never
 see my father again. to you this must seem all wild and strange, because
 there is a law in england. there is a law in cuba, too, but in some of
 those little islands the only law is the law of the strongest.”
 she raised her hands to her face and there was silence for a while.
 “of course it was a trap,” she presently continued. “i was taken to an
 island called el manas which belonged to senor menendez, and where he had
 a house. this he could do, but”—she threw back her head proudly—“my
 spirit he could not break. lots and lots of money would be mine, and
 estates of my own; but one thing about him i must tell: he never showed me
 violence. for one, two, three weeks i stayed a prisoner in his house. all
 the servants were faithful to him and i could not find a friend among
 them. although quite innocent, i was ruined. do you know?”
 she raised her eyes pathetically to val beverley.
 “i thought my heart was broken, for something told me my father was dead.
 this was true.”
 “what!” i exclaimed. “you don’t mean—”
 “i don’t know, i don’t know,” she answered, brokenly. “he died on his way
 to havana. they said it was an accident. well—at last, señor
 menendez offered me marriage. i thought if i agreed it would give me my
 freedom, and i could run away and find ah tsong.”
 she paused, and a flush coloured her delicate face and faded again,
 leaving it very pale.
 “we were married in the house, by a spanish priest. oh”—she raised
 her hands pathetically—“do you know what a woman is like? my spirit
 was not broken still, but crushed. i had now nothing but kindness and
 gifts. i might never have known, but senor menendez, who thought”—she
 smiled sadly—“i was beautiful, took me to cuba, where he had a great
 house. please remember, please,” she pleaded, “before you judge of me,
 that i was so young and had never known love, except the love of my
 father. i did not even dream, then, his death was not an accident.
 “i was proud of my jewels and fine dresses. but i began to notice that
 juan did not present any of his friends to me. we went about, but to
 strange places, never to visit people of his own kind, and none came to
 visit us. then one night i heard someone on the balcony of my room. i was
 so frightened i could not cry out. it was good i was like that, for the
 curtain was pulled open and ah tsong came in.”
 she clutched convulsively at the arms of her chair.
 “he told me!” she said in a very low voice.
 then, looking up pitifully:
 “do you know?” she asked in her quaint way. “it was a mock marriage. he
 had done it and thought no shame, because it was so with my mother. oh!”
 her beautiful eyes flashed, and for the first time since i had met ysola
 camber i saw the real spanish spirit of the woman leap to life.
 “he did not know me. perhaps i did not know myself. that night, with no
 money, without a ring, a piece of lace, a peseta, anything that had
 belonged to him, i went with ah tsong. we made our way to a half-sister of
 my father’s who lived in puerto principe, and at first—she would not
 have me. i was talked about, she said, in all the islands. she told me of
 my poor father. she told me i had dragged the name of de valera in the
 dirt. at last i made her understand—that what everyone else had
 known, i had never even dreamed of.”
 she looked up wistfully, as if thinking that we might doubt her.
 “do you know?” she whispered.
 “i know—oh! i know!” said val beverley. i loved her for the sympathy
 in her voice and in her eyes. “it is very, very brave of you to tell us
 this, mrs. camber.”
 “yes? do you think so?” asked the girl, simply. “what does it matter if it
 can help colin?
 “this aunt of mine,” she presently continued, “was a poor woman, and it
 was while i was hiding in her house—because spies of senor menendez
 were searching for me—that i met—my husband. he was studying
 in cuba the strange things he writes about, you see. and before i knew
 what had happened—i found i loved him more than all else in the
 world. it is so wonderful, that feeling,” she said, looking across at val
 beverley. “do you know?”
 the girl flushed deeply, and lowered her eyes, but made no reply.
 “because you are a woman, too, you will perhaps understand,” she resumed.
 “i did not tell him. i did not dare to tell him at first. i was so madly
 happy i had no courage to speak. but when”—her voice sank lower and
 lower—“he asked me to marry him, i told him. nothing he could ever
 do would change my love for him now, because he forgave me and made me his
 wife.”
 i feared that at last she was going to break down, for her voice became
 very tremulous and tears leapt again into her eyes. she conquered her
 emotion, however, and went on:
 “we crossed over to the states, and colin’s family who had heard of his
 marriage—some friend of señor menendez had told them—would not
 know us. it meant that colin, who would have been a rich man, was very
 poor. it made no difference. he was splendid. and i was so happy it was
 all like a dream. he made me forget i was to blame for his troubles. then
 we were in washington—and i saw señor menendez in the hotel!
 “oh, my heart stopped beating. for me it seemed like the end of
 everything. i knew, i knew, he was following me. but he had not seen me,
 and without telling colin the reason, i made him leave washington, he was
 glad to go. wherever we went, in america, they seemed to find out about my
 mother. i got to hate them, hate them all. we came to england, and colin
 heard about this house, and we took it.
 “at last we were really happy. no one knew us. because we were strange,
 and because of ah tsong, they looked at us very funny and kept away, but
 we did not care. then sir james appleton sold cray’s folly.”
 she looked up quickly.
 “how can i tell you? it must have been by ah tsong that he traced me to
 surrey. some spy had told him there was a chinaman living here. oh, i
 don’t know how he found out, but when i heard who was coming to cray’s
 folly i thought i should die.
 “something i must tell you now. when i had told my story to colin, one
 thing i had not told him, because i was afraid what he might do. i had not
 told him the name of the man who had caused me to suffer so much. on the
 day i first saw señor menendez walking in the garden of cray’s folly i
 knew i must tell my husband what he had so often asked me to tell him—the
 name of the man. i told him—and at first i thought he would go mad.
 he began to drink—do you know? it is a failing in his family. but
 because i knew—because i knew—i forgave him, and hoped, always
 hoped, that he would stop. he promised to do so. he had given up going out
 each day to drink, and was working again like he used to work—too
 hard, too hard, but it was better than the other way.”
 she stopped speaking, and suddenly, before i could divine her intention,
 dropped upon her knees, and raised her clasped hands to me.
 “he did not, he did not kill him!” she cried, passionately. “he did not! o
 god! i who love him tell you he did not! you think he did. you do—you
 do! i can see it in your eyes!”
 “believe me, mrs. camber,” i answered, deeply moved, “i don’t doubt your
 word for a moment.”
 she continued to look at me for a while, and then turned to val beverley.
 “you don’t think he did,” she sobbed, “do you?”
 she looked such a child, such a pretty, helpless child, as she knelt there
 on the carpet, that i felt a lump rising in my throat.
 val beverley dropped down impulsively beside her and put her arms around
 the slender shoulders.
 “of course i don’t,” she exclaimed, indignantly. “of course i don’t. it’s
 quite unthinkable.”
 “i know it is,” moaned the other, raising her tearful face. “i love him
 and know his great soul. but what do these others know, and they will
 never believe me.”
 “have courage,” i said. “it has never failed you yet. mr. paul harley has
 promised to clear him by to-night.”
 “he has promised?” she whispered, still kneeling and clutching val
 beverley tightly. she looked up at me with hope reborn in her beautiful
 eyes. “he has promised? oh, i thank him. may god bless him. i know he will
 succeed.”
 i turned aside, and walked out across the hall and into the empty study.
 i recognize that whosoever may have taken the trouble to follow my
 chronicle thus far will be little disposed to suffer any intrusion of my
 personal affairs at such a point. therefore i shall pass lightly over the
 walk back to cray’s folly, during which i contrived to learn much about
 val beverley’s personal history but little to advance the investigation
 which i was there to assist.
 as i had surmised, miss beverley had been amply provided for by her
 father, and was bound to madame de stämer by no other ties than those of
 friendship and esteem. very reluctantly i released her, on our returning
 to the house; for she, perforce, hurried off to madame’s room, leaving me
 looking after her in a state of delightful bewilderment, the significance
 of which i could not disguise from myself. the absurd suspicions of
 inspector aylesbury were forgotten; so was the shadow upon the blind of
 colonel menendez’s study. i only knew that love had come to me, an
 unbidden guest, to stay for ever.
 manoel informed me that a number of pressmen, not to be denied, had taken
 photographs of the tudor garden and of the spot where colonel menendez had
 been found, but pedro, following my instructions, had referred them all to
 market hilton.
 i was standing in the doorway talking to the man when i heard the drone of
 harley’s motor in the avenue, and a moment later he and wessex stepped out
 in front of the porch and joined me. i thought that wessex looked stern
 and rather confused, but harley was quite his old self, his keen eyes
 gleaming humorously, and an expression of geniality upon his tanned
 features.
 “hullo, knox!” he cried, “any developments?”
 “yes,” i said. “suppose we go up to your room and talk.”
 “good enough.”
 inspector wessex nodded without speaking, and the three of us mounted the
 staircase and entered paul harley’s room. harley seated himself upon the
 bed and began to load his pipe, whilst wessex, who seemed very restless,
 stood staring out of the window. i sat down in the armchair, and:
 “i have had an interesting interview with mrs. camber,” i said.
 “what?” exclaimed harley. “good. tell us all about it.”
 wessex turned, hands clasped behind him, and listened in silence to an
 account which i gave of my visit to the guest house. when i had finished:
 “it seems to me,” said the inspector, slowly, “that the only doubtful
 point in the case against camber is cleared up; namely, his motive.”
 “it certainly looks like it,” agreed harley. “but how strangely mrs.
 camber’s story differs from that of menendez although there are points of
 contact. i regret, however, that you were unable to settle the most
 important matter of all.”
 “you mean whether or not she had visited cray’s folly?”
 “exactly.”
 “then you still consider my theory to be correct?” i asked eagerly.
 “up to a point it has been proved to be,” he returned. “i must
 congratulate you upon a piece of really brilliant reasoning, knox. but
 respecting the most crucial moment of all, we are still without
 information, unfortunately. however, whilst the presence or otherwise, of
 mrs. camber in cray’s folly on the night preceding the tragedy may prove
 to bear intimately upon the case, an experiment which i propose to make
 presently will give the matter an entirely different significance.”
 “hm,” said wessex, doubtfully, “i am looking forward to this experiment of
 yours, mr. harley, with great interest. to be perfectly honest, i have no
 more idea than the man in the moon how you hope to clear camber.”
 “no,” replied harley, musingly, “the weight of evidence against him is
 crushing. but you are a man of great experience, wessex, in criminal
 investigations. tell me honestly, have you ever known a murder case in
 which there was such conclusive material for the prosecution?”
 “never,” replied the inspector, promptly. “in this respect, as in others,
 the case is unique.”
 “you have seen camber,” continued harley, “and have been enabled to form
 some sort of judgment respecting his character. you will admit that he is
 a clever man, brilliantly clever. keep this fact in mind. remember his
 studies, and he does not deny that they have included voodoo. remember his
 enquiries into the significance of bat wing. remember, as we now learn
 definitely from mrs. camber’s evidence, that he was in cuba at the same
 time as the late colonel menendez, and once, at least, actually in the
 same hotel in the united states. consider the rifle found under the floor
 of the hut; and, having weighed all these points judicially, wessex, tell
 me frankly, if in the whole course of your experience, you have ever met
 with a more perfect frame-up?”
 “what!” shouted wessex, in sudden excitement. “what!”
 “i said a frame-up,” repeated harley, quietly. “an american term, but one
 which will be familiar to you.”
 “good god!” muttered the detective, “you have turned all my ideas upside
 down.”
 “what may be termed the physical evidence,” continued harley, “is
 complete, i admit: too complete. there lies the weak spot. but what i will
 call the psychological evidence points in a totally different direction. a
 man clever enough to have planned this crime, and camber undoubtedly is
 such a man, could not—it is humanly impossible—have been fool
 enough, deliberately to lay such a train of damning facts. it’s a
 frame-up, wessex! i had begun to suspect this even before i met camber.
 having met him, i knew that i was right. then came an inspiration. i saw
 where there must be a flaw in the plan. it was geographically impossible
 that this could be otherwise.”
 “geographically impossible?” i said, in a hushed voice, for harley had
 truly astounded me.
 “geographical is the term, knox. i admit that the discovery of the rifle
 beneath the floor of the hut appalled me.”
 “i could see that it did.”
 “it was the crowning piece of evidence, knox, evidence of such fiendish
 cleverness on the part of those who had plotted menendez’s death that i
 began to wonder whether after all it would be possible to defeat them. i
 realized that camber’s life hung upon a hair. for the production of that
 rifle before a jury of twelve moderately stupid men and true could not
 fail to carry enormous weight. whereas the delicate point upon which my
 counter case rested might be more difficult to demonstrate in court.
 to-night, however, we shall put it to the test, and there are means, no
 doubt, which will occur to me later, of making its significance evident to
 one not acquainted with the locality. the press photographs, which i
 understand have been taken, may possibly help us in this.”
 bewildered by my friend’s revolutionary ideas, which explained the
 hitherto mysterious nature of his enquiries, i scarcely knew what to say;
 but:
 “if it’s a frame-up, mr. harley,” said wessex, “and the more i think about
 it the more it has that look to me, practically speaking, we have not yet
 started on the search for the murderer.”
 “we have not,” replied harley, grimly. “but i have a dawning idea of a
 method by which we shall be enabled to narrow down this enquiry.”
 it must be unnecessary for me to speak of the state of suppressed
 excitement in which we passed the remainder of that afternoon and evening.
 dr. rolleston called again to see madame de stämer, and reported that she
 was quite calm. in fact, he almost echoed val beverley’s words spoken
 earlier in the day.
 “she is unnaturally calm, mr. knox,” he said in confidence. “i understand
 that the dead man was a cousin, but i almost suspect that she was madly in
 love with him.”
 i nodded shortly, admiring his acute intelligence.
 “i think you are right, doctor,” i replied, “and if it is so, her amazing
 fortitude is all the more admirable.”
 “admirable?” he echoed. “as i said before, she has the courage of ten
 men.”
 a formal dinner was out of the question, of course; indeed, no one
 attempted to dress. val beverley excused herself, saying that she would
 dine in madame’s room, and harley, wessex, and i, partook of wine and
 sandwiches in the library.
 inspector aylesbury arrived about eight o’clock in a mood of repressed
 irritation. pedro showed him in to where the three of us were seated, and:
 “good evening, gentlemen,” said he, “here i am, as arranged, but as i am
 up to my eyes in work on the case, i will ask you, mr. harley, to carry
 out this experiment of yours as quickly as possible.”
 “no time shall be lost,” replied my friend, quietly. “may i request you to
 accompany detective-inspector wessex and mr. knox to the guest house by
 the high road? do not needlessly alarm mrs. camber. indeed, i think you
 might confine your attention to mrs. powis. merely request permission to
 walk down the garden to the hut, and be good enough to wait there until i
 join you, which will be in a few minutes after your arrival.”
 inspector aylesbury uttered an inarticulate, grunting sound, but i, who
 knew harley so well, could see that he felt himself to be upon the eve of
 a signal triumph. what he proposed to do, i had no idea, save that it was
 designed to clear colin camber. i prayed that it might also clear his
 pathetic girl-wife; and in a sort of gloomy silence i set out with wessex
 and aylesbury, down the drive, past the lodge, which seemed to be deserted
 to-night, and along the tree-lined high road, cool and sweet in the dusk
 of evening.
 aylesbury was very morose, and wessex, who had lighted his pipe, did not
 seem to be in a talkative mood either. he had the utmost faith in paul
 harley, but it was evident enough that he was oppressed by the weight of
 evidence against camber. i divined the fact that he was turning over in
 his mind the idea of the frame-up, and endeavouring to re-adjust the
 established facts in accordance with this new point of view.
 we were admitted to the guest house by mrs. powis, a cheery old soul; one
 of those born optimists whose special task in life seems to be that of a
 friend in need.
 as she opened the door, she smiled, shook her head, and raised her finger
 to her lips.
 “be as quiet as you can, sir,” she said. “i have got her to sleep.”
 she spoke of mrs. camber as one refers to a child, and, quite
 understanding her anxiety:
 “there will be no occasion to disturb her, mrs. powis,” i replied. “we
 merely wish to walk down to the bottom of the garden to make a few
 enquiries.”
 “yes, gentlemen,” she whispered, quietly closing the door as we all
 entered the hall.
 she led us through the rear portion of the house, and past the quarters of
 ah tsong into that neglected garden which i remembered so well.
 “there you are, sir, and may heaven help you to find the truth.”
 “rest assured that the truth will be found, mrs. powis,” i answered.
 inspector aylesbury cleared his throat, but wessex, puffing at his pipe,
 made no remark whatever until we were all come to the hut overhanging the
 little ravine.
 “this is where i found the rifle, detective-inspector,” explained
 aylesbury.
 wessex nodded absently.
 it was another perfect night, with only a faint tracery of cloud to be
 seen like lingering smoke over on the western horizon. everything seemed
 very still, so that although we were several miles from the railway line,
 when presently a train sped on its way one might have supposed, from the
 apparent nearness of the sound, that the track was no farther off than the
 grounds of cray’s folly.
 toward those grounds, automatically, our glances were drawn; and we stood
 there staring down at the ghostly map of the gardens, and all wondering,
 no doubt, what harley was doing and when he would be joining us.
 very faintly i could hear the water of the little stream bubbling beneath
 us. then, just as this awkward silence was becoming intolerable, there
 came a scraping and scratching from the shadows of the gully, and:
 “give me a hand, knox!” cried the voice of harley from below. “i want to
 avoid the barbed wire if possible.”
 he had come across country, and as i scrambled down the slope to meet him
 i could not help wondering with what object he had sent us ahead by the
 high road. presently, when he came clambering up into the garden, this in
 a measure was explained, for:
 “you are all wondering,” he began, rapidly, “what i am up to, no doubt.
 let me endeavour to make it clear. in order that my test should be
 conclusive, and in no way influenced by pre-knowledge of certain
 arrangements which i had made, i sent you on ahead of me. not wishing to
 waste time, i followed by the shorter route. and now, gentlemen, let us
 begin.”
 “good,” muttered inspector aylesbury.
 “but first of all,” continued harley, “i wish each one of you in turn to
 look out of the window of the hut, and down into the tudor garden of
 cray’s folly. will you begin, wessex?”
 wessex, taking his pipe out of his mouth, and staring hard at the speaker,
 nodded, entered the hut, and kneeling on the wooden seat, looked out of
 the window.
 “open the panes,” said harley, “so that you have a perfectly clear view.”
 wessex slid the panes open and stared intently down into the valley.
 “do you see anything unusual in the garden?”
 “nothing,” he reported.
 “and now, inspector aylesbury.”
 inspector aylesbury stamped noisily across the little hut, and peered out,
 briefly.
 “i can see the garden,” he said.
 “can you see the sun-dial?”
 “quite clearly.”
 “good. and now you, knox.”
 i followed, filled with astonishment.
 “do you see the sun-dial?” asked harley, again.
 “quite clearly.”
 “and beyond it?”
 “yes, i can see beyond it. i can even see its shadow lying like a black
 band on the path.”
 “and you can see the yew trees?”
 “of course.”
 “but nothing else? nothing unusual?”
 “nothing.”
 “very well,” said harley, tersely. “and now, gentlemen, we take to the
 rough ground, proceeding due east. will you be good enough to follow?”
 walking around the hut he found an opening in the hedge, and scrambled
 down into the place where rank grass grew and through which he and i on a
 previous occasion had made our way to the high road. to-night, however, he
 did not turn toward the high road, but proceeded along the crest of the
 hill.
 i followed him, excited by the novelty of the proceedings. wessex, very
 silent, came behind me, and inspector aylesbury, swearing under his
 breath, waded through the long grass at the rear.
 “will you all turn your attention to the garden again, please?” cried
 harley.
 we all paused, looking to the right.
 “anything unusual?”
 we were agreed that there was not.
 “very well,” said my friend. “you will kindly note that from this point
 onward the formation of the ground prevents our obtaining any other view
 of cray’s folly or its gardens until we reach the path to the valley, or
 turn on to the high road. from a point on the latter the tower may be seen
 but that is all. the first part of my experiment is concluded, gentlemen.
 we will now return.”
 giving us no opportunity for comment, he plunged on in the direction of
 the stream, and at a point which i regarded as unnecessarily difficult,
 crossed it, to the great discomfiture of the heavy inspector aylesbury. a
 few minutes later we found ourselves once more in the grounds of cray’s
 folly.
 harley, evidently with a definite objective in view, led the way up the
 terraces, through the rhododendrons, and round the base of the tower. he
 crossed to the sunken garden, and at the top of the steps paused.
 “be good enough to regard the sun-dial from this point,” he directed.
 even as he spoke, i caught my breath, and i heard aylesbury utter a sort
 of gasping sound.
 beyond the sun-dial and slightly to the left of it, viewed from where we
 stood, a faint, elfin light flickered, at a point apparently some four or
 five feet above the ground!
 “what’s this?” muttered wessex.
 “follow again, gentlemen,” said harley quietly.
 he led the way down to the garden and along the path to the sun-dial. this
 he passed, pausing immediately in front of the yew tree in which i knew
 the bullet to be embedded.
 he did not speak, but, extending his finger, pointed.
