 him said:
 “what is this that you have them shut up there within?”
 smiley said, with an air indifferent:
 “that could be a paroquet, or a syringe (ou un serin), but this no
 is nothing of such, it not is but a frog.”
 the individual it took, it regarded with care, it turned from one side and
 from the other, then he said:
 “tiens! in effect!—at what is she good?”
 “my god!” respond smiley, always with an air disengaged,
 “she is good for one thing, to my notice (à mon avis), she
 can batter in jumping (elle peut battre en sautant) all frogs of the
 county of calaveras.”
 the individual retook the box, it examined of new longly, and it rendered
 to smiley in saying with an air deliberate:
 “eh bien! i no saw not that that frog had nothing of better than
 each frog.” (je ne vois pas que cette grenouille ait rien de mieux
 qu’aucune grenouille.) [if that isn’t grammar gone to seed,
 then i count myself no judge.—m. t.]
 “possible that you not it saw not,” said smiley, “possible
 that you—you comprehend frogs; possible that you not you there
 comprehend nothing; possible that you had of the experience, and possible
 that you not be but an amateur. of all manner (de toute manière) i
 bet forty dollars that she batter in jumping no matter which frog of the
 county of calaveras.”
 the individual reflected a second, and said like sad:
 “i not am but a stranger here, i no have not a frog; but if i of it
 had one, i would embrace the bet.”
 “strong well!” respond smiley; “nothing of more
 facility. if you will hold my box a minute, i go you to search a frog (j’irai
 vous chercher).”
 behold, then, the individual, who guards the box, who puts his forty
 dollars upon those of smiley, and who attends (et qui attend). he attended
 enough long times, reflecting all solely. and figure you that he takes
 daniel, him opens the mouth by force and with a teaspoon him fills with
 shot of the hunt, even him fills just to the chin, then he him puts by the
 earth. smiley during these times was at slopping in a swamp. finally he
 trapped (attrape) a frog, him carried to that individual, and said:
 “now if you be ready, put him all against daniel with their before
 feet upon the same line, and i give the signal”—then he added:
 “one, two, three—advance!”
 him and the individual touched their frogs by behind, and the frog new put
 to jump smartly, but daniel himself lifted ponderously, exalted the
 shoulders thus, like a frenchman—to what good? he not could budge,
 he is planted solid like a church, he not advance no more than if one him
 had put at the anchor.
 smiley was surprised and disgusted, but he no himself doubted not of the
 turn being intended (mais il ne se doutait pas du tour, bien entendu). the
 individual empocketed the silver, himself with it went, and of it himself
 in going is it that he no gives not a jerk of thumb over the shoulder—like
 that—at the poor daniel, in saying with his air deliberate—(l’individu
 empoche l’argent, s’en va et en s’en allant est-ce qu’il
 ne donne pas un coup de pouce par-dessus l'épaule, comme
 ça, au pauvre daniel, en disant de son air délibéré):
 “eh bien! i no see not that that frog has nothing of better than
 another.”
 smiley himself scratched longtimes the head, the eyes fixed upon daniel,
 until that which at last he said:
 “i me demand how the devil it makes itself that this beast has
 refused. is it that she had something? one would believe that she is
 stuffed.”
 he grasped daniel by the skin of the neck, him lifted and said:
 “the wolf me bite if he no weigh not five pounds:”
 he him reversed and the unhappy belched two handfuls of shot (et le
 malheureux, etc.). when smiley recognized how it was, he was like mad. he
 deposited his frog by the earth and ran after that individual, but he not
 him caught never.
 such is the jumping frog, to the distorted french eye. i claim that i
 never put together such an odious mixture of bad grammar and delirium
 tremens in my life. and what has a poor foreigner like me done, to be
 abused and misrepresented like this? when i say, “well, i don’t
 see no p’ints about that frog that’s any better’n any
 other frog,” is it kind, is it just, for this frenchman to try to
 make it appear that i said, “eh bien! i no saw not that that frog
 had nothing of better than each frog”? i have no heart to write
 more. i never felt so about anything before.
 hartford, march, .
 [written about ]
 the editor of the memphis avalanche swoops thus mildly down upon a
 correspondent who posted him as a radical:—“while he was
 writing the first word, the middle, dotting his i’s, crossing his
 t’s, and punching his period, he knew he was concocting a sentence
 that was saturated with infamy and reeking with falsehood.”—exchange.
 i was told by the physician that a southern climate would improve my
 health, and so i went down to tennessee, and got a berth on the morning
 glory and johnson county war-whoop as associate editor. when i went on
 duty i found the chief editor sitting tilted back in a three-legged chair
 with his feet on a pine table. there was another pine table in the room
 and another afflicted chair, and both were half buried under newspapers
 and scraps and sheets of manuscript. there was a wooden box of sand,
 sprinkled with cigar stubs and “old soldiers,” and a stove
 with a door hanging by its upper hinge. the chief editor had a long-tailed
 black cloth frock-coat on, and white linen pants. his boots were small and
 neatly blacked. he wore a ruffled shirt, a large seal-ring, a standing
 collar of obsolete pattern, and a checkered neckerchief with the ends
 hanging down. date of costume about . he was smoking a cigar, and
 trying to think of a word, and in pawing his hair he had rumpled his locks
 a good deal. he was scowling fearfully, and i judged that he was
 concocting a particularly knotty editorial. he told me to take the
 exchanges and skim through them and write up the “spirit of the
 tennessee press,” condensing into the article all of their contents
 that seemed of interest.
 i wrote as follows:
 the editors of the semi-weekly earthquake evidently labor under a
 misapprehension with regard to the ballyhack railroad. it is not the
 object of the company to leave buzzardville off to one side. on the
 contrary, they consider it one of the most important points along the
 line, and consequently can have no desire to slight it. the gentlemen of
 the earthquake will, of course, take pleasure in making the correction.
 john w. blossom, esq., the able editor of the higginsville
 thunderbolt and battle cry of freedom, arrived in the city yesterday. he
 is stopping at the van buren house. we observe that our
 contemporary of the mud springs morning howl has fallen into the error
 of supposing that the election of van werter is not an established fact,
 but he will have discovered his mistake before this reminder reaches
 him, no doubt. he was doubtless misled by incomplete election returns.
 it is pleasant to note that the city of blathersville is
 endeavoring to contract with some new york gentlemen to pave its
 well-nigh impassable streets with the nicholson pavement. the daily
 hurrah urges the measure with ability, and seems confident of ultimate
 success.
 i passed my manuscript over to the chief editor for acceptance,
 alteration, or destruction. he glanced at it and his face clouded. he ran
 his eye down the pages, and his countenance grew portentous. it was easy
 to see that something was wrong. presently he sprang up and said:
 “thunder and lightning! do you suppose i am going to speak of those
 cattle that way? do you suppose my subscribers are going to stand such
 gruel as that? give me the pen!”
 i never saw a pen scrape and scratch its way so viciously, or plow through
 another man’s verbs and adjectives so relentlessly. while he was in
 the midst of his work, somebody shot at him through the open window, and
 marred the symmetry of my ear.
 “ah,” said he, “that is that scoundrel smith, of the
 moral volcano—he was due yesterday.” and he snatched a navy
 revolver from his belt and fired—smith dropped, shot in the thigh.
 the shot spoiled smith’s aim, who was just taking a second chance
 and he crippled a stranger. it was me. merely a finger shot off.
 then the chief editor went on with his erasure; and interlineations. just
 as he finished them a hand grenade came down the stove-pipe, and the
 explosion shivered the stove into a thousand fragments. however, it did no
 further damage, except that a vagrant piece knocked a couple of my teeth
 out.
 “that stove is utterly ruined,” said the chief editor.
 i said i believed it was.
 “well, no matter—don’t want it this kind of weather. i
 know the man that did it. i’ll get him. now, here is the way this
 stuff ought to be written.”
 i took the manuscript. it was scarred with erasures and interlineations
 till its mother wouldn’t have known it if it had had one. it now
 read as follows:
 the inveterate liars of the semi-weekly earthquake are evidently
 endeavoring to palm off upon a noble and chivalrous people another of
 their vile and brutal falsehoods with regard to that most glorious
 conception of the nineteenth century, the ballyhack railroad. the idea
 that buzzardville was to be left off at one side originated in their own
 fulsome brains—or rather in the settlings which they regard as
 brains. they had better swallow this lie if they want to save their
 abandoned reptile carcasses the cowhiding they so richly deserve.
 that ass, blossom, of the higginsville thunderbolt and battle cry
 of freedom, is down here again sponging at the van buren. we
 observe that the besotted blackguard of the mud springs morning howl is
 giving out, with his usual propensity for lying, that van werter is not
 elected. the heaven-born mission of journalism is to disseminate truth;
 to eradicate error; to educate, refine, and elevate the tone of public
 morals and manners, and make all men more gentle, more virtuous, more
 charitable, and in all ways better, and holier, and happier; and yet
 this blackhearted scoundrel degrades his great office persistently to
 the dissemination of falsehood, calumny, vituperation, and vulgarity.
 blathersville wants a nicholson pavement—it wants a jail and
 a poorhouse more. the idea of a pavement in a one-horse town composed of
 two gin-mills, a blacksmith shop, and that mustard-plaster of a
 newspaper, the daily hurrah! the crawling insect, buckner, who edits the
 hurrah, is braying about his business with his customary imbecility, and
 imagining that he is talking sense.
 “now that is the way to write—peppery and to the point.
 mush-and-milk journalism gives me the fan-tods.”
 about this time a brick came through the window with a splintering crash,
 and gave me a considerable of a jolt in the back. i moved out of range—i
 began to feel in the way.
 the chief said, “that was the colonel, likely. i’ve been
 expecting him for two days. he will be up now right away.”
 he was correct. the colonel appeared in the door a moment afterward with a
 dragoon revolver in his hand.
 he said, “sir, have i the honor of addressing the poltroon who edits
 this mangy sheet?”
 “you have. be seated, sir. be careful of the chair, one of its legs
 is gone. i believe i have the honor of addressing the putrid liar, colonel
 blatherskite tecumseh?”
 “right, sir. i have a little account to settle with you. if you are
 at leisure we will begin.”
 “i have an article on the ‘encouraging progress of moral and
 intellectual development in america’ to finish, but there is no
 hurry. begin.”
 both pistols rang out their fierce clamor at the same instant. the chief
 lost a lock of his hair, and the colonel’s bullet ended its career
 in the fleshy part of my thigh. the colonel’s left shoulder was
 clipped a little. they fired again. both missed their men this time, but i
 got my share, a shot in the arm. at the third fire both gentlemen were
 wounded slightly, and i had a knuckle chipped. i then said, i believed i
 would go out and take a walk, as this was a private matter, and i had a
 delicacy about participating in it further. but both gentlemen begged me
 to keep my seat, and assured me that i was not in the way.
 they then talked about the elections and the crops while they reloaded,
 and i fell to tying up my wounds. but presently they opened fire again
 with animation, and every shot took effect—but it is proper to
 remark that five out of the six fell to my share. the sixth one mortally
 wounded the colonel, who remarked, with fine humor, that he would have to
 say good morning now, as he had business uptown. he then inquired the way
 to the undertaker’s and left.
 the chief turned to me and said, “i am expecting company to dinner,
 and shall have to get ready. it will be a favor to me if you will read
 proof and attend to the customers.”
 i winced a little at the idea of attending to the customers, but i was too
 bewildered by the fusillade that was still ringing in my ears to think of
 anything to say.
 he continued, “jones will be here at three—cowhide him.
 gillespie will call earlier, perhaps—throw him out of the window.
 ferguson will be along about four—kill him. that is all for today, i
 believe. if you have any odd time, you may write a blistering article on
 the police—give the chief inspector rats. the cowhides are under the
 table; weapons in the drawer—ammunition there in the corner—lint
 and bandages up there in the pigeonholes. in case of accident, go to
 lancet, the surgeon, downstairs. he advertises—we take it out in
 trade.”
 he was gone. i shuddered. at the end of the next three hours i had been
 through perils so awful that all peace of mind and all cheerfulness were
 gone from me. gillespie had called and thrown me out of the window. jones
 arrived promptly, and when i got ready to do the cowhiding he took the job
 off my hands. in an encounter with a stranger, not in the bill of fare, i
 had lost my scalp. another stranger, by the name of thompson, left me a
 mere wreck and ruin of chaotic rags. and at last, at bay in the corner,
 and beset by an infuriated mob of editors, blacklegs, politicians, and
 desperadoes, who raved and swore and flourished their weapons about my
 head till the air shimmered with glancing flashes of steel, i was in the
 act of resigning my berth on the paper when the chief arrived, and with
 him a rabble of charmed and enthusiastic friends. then ensued a scene of
 riot and carnage such as no human pen, or steel one either, could
 describe. people were shot, probed, dismembered, blown up, thrown out of
 the window. there was a brief tornado of murky blasphemy, with a confused
 and frantic war-dance glimmering through it, and then all was over. in
 five minutes there was silence, and the gory chief and i sat alone and
 surveyed the sanguinary ruin that strewed the floor around us.
 he said, “you’ll like this place when you get used to it.”
 i said, “i’ll have to get you to excuse me; i think maybe i
 might write to suit you after a while; as soon as i had had some practice
 and learned the language i am confident i could. but, to speak the plain
 truth, that sort of energy of expression has its inconveniences, and a man
 is liable to interruption.
 “you see that yourself. vigorous writing is calculated to elevate
 the public, no doubt, but then i do not like to attract so much attention
 as it calls forth. i can’t write with comfort when i am interrupted
 so much as i have been to-day. i like this berth well enough, but i don’t
 like to be left here to wait on the customers. the experiences are novel,
 i grant you, and entertaining, too, after a fashion, but they are not
 judiciously distributed. a gentleman shoots at you through the window and
 cripples me; a bombshell comes down the stove-pipe for your gratification
 and sends the stove door down my throat; a friend drops in to swap
 compliments with you, and freckles me with bullet-holes till my skin won’t
 hold my principles; you go to dinner, and jones comes with his cowhide,
 gillespie throws me out of the window, thompson tears all my clothes off,
 and an entire stranger takes my scalp with the easy freedom of an old
 acquaintance; and in less than five minutes all the blackguards in the
 country arrive in their war-paint, and proceed to scare the rest of me to
 death with their tomahawks. take it altogether, i never had such a
 spirited time in all my life as i have had to-day. no; i like you, and i
 like your calm unruffled way of explaining things to the customers, but
 you see i am not used to it. the southern heart is too impulsive; southern
 hospitality is too lavish with the stranger. the paragraphs which i have
 written to-day, and into whose cold sentences your masterly hand has
 infused the fervent spirit of tennesseean journalism, will wake up another
 nest of hornets. all that mob of editors will come—and they will
 come hungry, too, and want somebody for breakfast. i shall have to bid you
 adieu. i decline to be present at these festivities. i came south for my
 health, i will go back on the same errand, and suddenly. tennesseean
 journalism is too stirring for me.”
 after which we parted with mutual regret, and i took apartments at the
 hospital.
 [written about ]
 once there was a bad little boy whose name was jim—though, if you
 will notice, you will find that bad little boys are nearly always called
 james in your sunday-school books. it was strange, but still it was true,
 that this one was called jim.
 he didn’t have any sick mother, either—a sick mother who was
 pious and had the consumption, and would be glad to lie down in the grave
 and be at rest but for the strong love she bore her boy, and the anxiety
 she felt that the world might be harsh and cold toward him when she was
 gone. most bad boys in the sunday books are named james, and have sick
 mothers, who teach them to say, “now, i lay me down,” etc.,
 and sing them to sleep with sweet, plaintive voices, and then kiss them
 good night, and kneel down by the bedside and weep. but it was different
 with this fellow. he was named jim, and there wasn’t anything the
 matter with his mother—no consumption, nor anything of that kind.
 she was rather stout than otherwise, and she was not pious; moreover, she
 was not anxious on jim’s account. she said if he were to break his
 neck it wouldn’t be much loss. she always spanked jim to sleep, and
 she never kissed him good night; on the contrary, she boxed his ears when
 she was ready to leave him.
 once this little bad boy stole the key of the pantry, and slipped in there
 and helped himself to some jam, and filled up the vessel with tar, so that
 his mother would never know the difference; but all at once a terrible
 feeling didn’t come over him, and something didn’t seem to
 whisper to him, “is it right to disobey my mother? isn’t it
 sinful to do this? where do bad little boys go who gobble up their good
 kind mother’s jam?” and then he didn’t kneel down all
 alone and promise never to be wicked any more, and rise up with a light,
 happy heart, and go and tell his mother all about it, and beg her
 forgiveness, and be blessed by her with tears of pride and thankfulness in
 her eyes. no; that is the way with all other bad boys in the books; but it
 happened otherwise with this jim, strangely enough. he ate that jam, and
 said it was bully, in his sinful, vulgar way; and he put in the tar, and
 said that was bully also, and laughed, and observed “that the old
 woman would get up and snort” when she found it out; and when she
 did find it out, he denied knowing anything about it, and she whipped him
 severely, and he did the crying himself. everything about this boy was
 curious—everything turned out differently with him from the way it
 does to the bad jameses in the books.
 once he climbed up in farmer acorn’s apple tree to steal apples, and
 the limb didn’t break, and he didn’t fall and break his arm,
 and get torn by the farmer’s great dog, and then languish on a
 sickbed for weeks, and repent and become good. oh, no; he stole as many
 apples as he wanted and came down all right; and he was all ready for the
 dog, too, and knocked him endways with a brick when he came to tear him.
 it was very strange—nothing like it ever happened in those mild
 little books with marbled backs, and with pictures in them of men with
 swallow-tailed coats and bell-crowned hats, and pantaloons that are short
 in the legs, and women with the waists of their dresses under their arms,
 and no hoops on. nothing like it in any of the sunday-school books.
 once he stole the teacher’s penknife, and, when he was afraid it
 would be found out and he would get whipped, he slipped it into george
 wilson’s cap—poor widow wilson’s son, the moral boy, the
 good little boy of the village, who always obeyed his mother, and never
 told an untruth, and was fond of his lessons, and infatuated with
 sunday-school. and when the knife dropped from the cap, and poor george
 hung his head and blushed, as if in conscious guilt, and the grieved
 teacher charged the theft upon him, and was just in the very act of
 bringing the switch down upon his trembling shoulders, a white-haired,
 improbable justice of the peace did not suddenly appear in their midst,
 and strike an attitude and say, “spare this noble boy—there
 stands the cowering culprit! i was passing the school door at recess, and,
 unseen myself, i saw the theft committed!” and then jim didn’t
 get whaled, and the venerable justice didn’t read the tearful school
 a homily, and take george by the hand and say such a boy deserved to be
 exalted, and then tell him to come and make his home with him, and sweep
 out the office, and make fires, and run errands, and chop wood, and study
 law, and help his wife do household labors, and have all the balance of
 the time to play, and get forty cents a month, and be happy. no; it would
 have happened that way in the books, but didn’t happen that way to
 jim. no meddling old clam of a justice dropped in to make trouble, and so
 the model boy george got thrashed, and jim was glad of it because, you
 know, jim hated moral boys. jim said he was “down on them milksops.”
 such was the coarse language of this bad, neglected boy.
 but the strangest thing that ever happened to jim was the time he went
 boating on sunday, and didn’t get drowned, and that other time that
 he got caught out in the storm when he was fishing on sunday, and didn’t
 get struck by lightning. why, you might look, and look, all through the
 sunday-school books from now till next christmas, and you would never come
 across anything like this. oh, no; you would find that all the bad boys
 who go boating on sunday invariably get drowned; and all the bad boys who
 get caught out in storms when they are fishing on sunday infallibly get
 struck by lightning. boats with bad boys in them always upset on sunday,
 and it always storms when bad boys go fishing on the sabbath. how this jim
 ever escaped is a mystery to me.
 this jim bore a charmed life—that must have been the way of it.
 nothing could hurt him. he even gave the elephant in the menagerie a plug
 of tobacco, and the elephant didn’t knock the top of his head off
 with his trunk. he browsed around the cupboard after essence-of
 peppermint, and didn’t make a mistake and drink aqua fortis. he
 stole his father’s gun and went hunting on the sabbath, and didn’t
 shoot three or four of his fingers off. he struck his little sister on the
 temple with his fist when he was angry, and she didn’t linger in
 pain through long summer days, and die with sweet words of forgiveness
 upon her lips that redoubled the anguish of his breaking heart. no; she
 got over it. he ran off and went to sea at last, and didn’t come
 back and find himself sad and alone in the world, his loved ones sleeping
 in the quiet churchyard, and the vine-embowered home of his boyhood
 tumbled down and gone to decay. ah, no; he came home as drunk as a piper,
 and got into the station-house the first thing.
 and he grew up and married, and raised a large family, and brained them
 all with an ax one night, and got wealthy by all manner of cheating and
 rascality; and now he is the infernalest wickedest scoundrel in his native
 village, and is universally respected, and belongs to the legislature.
 so you see there never was a bad james in the sunday-school books that had
 such a streak of luck as this sinful jim with the charmed life.
 [written about ]
 once there was a good little boy by the name of jacob blivens. he always
 obeyed his parents, no matter how absurd and unreasonable their demands
 were; and he always learned his book, and never was late at
 sabbath-school. he would not play hookey, even when his sober judgment
 told him it was the most profitable thing he could do. none of the other
 boys could ever make that boy out, he acted so strangely. he wouldn’t
 lie, no matter how convenient it was. he just said it was wrong to lie,
 and that was sufficient for him. and he was so honest that he was simply
 ridiculous. the curious ways that that jacob had, surpassed everything. he
 wouldn’t play marbles on sunday, he wouldn’t rob birds’
 nests, he wouldn’t give hot pennies to organ-grinders’
 monkeys; he didn’t seem to take any interest in any kind of rational
 amusement. so the other boys used to try to reason it out and come to an
 understanding of him, but they couldn’t arrive at any satisfactory
 conclusion. as i said before, they could only figure out a sort of vague
 idea that he was “afflicted,” and so they took him under their
 protection, and never allowed any harm to come to him.
 this good little boy read all the sunday-school books; they were his
 greatest delight. this was the whole secret of it. he believed in the good
 little boys they put in the sunday-school books; he had every confidence
 in them. he longed to come across one of them alive once; but he never
 did. they all died before his time, maybe. whenever he read about a
 particularly good one he turned over quickly to the end to see what became
 of him, because he wanted to travel thousands of miles and gaze on him;
 but it wasn’t any use; that good little boy always died in the last
 chapter, and there was a picture of the funeral, with all his relations
 and the sunday-school children standing around the grave in pantaloons
 that were too short, and bonnets that were too large, and everybody crying
 into handkerchiefs that had as much as a yard and a half of stuff in them.
 he was always headed off in this way. he never could see one of those good
 little boys on account of his always dying in the last chapter.
 jacob had a noble ambition to be put in a sunday school book. he wanted to
 be put in, with pictures representing him gloriously declining to lie to
 his mother, and her weeping for joy about it; and pictures representing
 him standing on the doorstep giving a penny to a poor beggar-woman with
 six children, and telling her to spend it freely, but not to be
 extravagant, because extravagance is a sin; and pictures of him
 magnanimously refusing to tell on the bad boy who always lay in wait for
 him around the corner as he came from school, and welted him over the head
 with a lath, and then chased him home, saying, “hi! hi!” as he
 proceeded. that was the ambition of young jacob blivens. he wished to be
 put in a sunday-school book. it made him feel a little uncomfortable
 sometimes when he reflected that the good little boys always died. he
 loved to live, you know, and this was the most unpleasant feature about
 being a sunday-school-book boy. he knew it was not healthy to be good. he
 knew it was more fatal than consumption to be so supernaturally good as
 the boys in the books were he knew that none of them had ever been able to
 stand it long, and it pained him to think that if they put him in a book
 he wouldn’t ever see it, or even if they did get the book out before
 he died it wouldn’t be popular without any picture of his funeral in
 the back part of it. it couldn’t be much of a sunday-school book
 that couldn’t tell about the advice he gave to the community when he
 was dying. so at last, of course, he had to make up his mind to do the
 best he could under the circumstances—to live right, and hang on as
 long as he could, and have his dying speech all ready when his time came.
 but somehow nothing ever went right with the good little boy; nothing ever
 turned out with him the way it turned out with the good little boys in the
 books. they always had a good time, and the bad boys had the broken legs;
 but in his case there was a screw loose somewhere, and it all happened
 just the other way. when he found jim blake stealing apples, and went
 under the tree to read to him about the bad little boy who fell out of a
 neighbor’s apple tree and broke his arm, jim fell out of the tree,
 too, but he fell on him and broke his arm, and jim wasn’t hurt at
 all. jacob couldn’t understand that. there wasn’t anything in
 the books like it.
 and once, when some bad boys pushed a blind man over in the mud, and jacob
 ran to help him up and receive his blessing, the blind man did not give
 him any blessing at all, but whacked him over the head with his stick and
 said he would like to catch him shoving him again, and then pretending to
 help him up. this was not in accordance with any of the books. jacob
 looked them all over to see.
 one thing that jacob wanted to do was to find a lame dog that hadn’t
 any place to stay, and was hungry and persecuted, and bring him home and
 pet him and have that dog’s imperishable gratitude. and at last he
 found one and was happy; and he brought him home and fed him, but when he
 was going to pet him the dog flew at him and tore all the clothes off him
 except those that were in front, and made a spectacle of him that was
 astonishing. he examined authorities, but he could not understand the
 matter. it was of the same breed of dogs that was in the books, but it
 acted very differently. whatever this boy did he got into trouble. the
 very things the boys in the books got rewarded for turned out to be about
 the most unprofitable things he could invest in.
 once, when he was on his way to sunday-school, he saw some bad boys
 starting off pleasuring in a sailboat. he was filled with consternation,
 because he knew from his reading that boys who went sailing on sunday
 invariably got drowned. so he ran out on a raft to warn them, but a log
 turned with him and slid him into the river. a man got him out pretty
 soon, and the doctor pumped the water out of him, and gave him a fresh
 start with his bellows, but he caught cold and lay sick abed nine weeks.
 but the most unaccountable thing about it was that the bad boys in the
 boat had a good time all day, and then reached home alive and well in the
 most surprising manner. jacob blivens said there was nothing like these
 things in the books. he was perfectly dumfounded.
 when he got well he was a little discouraged, but he resolved to keep on
 trying anyhow. he knew that so far his experiences wouldn’t do to go
 in a book, but he hadn’t yet reached the allotted term of life for
 good little boys, and he hoped to be able to make a record yet if he could
 hold on till his time was fully up. if everything else failed he had his
 dying speech to fall back on.
 he examined his authorities, and found that it was now time for him to go
 to sea as a cabin-boy. he called on a ship-captain and made his
 application, and when the captain asked for his recommendations he proudly
 drew out a tract and pointed to the word, “to jacob blivens, from
 his affectionate teacher.” but the captain was a coarse, vulgar man,
 and he said, “oh, that be blowed! that wasn’t any proof that
 he knew how to wash dishes or handle a slush-bucket, and he guessed he
 didn’t want him.” this was altogether the most extraordinary
 thing that ever happened to jacob in all his life. a compliment from a
 teacher, on a tract, had never failed to move the tenderest emotions of
 ship-captains, and open the way to all offices of honor and profit in
 their gift—it never had in any book that ever he had read. he could
 hardly believe his senses.
 this boy always had a hard time of it. nothing ever came out according to
 the authorities with him. at last, one day, when he was around hunting up
 bad little boys to admonish, he found a lot of them in the old
 iron-foundry fixing up a little joke on fourteen or fifteen dogs, which
 they had tied together in long procession, and were going to ornament with
 empty nitroglycerin cans made fast to their tails. jacob’s heart was
 touched. he sat down on one of those cans (for he never minded grease when
 duty was before him), and he took hold of the foremost dog by the collar,
 and turned his reproving eye upon wicked tom jones. but just at that
 moment alderman mcwelter, full of wrath, stepped in. all the bad boys ran
 away, but jacob blivens rose in conscious innocence and began one of those
 stately little sunday-school-book speeches which always commence with
 “oh, sir!” in dead opposition to the fact that no boy, good or
 bad, ever starts a remark with “oh, sir.” but the alderman
 never waited to hear the rest. he took jacob blivens by the ear and turned
 him around, and hit him a whack in the rear with the flat of his hand; and
 in an instant that good little boy shot out through the roof and soared
 away toward the sun, with the fragments of those fifteen dogs stringing
 after him like the tail of a kite. and there wasn’t a sign of that
 alderman or that old iron-foundry left on the face of the earth; and, as
 for young jacob blivens, he never got a chance to make his last dying
 speech after all his trouble fixing it up, unless he made it to the birds;
 because, although the bulk of him came down all right in a tree-top in an
 adjoining county, the rest of him was apportioned around among four
 townships, and so they had to hold five inquests on him to find out
 whether he was dead or not, and how it occurred. you never saw a boy
 scattered so.—[this glycerin catastrophe is borrowed from a floating
 newspaper item, whose author’s name i would give if i knew it.—m.
 thus perished the good little boy who did the best he could, but didn’t
 come out according to the books. every boy who ever did as he did
 prospered except him. his case is truly remarkable. it will probably never
 be accounted for.
 [written about ]
 those evening bells! those evening bells! how many a tale their
 music tells of youth, and home, and that sweet time when last
 i heard their soothing chime. those joyous hours are passed
 away; and many a heart that then was gay, within the tomb now
 darkly dwells, and hears no more those evening bells. 
 and so ’twill be when i am gone that tuneful peal will still
 ring on; while other bards shall walk these dells, and sing
 your praise, sweet evening bells.
 these annual bills! these annual bills! how many a song their
 discord trills of “truck” consumed, enjoyed, forgot,
 since i was skinned by last year’s lot! those joyous
 beans are passed away; those onions blithe, o where are they?
 once loved, lost, mourned—now vexing ills your shades troop
 back in annual bills! and so ’twill be when i’m
 aground these yearly duns will still go round, while other
 bards, with frantic quills, shall damn and damn these annual bills!
 [written about ]
 niagara falls is a most enjoyable place of resort. the hotels are
 excellent, and the prices not at all exorbitant. the opportunities for
 fishing are not surpassed in the country; in fact, they are not even
 equaled elsewhere. because, in other localities, certain places in the
 streams are much better than others; but at niagara one place is just as
 good as another, for the reason that the fish do not bite anywhere, and so
 there is no use in your walking five miles to fish, when you can depend on
 being just as unsuccessful nearer home. the advantages of this state of
 things have never heretofore been properly placed before the public.
 the weather is cool in summer, and the walks and drives are all pleasant
 and none of them fatiguing. when you start out to “do” the
 falls you first drive down about a mile, and pay a small sum for the
 privilege of looking down from a precipice into the narrowest part of the
 niagara river. a railway “cut” through a hill would be as
 comely if it had the angry river tumbling and foaming through its bottom.
 you can descend a staircase here a hundred and fifty feet down, and stand
 at the edge of the water. after you have done it, you will wonder why you
 did it; but you will then be too late.
 the guide will explain to you, in his blood-curdling way, how he saw the
 little steamer, maid of the mist, descend the fearful rapids—how
 first one paddle-box was out of sight behind the raging billows and then
 the other, and at what point it was that her smokestack toppled overboard,
 and where her planking began to break and part asunder—and how she
 did finally live through the trip, after accomplishing the incredible feat
 of traveling seventeen miles in six minutes, or six miles in seventeen
 minutes, i have really forgotten which. but it was very extraordinary,
 anyhow. it is worth the price of admission to hear the guide tell the
 story nine times in succession to different parties, and never miss a word
 or alter a sentence or a gesture.
 then you drive over to suspension bridge, and divide your misery between
 the chances of smashing down two hundred feet into the river below, and
 the chances of having the railway-train overhead smashing down onto you.
 either possibility is discomforting taken by itself, but, mixed together,
 they amount in the aggregate to positive unhappiness.
 on the canada side you drive along the chasm between long ranks of
 photographers standing guard behind their cameras, ready to make an
 ostentatious frontispiece of you and your decaying ambulance, and your
 solemn crate with a hide on it, which you are expected to regard in the
 light of a horse, and a diminished and unimportant background of sublime
 niagara; and a great many people have the incredible effrontery or the
 native depravity to aid and abet this sort of crime.
 any day, in the hands of these photographers, you may see stately pictures
 of papa and mamma, johnny and bub and sis, or a couple of country cousins,
 all smiling vacantly, and all disposed in studied and uncomfortable
 attitudes in their carriage, and all looming up in their awe-inspiring
 imbecility before the snubbed and diminished presentment of that majestic
 presence whose ministering spirits are the rainbows, whose voice is the
 thunder, whose awful front is veiled in clouds, who was monarch here dead
 and forgotten ages before this sackful of small reptiles was deemed
 temporarily necessary to fill a crack in the world’s unnoted
 myriads, and will still be monarch here ages and decades of ages after
 they shall have gathered themselves to their blood-relations, the other
 worms, and been mingled with the unremembering dust.
 there is no actual harm in making niagara a background whereon to display
 one’s marvelous insignificance in a good strong light, but it
 requires a sort of superhuman self-complacency to enable one to do it.
 when you have examined the stupendous horseshoe fall till you are
 satisfied you cannot improve on it, you return to america by the new
 suspension bridge, and follow up the bank to where they exhibit the cave
 of the winds.
 here i followed instructions, and divested myself of all my clothing, and
 put on a waterproof jacket and overalls. this costume is picturesque, but
 not beautiful. a guide, similarly dressed, led the way down a flight of
 winding stairs, which wound and wound, and still kept on winding long
 after the thing ceased to be a novelty, and then terminated long before it
 had begun to be a pleasure. we were then well down under the precipice,
 but still considerably above the level of the river.
 we now began to creep along flimsy bridges of a single plank, our persons
 shielded from destruction by a crazy wooden railing, to which i clung with
 both hands—not because i was afraid, but because i wanted to.
 presently the descent became steeper and the bridge flimsier, and sprays
 from the american fall began to rain down on us in fast increasing sheets
 that soon became blinding, and after that our progress was mostly in the
 nature of groping. now a a furious wind began to rush out from behind the
 waterfall, which seemed determined to sweep us from the bridge, and
 scatter us on the rocks and among the torrents below. i remarked that i
 wanted to go home; but it was too late. we were almost under the monstrous
 wall of water thundering down from above, and speech was in vain in the
 midst of such a pitiless crash of sound.
 in another moment the guide disappeared behind the deluge, and, bewildered
 by the thunder, driven helplessly by the wind, and smitten by the arrowy
 tempest of rain, i followed. all was darkness. such a mad storming,
 roaring, and bellowing of warring wind and water never crazed my ears
 before. i bent my head, and seemed to receive the atlantic on my back. the
 world seemed going to destruction. i could not see anything, the flood
 poured down savagely. i raised my head, with open mouth, and the most of
 the american cataract went down my throat. if i had sprung a leak now i
 had been lost. and at this moment i discovered that the bridge had ceased,
 and we must trust for a foothold to the slippery and precipitous rocks. i
 never was so scared before and survived it. but we got through at last,
 and emerged into the open day, where we could stand in front of the laced
 and frothy and seething world of descending water, and look at it. when i
 saw how much of it there was, and how fearfully in earnest it was, i was
 sorry i had gone behind it.
 the noble red man has always been a friend and darling of mine. i love to
 read about him in tales and legends and romances. i love to read of his
 inspired sagacity, and his love of the wild free life of mountain and
 forest, and his general nobility of character, and his stately
 metaphorical manner of speech, and his chivalrous love for the dusky
 maiden, and the picturesque pomp of his dress and accoutrements.
 especially the picturesque pomp of his dress and accoutrements. when i
 found the shops at niagara falls full of dainty indian beadwork, and
 stunning moccasins, and equally stunning toy figures representing human
 beings who carried their weapons in holes bored through their arms and
 bodies, and had feet shaped like a pie, i was filled with emotion. i knew
 that now, at last, i was going to come face to face with the noble red
 man.
 a lady clerk in a shop told me, indeed, that all her grand array of
 curiosities were made by the indians, and that they were plenty about the
 falls, and that they were friendly, and it would not be dangerous to speak
 to them. and sure enough, as i approached the bridge leading over to luna
 island, i came upon a noble son of the forest sitting under a tree,
 diligently at work on a bead reticule. he wore a slouch hat and brogans,
 and had a short black pipe in his mouth. thus does the baneful contact
 with our effeminate civilization dilute the picturesque pomp which is so
 natural to the indian when far removed from us in his native haunts. i
 addressed the relic as follows:
 “is the wawhoo-wang-wang of the whack-a-whack happy? does the great
 speckled thunder sigh for the war-path, or is his heart contented with
 dreaming of the dusky maiden, the pride of the forest? does the mighty
 sachem yearn to drink the blood of his enemies, or is he satisfied to make
 bead reticules for the pappooses of the paleface? speak, sublime relic of
 bygone grandeur—venerable ruin, speak!”
 the relic said:
 “an’ is it mesilf, dennis hooligan, that ye’d be takin’
 for a dirty injin, ye drawlin’, lantern-jawed, spider-legged divil!
 by the piper that played before moses, i’ll ate ye!”
 i went away from there.
 by and by, in the neighborhood of the terrapin tower, i came upon a gentle
 daughter of the aborigines in fringed and beaded buckskin moccasins and
 leggins, seated on a bench with her pretty wares about her. she had just
 carved out a wooden chief that had a strong family resemblance to a
 clothes-pin, and was now boring a hole through his abdomen to put his bow
 through. i hesitated a moment, and then addressed her:
 “is the heart of the forest maiden heavy? is the laughing tadpole
 lonely? does she mourn over the extinguished council-fires of her race,
 and the vanished glory of her ancestors? or does her sad spirit wander
 afar toward the hunting-grounds whither her brave
 gobbler-of-the-lightnings is gone? why is my daughter silent? has she
 ought against the paleface stranger?”
 the maiden said:
 “faix, an’ is it biddy malone ye dare to be callin’
 names? lave this, or i’ll shy your lean carcass over the cataract,
 ye sniveling blaggard!”
 i adjourned from there also.
 “confound these indians!” i said. “they told me they
 were tame; but, if appearances go for anything, i should say they were all
 on the warpath.”
 i made one more attempt to fraternize with them, and only one. i came upon
 a camp of them gathered in the shade of a great tree, making wampum and
 moccasins, and addressed them in the language of friendship:
 “noble red men, braves, grand sachems, war chiefs, squaws, and high
 muck-a-mucks, the paleface from the land of the setting sun greets you!
 you, beneficent polecat—you, devourer of mountains—you,
 roaring thundergust—you, bully boy with a glass eye—the
 paleface from beyond the great waters greets you all! war and pestilence
 have thinned your ranks and destroyed your once proud nation. poker and
 seven-up, and a vain modern expense for soap, unknown to your glorious
 ancestors, have depleted your purses. appropriating, in your simplicity,
 the property of others has gotten you into trouble. misrepresenting facts,
 in your simple innocence, has damaged your reputation with the soulless
 usurper. trading for forty-rod whisky, to enable you to get drunk and
 happy and tomahawk your families, has played the everlasting mischief with
 the picturesque pomp of your dress, and here you are, in the broad light
 of the nineteenth century, gotten up like the ragtag and bobtail of the
 purlieus of new york. for shame! remember your ancestors! recall their
 mighty deeds! remember uncas!—and red jacket! and hole in the day!—and
 whoopdedoodledo! emulate their achievements! unfurl yourselves under my
 banner, noble savages, illustrious guttersnipes—”
 “down wid him!” “scoop the blaggard!” “burn
 him!” “hang him!” “dhround him!”
 it was the quickest operation that ever was. i simply saw a sudden flash
 in the air of clubs, brickbats, fists, bead-baskets, and moccasins—a
 single flash, and they all appeared to hit me at once, and no two of them
 in the same place. in the next instant the entire tribe was upon me. they
 tore half the clothes off me; they broke my arms and legs; they gave me a
 thump that dented the top of my head till it would hold coffee like a
 saucer; and, to crown their disgraceful proceedings and add insult to
 injury, they threw me over the niagara falls, and i got wet.
 about ninety or a hundred feet from the top, the remains of my vest caught
 on a projecting rock, and i was almost drowned before i could get loose. i
 finally fell, and brought up in a world of white foam at the foot of the
 fall, whose celled and bubbly masses towered-up several inches above my
 head. of course i got into the eddy. i sailed round and round in it
 forty-four times—chasing a chip and gaining on it—each round
 trip a half-mile—reaching for the same bush on the bank forty-four
 times, and just exactly missing it by a hair’s-breadth every time.
 at last a man walked down and sat down close to that bush, and put a pipe
 in his mouth, and lit a match, and followed me with one eye and kept the
 other on the match, while he sheltered it in his hands from the wind.
 presently a puff of wind blew it out. the next time i swept around he
 said:
 “got a match?”
 “yes; in my other vest. help me out, please.”
 “not for joe.”
 when i came round again, i said:
 “excuse the seemingly impertinent curiosity of a drowning man, but
 will you explain this singular conduct of yours?”
 “with pleasure. i am the coroner. don’t hurry on my account. i
 can wait for you. but i wish i had a match.”
 i said: “take my place, and i’ll go and get you one.”
 he declined. this lack of confidence on his part created a coldness
 between us, and from that time forward i avoided him. it was my idea, in
 case anything happened to me, to so time the occurrence as to throw my
 custom into the hands of the opposition coroner on the american side.
 at last a policeman came along, and arrested me for disturbing the peace
 by yelling at people on shore for help. the judge fined me, but i had the
 advantage of him. my money was with my pantaloons, and my pantaloons were
 with the indians.
 thus i escaped. i am now lying in a very critical condition. at least i am
 lying anyway—-critical or not critical. i am hurt all over, but i
 cannot tell the full extent yet, because the doctor is not done taking
 inventory. he will make out my manifest this evening. however, thus far he
 thinks only sixteen of my wounds are fatal. i don’t mind the others.
 upon regaining my right mind, i said:
 “it is an awful savage tribe of indians that do the beadwork and
 moccasins for niagara falls, doctor. where are they from?”
 “limerick, my son.”
 [written about ]
 “moral statistician.”—i don’t want any of your
 statistics; i took your whole batch and lit my pipe with it. i hate your
 kind of people. you are always ciphering out how much a man’s health
 is injured, and how much his intellect is impaired, and how many pitiful
 dollars and cents he wastes in the course of ninety-two years’
 indulgence in the fatal practice of smoking; and in the equally fatal
 practice of drinking coffee; and in playing billiards occasionally; and in
 taking a glass of wine at dinner, etc., etc., etc. and you are always
 figuring out how many women have been burned to death because of the
 dangerous fashion of wearing expansive hoops, etc., etc., etc. you never
 see more than one side of the question. you are blind to the fact that
 most old men in america smoke and drink coffee, although, according to
 your theory, they ought to have died young; and that hearty old englishmen
 drink wine and survive it, and portly old dutchmen both drink and smoke
 freely, and yet grow older and fatter all the time. and you never try to
 find out how much solid comfort, relaxation, and enjoyment a man derives
 from smoking in the course of a lifetime (which is worth ten times the
 money he would save by letting it alone), nor the appalling aggregate of
 happiness lost in a lifetime by your kind of people from not smoking. of
 course you can save money by denying yourself all the little vicious
 enjoyments for fifty years; but then what can you do with it? what use can
 you put it to? money can’t save your infinitesimal soul. all the use
 that money can be put to is to purchase comfort and enjoyment in this
 life; therefore, as you are an enemy to comfort and enjoyment, where is
 the use of accumulating cash? it won’t do for you to say that you
 can use it to better purpose in furnishing a good table, and in charities,
 and in supporting tract societies, because you know yourself that you
 people who have no petty vices are never known to give away a cent, and
 that you stint yourselves so in the matter of food that you are always
 feeble and hungry. and you never dare to laugh in the daytime for fear
 some poor wretch, seeing you in a good humor, will try to borrow a dollar
 of you; and in church you are always down on your knees, with your eyes
 buried in the cushion, when the contribution-box comes around; and you
 never give the revenue officer full statement of your income. now you know
 these things yourself, don’t you? very well, then what is the use of
 your stringing out your miserable lives to a lean and withered old age?
 what is the use of your saving money that is so utterly worthless to you?
 in a word, why don’t you go off somewhere and die, and not be always
 trying to seduce people into becoming as “ornery” and
 unlovable as you are yourselves, by your villainous “moral
 statistics”? now i don’t approve of dissipation, and i don’t
 indulge in it, either; but i haven’t a particle of confidence in a
 man who has no redeeming petty vices, and so i don’t want to hear
 from you any more. i think you are the very same man who read me a long
 lecture last week about the degrading vice of smoking cigars, and then
 came back, in my absence, with your reprehensible fireproof gloves on, and
 carried off my beautiful parlor stove.
 “young author.”—yes, agassiz does recommend authors to
 eat fish, because the phosphorus in it makes brain. so far you are
 correct. but i cannot help you to a decision about the amount you need to
 eat—at least, not with certainty. if the specimen composition you
 send is about your fair usual average, i should judge that perhaps a
 couple of whales would be all you would want for the present. not the
 largest kind, but simply good, middling-sized whales.
 “simon wheeler,” sonora.—the following simple and
 touching remarks and accompanying poem have just come to hand from the
 rich gold-mining region of sonora:
 to mr. mark twain: the within parson, which i have set to poetry
 under the name and style of “he done his level best,” was
 one among the whitest men i ever see, and it ain’t every man that
 knowed him that can find it in his heart to say he’s glad the poor
 cuss is busted and gone home to the states. he was here in an early day,
 and he was the handyest man about takin’ holt of anything that
 come along you most ever see, i judge. he was a cheerful, stirin’
 cretur, always doin’ somethin’, and no man can say he ever
 see him do anything by halvers. preachin was his nateral gait, but he
 warn’t a man to lay back and twidle his thumbs because there didn’t
 happen to be nothin’ doin’ in his own especial line—no,
 sir, he was a man who would meander forth and stir up something for
 hisself. his last acts was to go his pile on “kings-and”
 (calklatin’ to fill, but which he didn’t fill), when there
 was a “flush” out agin him, and naterally, you see, he went
 under. and so he was cleaned out as you may say, and he struck the
 home-trail, cheerful but flat broke. i knowed this talonted man in
 arkansaw, and if you would print this humbly tribute to his gorgis
 abilities, you would greatly obleege his onhappy friend.
 he done his level best was he a mining on the flat—
 he done it with a zest; was he a leading of the choir—
 he done his level best. if he’d a reg’lar task to
 do, he never took no rest; or if ’twas off-and-on—the
 same— he done his level best. if he was preachin’
 on his beat, he’d tramp from east to west, and north to
 south-in cold and heat he done his level best. he’d
 yank a sinner outen (hades),** and land him with the blest;
 then snatch a prayer’n waltz in again, and do his level best.
 **here i have taken a slight liberty with the original ms. “hades”
 does not make such good meter as the other word of one syllable, but it
 sounds better.
 he’d cuss and sing and howl and pray, and dance and drink and
 jest, and lie and steal—all one to him— he done
 his level best. whate’er this man was sot to do,
 he done it with a zest; no matter what his contract was, he’d
 verily, this man was gifted with “gorgis abilities,” and it is
 a happiness to me to embalm the memory of their luster in these columns.
 if it were not that the poet crop is unusually large and rank in
 california this year, i would encourage you to continue writing, simon
 wheeler; but, as it is, perhaps it might be too risky in you to enter
 against so much opposition.
 “professional beggar.”—no; you are not obliged to take
 greenbacks at par.
 “melton mowbray,” dutch flat.—this correspondent sends a
 lot of doggerel, and says it has been regarded as very good in dutch flat.
 i give a specimen verse:
 the assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold, and his
 cohorts were gleaming with purple and gold; and the sheen of his
 spears was like stars on the sea, when the blue wave rolls nightly
 on deep galilee.**
 **this piece of pleasantry, published in a san francisco paper, was
 mistaken by the country journals for seriousness, and many and loud were
 the denunciations of the ignorance of author and editor, in not knowing
 that the lines in question were “written by byron.”
 there, that will do. that may be very good dutch flat poetry, but it won’t
 do in the metropolis. it is too smooth and blubbery; it reads like
 buttermilk gurgling from a jug. what the people ought to have is something
 spirited—something like “johnny comes marching home.”
 however, keep on practising, and you may succeed yet. there is genius in
 you, but too much blubber.
 “st. clair higgins.” los angeles.—“my life
 is a failure; i have adored, wildly, madly, and she whom i love has
 turned coldly from me and shed her affections upon another. what would
 you advise me to do?”
 you should set your affections on another also—or on several, if
 there are enough to go round. also, do everything you can to make your
 former flame unhappy. there is an absurd idea disseminated in novels, that
 the happier a girl is with another man, the happier it makes the old lover
 she has blighted. don’t allow yourself to believe any such nonsense
 as that. the more cause that girl finds to regret that she did not marry
 you, the more comfortable you will feel over it. it isn’t poetical,
 but it is mighty sound doctrine.
 “arithmeticus.” virginia, nevada.—“if it
 would take a cannon-ball  and / seconds to travel four miles, and 
 and / seconds to travel the next four, and  and / to travel the
 next four, and if its rate of progress continued to diminish in the same
 ratio, how long would it take it to go fifteen hundred million miles?”
 i don’t know.
 “ambitious learner,” oakland.—yes; you are right america
 was not discovered by alexander selkirk.
 “discarded lover.”—“i loved, and still
 love, the beautiful edwitha howard, and intended to marry her. yet,
 during my temporary absence at benicia, last week, alas! she married
 jones. is my happiness to be thus blasted for life? have i no redress?”
 of course you have. all the law, written and unwritten, is on your side.
 the intention and not the act constitutes crime—in other words,
 constitutes the deed. if you call your bosom friend a fool, and intend it
 for an insult, it is an insult; but if you do it playfully, and meaning no
 insult, it is not an insult. if you discharge a pistol accidentally, and
 kill a man, you can go free, for you have done no murder; but if you try
 to kill a man, and manifestly intend to kill him, but fail utterly to do
 it, the law still holds that the intention constituted the crime, and you
 are guilty of murder. ergo, if you had married edwitha accidentally, and
 without really intending to do it, you would not actually be married to
 her at all, because the act of marriage could not be complete without the
 intention. and ergo, in the strict spirit of the law, since you
 deliberately intended to marry edwitha, and didn’t do it, you are
 married to her all the same—because, as i said before, the intention
 constitutes the crime. it is as clear as day that edwitha is your wife,
 and your redress lies in taking a club and mutilating jones with it as
 much as you can. any man has a right to protect his own wife from the
 advances of other men. but you have another alternative—you were
 married to edwitha first, because of your deliberate intention, and now
 you can prosecute her for bigamy, in subsequently marrying jones. but
 there is another phase in this complicated case: you intended to marry
 edwitha, and consequently, according to law, she is your wife—there
 is no getting around that; but she didn’t marry you, and if she
 never intended to marry you, you are not her husband, of course. ergo, in
 marrying jones, she was guilty of bigamy, because she was the wife of
 another man at the time; which is all very well as far as it goes—but
 then, don’t you see, she had no other husband when she married
 jones, and consequently she was not guilty of bigamy. now, according to
 this view of the case, jones married a spinster, who was a widow at the
 same time and another man’s wife at the same time, and yet who had
 no husband and never had one, and never had any intention of getting
 married, and therefore, of course, never had been married; and by the same
 reasoning you are a bachelor, because you have never been any one’s
 husband; and a married man, because you have a wife living; and to all
 intents and purposes a widower, because you have been deprived of that
 wife; and a consummate ass for going off to benicia in the first place,
 while things were so mixed. and by this time i have got myself so tangled
 up in the intricacies of this extraordinary case that i shall have to give
 up any further attempt to advise you—i might get confused and fail
 to make myself understood. i think i could take up the argument where i
 left off, and by following it closely awhile, perhaps i could prove to
 your satisfaction, either that you never existed at all, or that you are
 dead now, and consequently don’t need the faithless edwitha—i
 think i could do that, if it would afford you any comfort.
 “arthur augustus.”—no; you are wrong; that is the proper
 way to throw a brickbat or a tomahawk; but it doesn’t answer so well
 for a bouquet; you will hurt somebody if you keep it up. turn your nosegay
 upside down, take it by the stems, and toss it with an upward sweep. did
 you ever pitch quoits? that is the idea. the practice of recklessly
 heaving immense solid bouquets, of the general size and weight of prize
 cabbages, from the dizzy altitude of the galleries, is dangerous and very
 reprehensible. now, night before last, at the academy of music, just after
 signorina ________ had finished that exquisite melody, “the last
 rose of summer,” one of these floral pile-drivers came cleaving down
 through the atmosphere of applause, and if she hadn’t deployed
 suddenly to the right, it would have driven her into the floor like a
 shinglenail. of course that bouquet was well meant; but how would you like
 to have been the target? a sincere compliment is always grateful to a
 lady, so long as you don’t try to knock her down with it.
 “young mother.”—and so you think a baby is a thing of
 beauty and a joy forever? well, the idea is pleasing, but not original;
 every cow thinks the same of its own calf. perhaps the cow may not think
 it so elegantly, but still she thinks it nevertheless. i honor the cow for
 it. we all honor this touching maternal instinct wherever we find it, be
 it in the home of luxury or in the humble cow-shed. but really, madam,
 when i come to examine the matter in all its bearings, i find that the
 correctness of your assertion does not assert itself in all cases. a
 soiled baby, with a neglected nose, cannot be conscientiously regarded as
 a thing of beauty; and inasmuch as babyhood spans but three short years,
 no baby is competent to be a joy “forever.” it pains me thus
 to demolish two-thirds of your pretty sentiment in a single sentence; but
 the position i hold in this chair requires that i shall not permit you to
 deceive and mislead the public with your plausible figures of speech. i
 know a female baby, aged eighteen months, in this city, which cannot hold
 out as a “joy” twenty-four hours on a stretch, let alone
 “forever.” and it possesses some of the most remarkable
 eccentricities of character and appetite that have ever fallen under my
 notice. i will set down here a statement of this infant’s operations
 (conceived, planned, and carried out by itself, and without suggestion or
 assistance from its mother or any one else), during a single day; and what
 i shall say can be substantiated by the sworn testimony of witnesses.
 it commenced by eating one dozen large blue-mass pills, box and all; then
 it fell down a flight of stairs, and arose with a blue and purple knot on
 its forehead, after which it proceeded in quest of further refreshment and
 amusement. it found a glass trinket ornamented with brass-work—smashed
 up and ate the glass, and then swallowed the brass. then it drank about
 twenty drops of laudanum, and more than a dozen tablespoonfuls of strong
 spirits of camphor. the reason why it took no more laudanum was because
 there was no more to take. after this it lay down on its back, and shoved
 five or six inches of a silver-headed whalebone cane down its throat; got
 it fast there, and it was all its mother could do to pull the cane out
 again, without pulling out some of the child with it. then, being hungry
 for glass again, it broke up several wine glasses, and fell to eating and
 swallowing the fragments, not minding a cut or two. then it ate a quantity
 of butter, pepper, salt, and california matches, actually taking a
 spoonful of butter, a spoonful of salt, a spoonful of pepper, and three or
 four lucifer matches at each mouthful. (i will remark here that this thing
 of beauty likes painted german lucifers, and eats all she can get of them;
 but she prefers california matches, which i regard as a compliment to our
 home manufactures of more than ordinary value, coming, as it does, from
 one who is too young to flatter.) then she washed her head with soap and
 water, and afterward ate what soap was left, and drank as much of the suds
 as she had room for; after which she sallied forth and took the cow
 familiarly by the tail, and got kicked heels over head. at odd times
 during the day, when this joy forever happened to have nothing particular
 on hand, she put in the time by climbing up on places, and falling down
 off them, uniformly damaging her self in the operation. as young as she
 is, she speaks many words tolerably distinctly; and being plain-spoken in
 other respects, blunt and to the point, she opens conversation with all
 strangers, male or female, with the same formula, “how do, jim?”
 not being familiar with the ways of children, it is possible that i have
 been magnifying into matter of surprise things which may not strike any
 one who is familiar with infancy as being at all astonishing. however, i
 cannot believe that such is the case, and so i repeat that my report of
 this baby’s performances is strictly true; and if any one doubts it,
 i can produce the child. i will further engage that she will devour
 anything that is given her (reserving to myself only the right to exclude
 anvils), and fall down from any place to which she may be elevated (merely
 stipulating that her preference for alighting on her head shall be
 respected, and, therefore, that the elevation chosen shall be high enough
 to enable her to accomplish this to her satisfaction). but i find i have
 wandered from my subject; so, without further argument, i will reiterate
 my conviction that not all babies are things of beauty and joys forever.
 “arithmeticus.” virginia, nevada.—“i am an
 enthusiastic student of mathematics, and it is so vexatious to me to
 find my progress constantly impeded by these mysterious arithmetical
 technicalities. now do tell me what the difference is between geometry
 and conchology?”
 here you come again with your arithmetical conundrums, when i am suffering
 death with a cold in the head. if you could have seen the expression of
 scorn that darkened my countenance a moment ago, and was instantly split
 from the center in every direction like a fractured looking-glass by my
 last sneeze, you never would have written that disgraceful question.
 conchology is a science which has nothing to do with mathematics; it
 relates only to shells. at the same time, however, a man who opens oysters
 for a hotel, or shells a fortified town, or sucks eggs, is not, strictly
 speaking, a conchologist-a fine stroke of sarcasm that, but it will be
 lost on such an unintellectual clam as you. now compare conchology and
 geometry together, and you will see what the difference is, and your
 question will be answered. but don’t torture me with any more
 arithmetical horrors until you know i am rid of my cold. i feel the
 bitterest animosity toward you at this moment—bothering me in this
 way, when i can do nothing but sneeze and rage and snort
 pocket-handkerchiefs to atoms. if i had you in range of my nose now i
 would blow your brains out.
 [being a letter written to a poultry society that had conferred a
 complimentary membership upon the author. written about .]
 seriously, from early youth i have taken an especial interest in the
 subject of poultry-raising, and so this membership touches a ready
 sympathy in my breast. even as a schoolboy, poultry-raising was a study
 with me, and i may say without egotism that as early as the age of
 seventeen i was acquainted with all the best and speediest methods of
 raising chickens, from raising them off a roost by burning lucifer matches
 under their noses, down to lifting them off a fence on a frosty night by
 insinuating the end of a warm board under their heels. by the time i was
 twenty years old, i really suppose i had raised more poultry than any one
 individual in all the section round about there. the very chickens came to
 know my talent by and by. the youth of both sexes ceased to paw the earth
 for worms, and old roosters that came to crow, “remained to pray,”
 when i passed by.
 i have had so much experience in the raising of fowls that i cannot but
 think that a few hints from me might be useful to the society. the two
 methods i have already touched upon are very simple, and are only used in
 the raising of the commonest class of fowls; one is for summer, the other
 for winter. in the one case you start out with a friend along about eleven
 o’clock on a summer’s night (not later, because in some states—especially
 in california and oregon—chickens always rouse up just at midnight
 and crow from ten to thirty minutes, according to the ease or difficulty
 they experience in getting the public waked up), and your friend carries
 with him a sack. arrived at the henroost (your neighbor’s, not your
 own), you light a match and hold it under first one and then another
 pullet’s nose until they are willing to go into that bag without
 making any trouble about it. you then return home, either taking the bag
 with you or leaving it behind, according as circumstances shall dictate.
 n. b.—i have seen the time when it was eligible and appropriate to
 leave the sack behind and walk off with considerable velocity, without
 ever leaving any word where to send it.
 in the case of the other method mentioned for raising poultry, your friend
 takes along a covered vessel with a charcoal fire in it, and you carry a
 long slender plank. this is a frosty night, understand. arrived at the
 tree, or fence, or other henroost (your own if you are an idiot), you warm
 the end of your plank in your friend’s fire vessel, and then raise
 it aloft and ease it up gently against a slumbering chicken’s foot.
 if the subject of your attentions is a true bird, he will infallibly
 return thanks with a sleepy cluck or two, and step out and take up
 quarters on the plank, thus becoming so conspicuously accessory before the
 fact to his own murder as to make it a grave question in our minds as it
 once was in the mind of blackstone, whether he is not really and
 deliberately committing suicide in the second degree. [but you enter into
 a contemplation of these legal refinements subsequently not then.]
 when you wish to raise a fine, large, donkey-voiced shanghai rooster, you
 do it with a lasso, just as you would a bull. it is because he must be
 choked, and choked effectually, too. it is the only good, certain way, for
 whenever he mentions a matter which he is cordially interested in, the
 chances are ninety-nine in a hundred that he secures somebody else’s
 immediate attention to it too, whether it be day or night.
 the black spanish is an exceedingly fine bird and a costly one.
 thirty-five dollars is the usual figure, and fifty a not uncommon price
 for a specimen. even its eggs are worth from a dollar to a dollar and a
 half apiece, and yet are so unwholesome that the city physician seldom or
 never orders them for the workhouse. still i have once or twice procured
 as high as a dozen at a time for nothing, in the dark of the moon. the
 best way to raise the black spanish fowl is to go late in the evening and
 raise coop and all. the reason i recommend this method is that, the birds
 being so valuable, the owners do not permit them to roost around
 promiscuously, but put them in a coop as strong as a fireproof safe and
 keep it in the kitchen at night. the method i speak of is not always a
 bright and satisfying success, and yet there are so many little articles
 of vertu about a kitchen, that if you fail on the coop you can
 generally bring away something else. i brought away a nice steel trap one
 night, worth ninety cents.
 but what is the use in my pouring out my whole intellect on this subject?
 i have shown the western new york poultry society that they have taken to
 their bosom a party who is not a spring chicken by any means, but a man
 who knows all about poultry, and is just as high up in the most efficient
 methods of raising it as the president of the institution himself. i thank
 these gentlemen for the honorary membership they have conferred upon me,
 and shall stand at all times ready and willing to testify my good feeling
 and my official zeal by deeds as well as by this hastily penned advice and
 information. whenever they are ready to go to raising poultry, let them
 call for me any evening after eleven o’clock, and i shall be on hand
 promptly.
experience of the mcwilliamses with
 [as related to the author of this book by mr. mcwilliams, a pleasant new
 york gentleman whom the said author met by chance on a journey.]
 well, to go back to where i was before i digressed to explain to you how
 that frightful and incurable disease, membranous croup,[diphtheria d.w.]
 was ravaging the town and driving all mothers mad with terror, i called
 mrs. mcwilliams’s attention to little penelope, and said:
 “darling, i wouldn’t let that child be chewing that pine stick
 if i were you.”
 “precious, where is the harm in it?” said she, but at the same
 time preparing to take away the stick for women cannot receive even the
 most palpably judicious suggestion without arguing it; that is married
 women.
 i replied:
 “love, it is notorious that pine is the least nutritious wood that a
 child can eat.”
 my wife’s hand paused, in the act of taking the stick, and returned
 itself to her lap. she bridled perceptibly, and said:
 “hubby, you know better than that. you know you do. doctors all say
 that the turpentine in pine wood is good for weak back and the kidneys.”
 “ah—i was under a misapprehension. i did not know that the
 child’s kidneys and spine were affected, and that the family
 physician had recommended—”
 “who said the child’s spine and kidneys were affected?”
 “my love, you intimated it.”
 “the idea! i never intimated anything of the kind.”
 “why, my dear, it hasn’t been two minutes since you said—”
 “bother what i said! i don’t care what i did say. there isn’t
 any harm in the child’s chewing a bit of pine stick if she wants to,
 and you know it perfectly well. and she shall chew it, too. so there, now!”
 “say no more, my dear. i now see the force of your reasoning, and i
 will go and order two or three cords of the best pine wood to-day. no
 child of mine shall want while i—”
 “oh, please go along to your office and let me have some peace. a
 body can never make the simplest remark but you must take it up and go to
 arguing and arguing and arguing till you don’t know what you are
 talking about, and you never do.”
 “very well, it shall be as you say. but there is a want of logic in
 your last remark which—”
 however, she was gone with a flourish before i could finish, and had taken
 the child with her. that night at dinner she confronted me with a face as
 white as a sheet:
 “oh, mortimer, there’s another! little georgi gordon is taken.”
 “membranous croup?”
 “membranous croup.”
 “is there any hope for him?”
 “none in the wide world. oh, what is to become of us!”
 by and by a nurse brought in our penelope to say good night and offer the
 customary prayer at the mother’s knee. in the midst of “now i
 lay me down to sleep,” she gave a slight cough! my wife fell back
 like one stricken with death. but the next moment she was up and brimming
 with the activities which terror inspires.
 she commanded that the child’s crib be removed from the nursery to
 our bedroom; and she went along to see the order executed. she took me
 with her, of course. we got matters arranged with speed. a cot-bed was put
 up in my wife’s dressing room for the nurse. but now mrs. mcwilliams
 said we were too far away from the other baby, and what if he were to have
 the symptoms in the night—and she blanched again, poor thing.
 we then restored the crib and the nurse to the nursery and put up a bed
 for ourselves in a room adjoining.
 presently, however, mrs. mcwilliams said suppose the baby should catch it
 from penelope? this thought struck a new panic to her heart, and the tribe
 of us could not get the crib out of the nursery again fast enough to
 satisfy my wife, though she assisted in her own person and well-nigh
 pulled the crib to pieces in her frantic hurry.
 we moved down-stairs; but there was no place there to stow the nurse, and
 mrs. mcwilliams said the nurse’s experience would be an inestimable
 help. so we returned, bag and baggage, to our own bedroom once more, and
 felt a great gladness, like storm-buffeted birds that have found their
 nest again.
 mrs. mcwilliams sped to the nursery to see how things were going on there.
 she was back in a moment with a new dread. she said:
 “what can make baby sleep so?”
 i said:
 “why, my darling, baby always sleeps like a graven image.”
 “i know. i know; but there’s something peculiar about his
 sleep now. he seems to—to—he seems to breathe so regularly.
 oh, this is dreadful.”
 “but, my dear, he always breathes regularly.”
 “oh, i know it, but there’s something frightful about it now.
 his nurse is too young and inexperienced. maria shall stay there with her,
 and be on hand if anything happens.”
 “that is a good idea, but who will help you?”
 “you can help me all i want. i wouldn’t allow anybody to do
 anything but myself, anyhow, at such a time as this.”
 i said i would feel mean to lie abed and sleep, and leave her to watch and
 toil over our little patient all the weary night. but she reconciled me to
 it. so old maria departed and took up her ancient quarters in the nursery.
 penelope coughed twice in her sleep.
 “oh, why don’t that doctor come! mortimer, this room is too
 warm. this room is certainly too warm. turn off the register-quick!”
 i shut it off, glancing at the thermometer at the same time, and wondering
 to myself if  was too warm for a sick child.
 the coachman arrived from down-town now with the news that our physician
 was ill and confined to his bed. mrs. mcwilliams turned a dead eye upon
 me, and said in a dead voice:
 “there is a providence in it. it is foreordained. he never was sick
 before. never. we have not been living as we ought to live, mortimer. time
 and time again i have told you so. now you see the result. our child will
 never get well. be thankful if you can forgive yourself; i never can
 forgive myself.”
 i said, without intent to hurt, but with heedless choice of words, that i
 could not see that we had been living such an abandoned life.
 “mortimer! do you want to bring the judgment upon baby, too!”
 then she began to cry, but suddenly exclaimed:
 “the doctor must have sent medicines!”
 i said:
 “certainly. they are here. i was only waiting for you to give me a
 chance.”
 “well do give them to me! don’t you know that every moment is
 precious now? but what was the use in sending medicines, when he knows
 that the disease is incurable?”
 i said that while there was life there was hope.
 “hope! mortimer, you know no more what you are talking about than
 the child unborn. if you would—as i live, the directions say give
 one teaspoonful once an hour! once an hour!—as if we had a whole
 year before us to save the child in! mortimer, please hurry. give the poor
 perishing thing a tablespoonful, and try to be quick!”
 “why, my dear, a tablespoonful might—”
 “don’t drive me frantic! . . . there, there, there, my
 precious, my own; it’s nasty bitter stuff, but it’s good for
 nelly—good for mother’s precious darling; and it will make her
 well. there, there, there, put the little head on mamma’s breast and
 go to sleep, and pretty soon—oh, i know she can’t live till
 morning! mortimer, a tablespoonful every half-hour will—oh, the
 child needs belladonna, too; i know she does—and aconite. get them,
 mortimer. now do let me have my way. you know nothing about these things.”
 we now went to bed, placing the crib close to my wife’s pillow. all
 this turmoil had worn upon me, and within two minutes i was something more
 than half asleep. mrs. mcwilliams roused me:
 “darling, is that register turned on?”
 “no.”
 “i thought as much. please turn it on at once. this room is cold.”
 i turned it on, and presently fell asleep again. i was aroused once more:
 “dearie, would you mind moving the crib to your side of the bed? it
 is nearer the register.”
 i moved it, but had a collision with the rug and woke up the child. i
 dozed off once more, while my wife quieted the sufferer. but in a little
 while these words came murmuring remotely through the fog of my
 drowsiness:
 “mortimer, if we only had some goose grease—will you ring?”
 i climbed dreamily out, and stepped on a cat, which responded with a
 protest and would have got a convincing kick for it if a chair had not got
 it instead.
 “now, mortimer, why do you want to turn up the gas and wake up the
 child again?”
 “because i want to see how much i am hurt, caroline.”
 “well, look at the chair, too—i have no doubt it is ruined.
 poor cat, suppose you had—”
 “now i am not going to suppose anything about the cat. it never
 would have occurred if maria had been allowed to remain here and attend to
 these duties, which are in her line and are not in mine.”
 “now, mortimer, i should think you would be ashamed to make a remark
 like that. it is a pity if you cannot do the few little things i ask of
 you at such an awful time as this when our child—”
 “there, there, i will do anything you want. but i can’t raise
 anybody with this bell. they’re all gone to bed. where is the goose
 grease?”
 “on the mantelpiece in the nursery. if you’ll step there and
 speak to maria—”
 i fetched the goose grease and went to sleep again. once more i was
 called:
 “mortimer, i so hate to disturb you, but the room is still too cold
 for me to try to apply this stuff. would you mind lighting the fire? it is
 all ready to touch a match to.”
 i dragged myself out and lit the fire, and then sat down disconsolate.
 “mortimer, don’t sit there and catch your death of cold. come
 to bed.”
 as i was stepping in she said:
 “but wait a moment. please give the child some more of the medicine.”
 which i did. it was a medicine which made a child more or less lively; so
 my wife made use of its waking interval to strip it and grease it all over
 with the goose oil. i was soon asleep once more, but once more i had to
 get up.
 “mortimer, i feel a draft. i feel it distinctly. there is nothing so
 bad for this disease as a draft. please move the crib in front of the
 fire.”
 i did it; and collided with the rug again, which i threw in the fire. mrs.
 mcwilliams sprang out of bed and rescued it and we had some words. i had
 another trifling interval of sleep, and then got up, by request, and
 constructed a flax-seed poultice. this was placed upon the child’s
 breast and left there to do its healing work.
 a wood-fire is not a permanent thing. i got up every twenty minutes and
 renewed ours, and this gave mrs. mcwilliams the opportunity to shorten the
 times of giving the medicines by ten minutes, which was a great
 satisfaction to her. now and then, between times, i reorganized the
 flax-seed poultices, and applied sinapisms and other sorts of blisters
 where unoccupied places could be found upon the child. well, toward
 morning the wood gave out and my wife wanted me to go down cellar and get
 some more. i said:
 “my dear, it is a laborious job, and the child must be nearly warm
 enough, with her extra clothing. now mightn’t we put on another
 layer of poultices and—”
 i did not finish, because i was interrupted. i lugged wood up from below
 for some little time, and then turned in and fell to snoring as only a man
 can whose strength is all gone and whose soul is worn out. just at broad
 daylight i felt a grip on my shoulder that brought me to my senses
 suddenly. my wife was glaring down upon me and gasping. as soon as she
 could command her tongue she said:
 “it is all over! all over! the child’s perspiring! what shall
 we do?”
 “mercy, how you terrify me! i don’t know what we ought to do.
 maybe if we scraped her and put her in the draft again—”
 “oh, idiot! there is not a moment to lose! go for the doctor. go
 yourself. tell him he must come, dead or alive.”
 i dragged that poor sick man from his bed and brought him. he looked at
 the child and said she was not dying. this was joy unspeakable to me, but
 it made my wife as mad as if he had offered her a personal affront. then
 he said the child’s cough was only caused by some trifling
 irritation or other in the throat. at this i thought my wife had a mind to
 show him the door. now the doctor said he would make the child cough
 harder and dislodge the trouble. so he gave her something that sent her
 into a spasm of coughing, and presently up came a little wood splinter or
 so.
 “this child has no membranous croup,” said he. “she has
 been chewing a bit of pine shingle or something of the kind, and got some
 little slivers in her throat. they won’t do her any hurt.”
 “no,” said i, “i can well believe that. indeed, the
 turpentine that is in them is very good for certain sorts of diseases that
 are peculiar to children. my wife will tell you so.”
 but she did not. she turned away in disdain and left the room; and since
 that time there is one episode in our life which we never refer to. hence
 the tide of our days flows by in deep and untroubled serenity.
 [very few married men have such an experience as mcwilliams’s, and
 so the author of this book thought that maybe the novelty of it would
 give it a passing interest to the reader.]
 [written about ]
 i was a very smart child at the age of thirteen—an unusually smart
 child, i thought at the time. it was then that i did my first newspaper
 scribbling, and most unexpectedly to me it stirred up a fine sensation in
 the community. it did, indeed, and i was very proud of it, too. i was a
 printer’s “devil,” and a progressive and aspiring one.
 my uncle had me on his paper (the weekly hannibal journal, two dollars a
 year in advance—five hundred subscribers, and they paid in cordwood,
 cabbages, and unmarketable turnips), and on a lucky summer’s day he
 left town to be gone a week, and asked me if i thought i could edit one
 issue of the paper judiciously. ah! didn’t i want to try! higgins
 was the editor on the rival paper. he had lately been jilted, and one
 night a friend found an open note on the poor fellow’s bed, in which
 he stated that he could not longer endure life and had drowned himself in
 bear creek. the friend ran down there and discovered higgins wading back
 to shore. he had concluded he wouldn’t.
 the village was full of it for several days, but higgins did not suspect
 it. i thought this was a fine opportunity. i wrote an elaborately wretched
 account of the whole matter, and then illustrated it with villainous cuts
 engraved on the bottoms of wooden type with a jackknife—one of them
 a picture of higgins wading out into the creek in his shirt, with a
 lantern, sounding the depth of the water with a walking-stick. i thought
 it was desperately funny, and was densely unconscious that there was any
 moral obliquity about such a publication. being satisfied with this effort
 i looked around for other worlds to conquer, and it struck me that it
 would make good, interesting matter to charge the editor of a neighboring
 country paper with a piece of gratuitous rascality and “see him
 squirm.”
 i did it, putting the article into the form of a parody on the “burial
 of sir john moore”—and a pretty crude parody it was, too.
 then i lampooned two prominent citizens outrageously—not because
 they had done anything to deserve, but merely because i thought it was my
 duty to make the paper lively.
 next i gently touched up the newest stranger—the lion of the day,
 the gorgeous journeyman tailor from quincy. he was a simpering coxcomb of
 the first water, and the “loudest” dressed man in the state.
 he was an inveterate woman-killer. every week he wrote lushy “poetry”
 for the journal, about his newest conquest. his rhymes for my week were
 headed, “to mary in h—l,” meaning to mary in hannibal,
 of course. but while setting up the piece i was suddenly riven from head
 to heel by what i regarded as a perfect thunderbolt of humor, and i
 compressed it into a snappy footnote at the bottom—thus: “we
 will let this thing pass, just this once; but we wish mr. j. gordon
 runnels to understand distinctly that we have a character to sustain, and
 from this time forth when he wants to commune with his friends in h—l,
 he must select some other medium than the columns of this journal!”
 the paper came out, and i never knew any little thing attract so much
 attention as those playful trifles of mine.
 for once the hannibal journal was in demand—a novelty it had not
 experienced before. the whole town was stirred. higgins dropped in with a
 double-barreled shotgun early in the forenoon. when he found that it was
 an infant (as he called me) that had done him the damage, he simply pulled
 my ears and went away; but he threw up his situation that night and left
 town for good. the tailor came with his goose and a pair of shears; but he
 despised me, too, and departed for the south that night. the two lampooned
 citizens came with threats of libel, and went away incensed at my
 insignificance. the country editor pranced in with a war-whoop next day,
 suffering for blood to drink; but he ended by forgiving me cordially and
 inviting me down to the drug store to wash away all animosity in a
 friendly bumper of “fahnestock’s vermifuge.” it was his
 little joke. my uncle was very angry when he got back—unreasonably
 so, i thought, considering what an impetus i had given the paper, and
 considering also that gratitude for his preservation ought to have been
 uppermost in his mind, inasmuch as by his delay he had so wonderfully
 escaped dissection, tomahawking, libel, and getting his head shot off.
 but he softened when he looked at the accounts and saw that i had actually
 booked the unparalleled number of thirty-three new subscribers, and had
 the vegetables to show for it, cordwood, cabbage, beans, and unsalable
 turnips enough to run the family for two years!
 [written about ]
 it is seldom pleasant to tell on oneself, but some times it is a sort of
 relief to a man to make a confession. i wish to unburden my mind now, and
 yet i almost believe that i am moved to do it more because i long to bring
 censure upon another man than because i desire to pour balm upon my
 wounded heart. (i don’t know what balm is, but i believe it is the
 correct expression to use in this connection—never having seen any
 balm.) you may remember that i lectured in newark lately for the young
 gentlemen of the——-society? i did at any rate. during the
 afternoon of that day i was talking with one of the young gentlemen just
 referred to, and he said he had an uncle who, from some cause or other,
 seemed to have grown permanently bereft of all emotion. and with tears in
 his eyes, this young man said, “oh, if i could only see him laugh
 once more! oh, if i could only see him weep!” i was touched. i could
 never withstand distress.
 i said: “bring him to my lecture. i’ll start him for you.”
 “oh, if you could but do it! if you could but do it, all our family
 would bless you for evermore—for he is so very dear to us. oh, my
 benefactor, can you make him laugh? can you bring soothing tears to those
 parched orbs?”
 i was profoundly moved. i said: “my son, bring the old party round.
 i have got some jokes in that lecture that will make him laugh if there is
 any laugh in him; and if they miss fire, i have got some others that will
 make him cry or kill him, one or the other.” then the young man
 blessed me, and wept on my neck, and went after his uncle. he placed him
 in full view, in the second row of benches, that night, and i began on
 him. i tried him with mild jokes, then with severe ones; i dosed him with
 bad jokes and riddled him with good ones; i fired old stale jokes into
 him, and peppered him fore and aft with red-hot new ones; i warmed up to
 my work, and assaulted him on the right and left, in front and behind; i
 fumed and sweated and charged and ranted till i was hoarse and sick and
 frantic and furious; but i never moved him once—i never started a
 smile or a tear! never a ghost of a smile, and never a suspicion of
 moisture! i was astounded. i closed the lecture at last with one
 despairing shriek—with one wild burst of humor, and hurled a joke of
 supernatural atrocity full at him!
 then i sat down bewildered and exhausted.
 the president of the society came up and bathed my head with cold water,
 and said: “what made you carry on so toward the last?”
 i said: “i was trying to make that confounded old fool laugh, in the
 second row.”
 and he said: “well, you were wasting your time, because he is deaf
 and dumb, and as blind as a badger!”
 now, was that any way for that old man’s nephew to impose on a
 stranger and orphan like me? i ask you as a man and brother, if that was
 any way for him to do?
 [written about ]
 he arrives just as regularly as the clock strikes nine in the morning. and
 so he even beats the editor sometimes, and the porter must leave his work
 and climb two or three pairs of stairs to unlock the “sanctum”
 door and let him in. he lights one of the office pipes—not
 reflecting, perhaps, that the editor may be one of those “stuck-up”
 people who would as soon have a stranger defile his tooth-brush as his
 pipe-stem. then he begins to loll—for a person who can consent to
 loaf his useless life away in ignominious indolence has not the energy to
 sit up straight. he stretches full length on the sofa awhile; then draws
 up to half length; then gets into a chair, hangs his head back and his
 arms abroad, and stretches his legs till the rims of his boot-heels rest
 upon the floor; by and by sits up and leans forward, with one leg or both
 over the arm of the chair. but it is still observable that with all his
 changes of position, he never assumes the upright or a fraudful
 affectation of dignity. from time to time he yawns, and stretches, and
 scratches himself with a tranquil, mangy enjoyment, and now and then he
 grunts a kind of stuffy, overfed grunt, which is full of animal
 contentment. at rare and long intervals, however, he sighs a sigh that is
 the eloquent expression of a secret confession, to wit “i am useless
 and a nuisance, a cumberer of the earth.” the bore and his comrades—for
 there are usually from two to four on hand, day and night—mix into
 the conversation when men come in to see the editors for a moment on
 business; they hold noisy talks among themselves about politics in
 particular, and all other subjects in general—even warming up, after
 a fashion, sometimes, and seeming to take almost a real interest in what
 they are discussing. they ruthlessly call an editor from his work with
 such a remark as: “did you see this, smith, in the gazette?”
 and proceed to read the paragraph while the sufferer reins in his
 impatient pen and listens; they often loll and sprawl round the office
 hour after hour, swapping anecdotes and relating personal experiences to
 each other—hairbreadth escapes, social encounters with distinguished
 men, election reminiscences, sketches of odd characters, etc. and through
 all those hours they never seem to comprehend that they are robbing the
 editors of their time, and the public of journalistic excellence in next
 day’s paper. at other times they drowse, or dreamily pore over
 exchanges, or droop limp and pensive over the chair-arms for an hour. even
 this solemn silence is small respite to the editor, for the next
 uncomfortable thing to having people look over his shoulders, perhaps, is
 to have them sit by in silence and listen to the scratching of his pen. if
 a body desires to talk private business with one of the editors, he must
 call him outside, for no hint milder than blasting-powder or nitroglycerin
 would be likely to move the bores out of listening-distance. to have to
 sit and endure the presence of a bore day after day; to feel your cheerful
 spirits begin to sink as his footstep sounds on the stair, and utterly
 vanish away as his tiresome form enters the door; to suffer through his
 anecdotes and die slowly to his reminiscences; to feel always the fetters
 of his clogging presence; to long hopelessly for one single day’s
 privacy; to note with a shudder, by and by, that to contemplate his
 funeral in fancy has ceased to soothe, to imagine him undergoing in strict
 and fearful detail the tortures of the ancient inquisition has lost its
 power to satisfy the heart, and that even to wish him millions and
 millions and millions of miles in tophet is able to bring only a fitful
 gleam of joy; to have to endure all this, day after day, and week after
 week, and month after month, is an affliction that transcends any other
 that men suffer. physical pain is pastime to it, and hanging a pleasure
 excursion.
 “the church was densely crowded that lovely summer sabbath,”
 said the sunday-school superintendent, “and all, as their eyes
 rested upon the small coffin, seemed impressed by the poor black boy’s
 fate. above the stillness the pastor’s voice rose, and chained the
 interest of every ear as he told, with many an envied compliment, how that
 the brave, noble, daring little johnny greer, when he saw the drowned body
 sweeping down toward the deep part of the river whence the agonized
 parents never could have recovered it in this world, gallantly sprang into
 the stream, and, at the risk of his life, towed the corpse to shore, and
 held it fast till help came and secured it. johnny greer was sitting just
 in front of me. a ragged street-boy, with eager eye, turned upon him
 instantly, and said in a hoarse whisper
 “‘no; but did you, though?’
 “‘yes.’
 “‘towed the carkiss ashore and saved it yo’self?’
 “‘yes.’
 “‘cracky! what did they give you?’
 “‘nothing.’
 “‘w-h-a-t [with intense disgust]! d’you know what i’d
 ‘a’ done? i’d ‘a’ anchored him out in the
 stream, and said, five dollars, gents, or you carn’t have yo’
 nigger.’”
 [written about ]
 in as few words as possible i wish to lay before the nation what share,
 howsoever small, i have had in this matter—this matter which has so
 exercised the public mind, engendered so much ill-feeling, and so filled
 the newspapers of both continents with distorted statements and
 extravagant comments.
 the origin of this distressful thing was this—and i assert here that
 every fact in the following résumé can be amply
 proved by the official records of the general government.
 john wilson mackenzie, of rotterdam, chemung county, new jersey, deceased,
 contracted with the general government, on or about the th day of
 october, , to furnish to general sherman the sum total of thirty
 barrels of beef.
 very well.
 he started after sherman with the beef, but when he got to washington
 sherman had gone to manassas; so he took the beef and followed him there,
 but arrived too late; he followed him to nashville, and from nashville to
 chattanooga, and from chattanooga to atlanta—but he never could
 overtake him. at atlanta he took a fresh start and followed him clear
 through his march to the sea. he arrived too late again by a few days; but
 hearing that sherman was going out in the quaker city excursion to the
 holy land, he took shipping for beirut, calculating to head off the other
 vessel. when he arrived in jerusalem with his beef, he learned that
 sherman had not sailed in the quaker city, but had gone to the plains to
 fight the indians. he returned to america and started for the rocky
 mountains. after sixty-eight days of arduous travel on the plains, and
 when he had got within four miles of sherman’s headquarters, he was
 tomahawked and scalped, and the indians got the beef.
 they got all of it but one barrel. sherman’s army captured that, and
 so, even in death, the bold navigator partly fulfilled his contract. in
 his will, which he had kept like a journal, he bequeathed the contract to
 his son bartholomew. bartholomew w. made out the following bill, and then
 died:
 in account with john wilson mackenzie, of new jersey,
 deceased,
 dr.
 to thirty barrels of beef for general sherman, at $,
 to traveling expenses and transportation
 total
 rec’d pay’t.
 he died then; but he left the contract to wm. j. martin, who tried to
 collect it, but died before he got through. he left it to barker j. allen,
 and he tried to collect it also. he did not survive. barker j. allen left
 it to anson g. rogers, who attempted to collect it, and got along as far
 as the ninth auditor’s office, when death, the great leveler, came
 all unsummoned, and foreclosed on him also. he left the bill to a relative
 of his in connecticut, vengeance hopkins by name, who lasted four weeks
 and two days, and made the best time on record, coming within one of
 reaching the twelfth auditor. in his will he gave the contract bill to his
 uncle, by the name of o-be-joyful johnson. it was too undermining for
 joyful. his last words were: “weep not for me—i am willing to
 go.” and so he was, poor soul. seven people inherited the contract
 after that; but they all died. so it came into my hands at last. it fell
 to me through a relative by the name of hubbard—bethlehem hubbard,
 of indiana. he had had a grudge against me for a long time; but in his
 last moments he sent for me, and forgave me everything, and, weeping, gave
 me the beef contract.
 this ends the history of it up to the time that i succeeded to the
 property. i will now endeavor to set myself straight before the nation in
 everything that concerns my share in the matter. i took this beef
 contract, and the bill for mileage and transportation, to the president of
 the united states.
 he said, “well, sir, what can i do for you?”
 i said, “sire, on or about the th day of october, , john
 wilson mackenzie, of rotterdam, chemung county, new jersey, deceased,
 contracted with the general government to furnish to general sherman, the
 sum total of thirty barrels of beef—”
 he stopped me there, and dismissed me from his presence—kindly, but
 firmly. the next day i called on the secretary of state.
 he said, “well, sir?”
 i said, “your royal highness: on or about the th day of october,
 , john wilson mackenzie of rotterdam, chemung county, new jersey,
 deceased, contracted with the general government to furnish to general
 sherman the sum total of thirty barrels of beef—”
 “that will do, sir—that will do; this office has nothing to do
 with contracts for beef.”
 i was bowed out. i thought the matter all over and finally, the following
 day, i visited the secretary of the navy, who said, “speak quickly,
 sir; do not keep me waiting.”
 i said, “your royal highness, on or about the th day of october,
 , john wilson mackenzie of rotterdam, chemung county, new jersey,
 deceased, contracted with the general government to general sherman the
 sum total of thirty barrels of beef—”
 well, it was as far as i could get. he had nothing to do with beef
 contracts for general sherman either. i began to think it was a curious
 kind of government. it looked somewhat as if they wanted to get out of
 paying for that beef. the following day i went to the secretary of the
 interior.
 i said, “your imperial highness, on or about the th day of october—”
 “that is sufficient, sir. i have heard of you before. go, take your
 infamous beef contract out of this establishment. the interior department
 has nothing whatever to do with subsistence for the army.”
 i went away. but i was exasperated now. i said i would haunt them; i would
 infest every department of this iniquitous government till that contract
 business was settled. i would collect that bill, or fall, as fell my
 predecessors, trying. i assailed the postmaster-general; i besieged the
 agricultural department; i waylaid the speaker of the house of
 representatives. they had nothing to do with army contracts for beef. i
 moved upon the commissioner of the patent office.
 i said, “your august excellency, on or about—”
 “perdition! have you got here with your incendiary beef contract, at
 last? we have nothing to do with beef contracts for the army, my dear sir.”
 “oh, that is all very well—but somebody has got to pay for
 that beef. it has got to be paid now, too, or i’ll confiscate this
 old patent office and everything in it.”
 “but, my dear sir—”
 “it don’t make any difference, sir. the patent office is
 liable for that beef, i reckon; and, liable or not liable, the patent
 office has got to pay for it.”
 never mind the details. it ended in a fight. the patent office won. but i
 found out something to my advantage. i was told that the treasury
 department was the proper place for me to go to. i went there. i waited
 two hours and a half, and then i was admitted to the first lord of the
 treasury.
 i said, “most noble, grave, and reverend signor, on or about the
 th day of october, , john wilson macken—”
 “that is sufficient, sir. i have heard of you. go to the first
 auditor of the treasury.”
 i did so. he sent me to the second auditor. the second auditor sent me to
 the third, and the third sent me to the first comptroller of the corn-beef
 division. this began to look like business. he examined his books and all
 his loose papers, but found no minute of the beef contract. i went to the
 second comptroller of the corn-beef division. he examined his books and
 his loose papers, but with no success. i was encouraged. during that week
 i got as far as the sixth comptroller in that division; the next week i
 got through the claims department; the third week i began and completed
 the mislaid contracts department, and got a foothold in the dead reckoning
 department. i finished that in three days. there was only one place left
 for it now. i laid siege to the commissioner of odds and ends. to his
 clerk, rather—he was not there himself. there were sixteen beautiful
 young ladies in the room, writing in books, and there were seven
 well-favored young clerks showing them how. the young women smiled up over
 their shoulders, and the clerks smiled back at them, and all went merry as
 a marriage bell. two or three clerks that were reading the newspapers
 looked at me rather hard, but went on reading, and nobody said anything.
 however, i had been used to this kind of alacrity from fourth assistant
 junior clerks all through my eventful career, from the very day i entered
 the first office of the corn-beef bureau clear till i passed out of the
 last one in the dead reckoning division. i had got so accomplished by this
 time that i could stand on one foot from the moment i entered an office
 till a clerk spoke to me, without changing more than two, or maybe three,
 times.
 so i stood there till i had changed four different times. then i said to
 one of the clerks who was reading:
 “illustrious vagrant, where is the grand turk?”
 “what do you mean, sir? whom do you mean? if you mean the chief of
 the bureau, he is out.”
 “will he visit the harem to-day?”
 the young man glared upon me awhile, and then went on reading his paper.
 but i knew the ways of those clerks. i knew i was safe if he got through
 before another new york mail arrived. he only had two more papers left.
 after a while he finished them, and then he yawned and asked me what i
 wanted.
 “renowned and honored imbecile: on or about—”
 “you are the beef-contract man. give me your papers.”
 he took them, and for a long time he ransacked his odds and ends. finally
 he found the northwest passage, as i regarded it—he found the long
 lost record of that beef contract—he found the rock upon which so
 many of my ancestors had split before they ever got to it. i was deeply
 moved. and yet i rejoiced—for i had survived. i said with emotion,
 “give it me. the government will settle now.” he waved me
 back, and said there was something yet to be done first.
 “where is this john wilson mackenzie?” said he.
 “dead.”
 “when did he die?”
 “he didn’t die at all—he was killed.”
 “how?”
 “tomahawked.”
 “who tomahawked him?”
 “why, an indian, of course. you didn’t suppose it was the
 superintendent of a sunday-school, did you?”
 “no. an indian, was it?”
 “the same.”
 “name of the indian?”
 “his name? i don’t know his name.”
 “must have his name. who saw the tomahawking done?”
 “i don’t know.”
 “you were not present yourself, then?”
 “which you can see by my hair. i was absent.
 “then how do you know that mackenzie is dead?”
 “because he certainly died at that time, and i have every reason to
 believe that he has been dead ever since. i know he has, in fact.”
 “we must have proofs. have you got the indian?”
 “of course not.”
 “well, you must get him. have you got the tomahawk?”
 “i never thought of such a thing.”
 “you must get the tomahawk. you must produce the indian and the
 tomahawk. if mackenzie’s death can be proven by these, you can then
 go before the commission appointed to audit claims with some show of
 getting your bill under such headway that your children may possibly live
 to receive the money and enjoy it. but that man’s death must be
 proven. however, i may as well tell you that the government will never pay
 that transportation and those traveling expenses of the lamented
 mackenzie. it may possibly pay for the barrel of beef that sherman’s
 soldiers captured, if you can get a relief bill through congress making an
 appropriation for that purpose; but it will not pay for the twenty-nine
 barrels the indians ate.”
 “then there is only a hundred dollars due me, and that isn’t
 certain! after all mackenzie’s travels in europe, asia, and america
 with that beef; after all his trials and tribulations and transportation;
 after the slaughter of all those innocents that tried to collect that
 bill! young man, why didn’t the first comptroller of the corn-beef
 division tell me this?”
 “he didn’t know anything about the genuineness of your claim.”
 “why didn’t the second tell me? why didn’t the third?
 why didn’t all those divisions and departments tell me?”
 “none of them knew. we do things by routine here. you have followed
 the routine and found out what you wanted to know. it is the best way. it
 is the only way. it is very regular, and very slow, but it is very
 certain.”
 “yes, certain death.” it has been, to the most of our tribe. i
 begin to feel that i, too, am called.
 “young man, you love the bright creature yonder with the gentle blue
 eyes and the steel pens behind her ears—i see it in your soft
 glances; you wish to marry her—but you are poor. here, hold out your
 hand—here is the beef contract; go, take her and be happy! heaven
 bless you, my children!”
 this is all i know about the great beef contract that has created so much
 talk in the community. the clerk to whom i bequeathed it died. i know
 nothing further about the contract, or any one connected with it. i only
 know that if a man lives long enough he can trace a thing through the
 circumlocution office of washington and find out, after much labor and
 trouble and delay, that which he could have found out on the first day if
 the business of the circumlocution office were as ingeniously systematized
 as it would be if it were a great private mercantile institution.
 —[some years ago, about , when this was first published,
 few people believed it, but considered it a mere extravaganza. in these
 latter days it seems hard to realize that there was ever a time when the
 robbing of our government was a novelty. the very man who showed me
 where to find the documents for this case was at that very time spending
 hundreds of thousands of dollars in washington for a mail steamship
 concern, in the effort to procure a subsidy for the company—a fact
 which was a long time in coming to the surface, but leaked out at last
 and underwent congressional investigation.]
 this is history. it is not a wild extravaganza, like “john wilson
 mackenzie’s great beef contract,” but is a plain statement of
 facts and circumstances with which the congress of the united states has
 interested itself from time to time during the long period of half a
 century.
 i will not call this matter of george fisher’s a great deathless and
 unrelenting swindle upon the government and people of the united states—for
 it has never been so decided, and i hold that it is a grave and solemn
 wrong for a writer to cast slurs or call names when such is the case—but
 will simply present the evidence and let the reader deduce his own
 verdict. then we shall do nobody injustice, and our consciences shall be
 clear.
 on or about the st day of september, , the creek war being then in
 progress in florida, the crops, herds, and houses of mr. george fisher, a
 citizen, were destroyed, either by the indians or by the united states
 troops in pursuit of them. by the terms of the law, if the indians
 destroyed the property, there was no relief for fisher; but if the troops
 destroyed it, the government of the united states was debtor to fisher for
 the amount involved.
 george fisher must have considered that the indians destroyed the
 property, because, although he lived several years afterward, he does not
 appear to have ever made any claim upon the government.
 in the course of time fisher died, and his widow married again. and by and
 by, nearly twenty years after that dimly remembered raid upon fisher’s
 corn-fields, the widow fisher’s new husband petitioned congress for
 pay for the property, and backed up the petition with many depositions and
 affidavits which purported to prove that the troops, and not the indians,
 destroyed the property; that the troops, for some inscrutable reason,
 deliberately burned down “houses” (or cabins) valued at $,
 the same belonging to a peaceable private citizen, and also destroyed
 various other property belonging to the same citizen. but congress
 declined to believe that the troops were such idiots (after overtaking and
 scattering a band of indians proved to have been found destroying fisher’s
 property) as to calmly continue the work of destruction themselves; and
 make a complete job of what the indians had only commenced. so congress
 denied the petition of the heirs of george fisher in , and did not pay
 them a cent.
 we hear no more from them officially until , sixteen years after their
 first attempt on the treasury, and a full generation after the death of
 the man whose fields were destroyed. the new generation of fisher heirs
 then came forward and put in a bill for damages. the second auditor
 awarded them $,, being half the damage sustained by fisher. the
 auditor said the testimony showed that at least half the destruction was
 done by the indians “before the troops started in pursuit,”
 and of course the government was not responsible for that half.
 . that was in april, . in december, , the heirs of george fisher,
 deceased, came forward and pleaded for a “revision” of their
 bill of damages. the revision was made, but nothing new could be found in
 their favor except an error of $ in the former calculation. however, in
 order to keep up the spirits of the fisher family, the auditor concluded
 to go back and allow interest from the date of the first petition ()
 to the date when the bill of damages was awarded. this sent the fishers
 home happy with sixteen years’ interest on $,—the same
 amounting to $,.. total, $,..
 . for an entire year the suffering fisher family remained quiet—even
 satisfied, after a fashion. then they swooped down upon the government
 with their wrongs once more. that old patriot, attorney-general toucey,
 burrowed through the musty papers of the fishers and discovered one more
 chance for the desolate orphans—interest on that original award of
 $, from date of destruction of the property () up to ! result,
 $,. for the indigent fishers. so now we have: first, $,
 damages; second, interest on it from  to , $,.; third,
 interest on it dated back to , $,.. total, $,.! what
 better investment for a great-grandchild than to get the indians to burn a
 corn-field for him sixty or seventy years before his birth, and plausibly
 lay it on lunatic united states troops?
 . strange as it may seem, the fishers let congress alone for five years—or,
 what is perhaps more likely, failed to make themselves heard by congress
 for that length of time. but at last, in , they got a hearing. they
 persuaded congress to pass an act requiring the auditor to re-examine
 their case. but this time they stumbled upon the misfortune of an honest
 secretary of the treasury (mr. james guthrie), and he spoiled everything.
 he said in very plain language that the fishers were not only not entitled
 to another cent, but that those children of many sorrows and acquainted
 with grief had been paid too much already.
 . therefore another interval of rest and silence ensued—an interval
 which lasted four years—viz till . the “right man in the
 right place” was then secretary of war—john b. floyd, of
 peculiar renown! here was a master intellect; here was the very man to
 succor the suffering heirs of dead and forgotten fisher. they came up from
 florida with a rush—a great tidal wave of fishers freighted with the
 same old musty documents about the same immortal corn-fields of their
 ancestor. they straight-way got an act passed transferring the fisher
 matter from the dull auditor to the ingenious floyd. what did floyd do? he
 said, “it was proved that the indians destroyed everything they
 could before the troops entered in pursuit.” he considered,
 therefore, that what they destroyed must have consisted of “the
 houses with all their contents, and the liquor” (the most trifling
 part of the destruction, and set down at only $, all told), and that
 the government troops then drove them off and calmly proceeded to destroy:—
 two hundred and twenty acres of corn in the field, thirty-five acres of
 wheat, and nine hundred and eighty-six head of live stock! [what a
 singularly intelligent army we had in those days, according to mr. floyd—though
 not according to the congress of .]
 so mr. floyd decided that the government was not responsible for that
 $, worth of rubbish which the indians destroyed, but was responsible
 for the property destroyed by the troops—which property consisted of
 (i quote from the printed united states senate document):
 dollars
 corn at bassett’s creek,
 cattle,
 stock hogs,
 drove hogs,
 wheat,
 hides,
 corn on the alabama river,
  total,
 that sum, in his report, mr. floyd calls the “full value of the
 property destroyed by the troops.”
 he allows that sum to the starving fishers, together with interest from
 . from this new sum total the amounts already paid to the fishers were
 deducted, and then the cheerful remainder (a fraction under forty thousand
 dollars) was handed to them and again they retired to florida in a
 condition of temporary tranquillity. their ancestor’s farm had now
 yielded them altogether nearly sixty-seven thousand dollars in cash.
 . does the reader suppose that that was the end of it? does he suppose
 those diffident fishers were satisfied? let the evidence show. the fishers
 were quiet just two years. then they came swarming up out of the fertile
 swamps of florida with their same old documents, and besieged congress
 once more. congress capitulated on the st of june, , and instructed
 mr. floyd to overhaul those papers again, and pay that bill. a treasury
 clerk was ordered to go through those papers and report to mr. floyd what
 amount was still due the emaciated fishers.
 this clerk (i can produce him whenever he is wanted) discovered what was
 apparently a glaring and recent forgery in the papers; whereby a witness’s
 testimony as to the price of corn in florida in  was made to name
 double the amount which that witness had originally specified as the
 price! the clerk not only called his superior’s attention to this
 thing, but in making up his brief of the case called particular attention
 to it in writing. that part of the brief never got before congress, nor
 has congress ever yet had a hint of forgery existing among the fisher
 papers. nevertheless, on the basis of the double prices (and totally
 ignoring the clerk’s assertion that the figures were manifestly and
 unquestionably a recent forgery), mr. floyd remarks in his new report that
 “the testimony, particularly in regard to the corn crops, demands a
 much higher allowance than any heretofore made by the auditor or myself.”
 so he estimates the crop at sixty bushels to the acre (double what florida
 acres produce), and then virtuously allows pay for only half the crop, but
 allows two dollars and a half a bushel for that half, when there are rusty
 old books and documents in the congressional library to show just what the
 fisher testimony showed before the forgery—viz., that in the fall of
  corn was only worth from $. to $. a bushel. having accomplished
 this, what does mr. floyd do next? mr. floyd (“with an earnest
 desire to execute truly the legislative will,” as he piously
 remarks) goes to work and makes out an entirely new bill of fisher
 damages, and in this new bill he placidly ignores the indians altogether—puts
 no particle of the destruction of the fisher property upon them, but, even
 repenting him of charging them with burning the cabins and drinking the
 whisky and breaking the crockery, lays the entire damage at the door of
 the imbecile united states troops down to the very last item! and not only
 that, but uses the forgery to double the loss of corn at “bassett’s
 creek,” and uses it again to absolutely treble the loss of corn on
 the “alabama river.” this new and ably conceived and executed
 bill of mr. floyd’s figures up as follows (i copy again from the
 printed united states senate document):
 the united states in account with the legal representatives of george
 fisher, deceased.
 to  head of cattle, at  dollars,
 to  head of drove hogs,
 to  head of stock hogs,
 to  acres of corn on bassett’s creek,
 to  barrels of whisky,
 to  barrels of brandy,
 to  barrel of rum,
 to dry-goods and merchandise in store,
 to  acres of wheat,
 to , hides,
 to furs and hats in store,
 to crockery ware in store,
 to smith’s and carpenter’s tools,
 to houses burned and destroyed,
 to  dozen bottles of wine,
 to  acres of corn on alabama river,
 to crops of peas, fodder, etc
 total,
 to interest on $,, from july 
 to november ,  years and  months,
 to interest on $,, from september
  to november ,  years and  months,
  total,
 he puts everything in this time. he does not even allow that the indians
 destroyed the crockery or drank the four dozen bottles of (currant) wine.
 when it came to supernatural comprehensiveness in “gobbling,”
 john b. floyd was without his equal, in his own or any other generation.
 subtracting from the above total the $, already paid to george fisher’s
 implacable heirs, mr. floyd announced that the government was still
 indebted to them in the sum of sixty-six thousand five hundred and
 nineteen dollars and eighty-five cents, “which,” mr. floyd
 complacently remarks, “will be paid, accordingly, to the
 administrator of the estate of george fisher, deceased, or to his attorney
 in fact.”
 but, sadly enough for the destitute orphans, a new president came in just
 at this time, buchanan and floyd went out, and they never got their money.
 the first thing congress did in  was to rescind the resolution of june
 , , under which mr. floyd had been ciphering. then floyd (and
 doubtless the heirs of george fisher likewise) had to give up financial
 business for a while, and go into the confederate army and serve their
 country.
 were the heirs of george fisher killed? no. they are back now at this very
 time (july, ), beseeching congress through that blushing and diffident
 creature, garrett davis, to commence making payments again on their
 interminable and insatiable bill of damages for corn and whisky destroyed
 by a gang of irresponsible indians, so long ago that even government
 red-tape has failed to keep consistent and intelligent track of it.
 now the above are facts. they are history. any one who doubts it can send
 to the senate document department of the capitol for h. r. ex. doc. no.
 , th congress, d session; and for s. ex. doc. no. , st congress,
 d session, and satisfy himself. the whole case is set forth in the first
 volume of the court of claims reports.
 it is my belief that as long as the continent of america holds together,
 the heirs of george fisher, deceased, will still make pilgrimages to
 washington from the swamps of florida, to plead for just a little more
 cash on their bill of damages (even when they received the last of that
 sixty-seven thousand dollars, they said it was only one fourth what the
 government owed them on that fruitful corn-field), and as long as they
 choose to come they will find garrett davises to drag their vampire
 schemes before congress. this is not the only hereditary fraud (if fraud
 it is—which i have before repeatedly remarked is not proven) that is
 being quietly handed down from generation to generation of fathers and
 sons, through the persecuted treasury of the united states.
 in san francisco, the other day, “a well-dressed boy, on his way to
 sunday-school, was arrested and thrown into the city prison for stoning
 chinamen.”
 what a commentary is this upon human justice! what sad prominence it gives
 to our human disposition to tyrannize over the weak! san francisco has
 little right to take credit to herself for her treatment of this poor boy.
 what had the child’s education been? how should he suppose it was
 wrong to stone a chinaman? before we side against him, along with outraged
 san francisco, let us give him a chance—let us hear the testimony
 for the defense.
 he was a “well-dressed” boy, and a sunday-school scholar, and
 therefore the chances are that his parents were intelligent, well-to-do
 people, with just enough natural villainy in their composition to make
 them yearn after the daily papers, and enjoy them; and so this boy had
 opportunities to learn all through the week how to do right, as well as on
 sunday.
 it was in this way that he found out that the great commonwealth of
 california imposes an unlawful mining-tax upon john the foreigner, and
 allows patrick the foreigner to dig gold for nothing—probably
 because the degraded mongol is at no expense for whisky, and the refined
 celt cannot exist without it.
 it was in this way that he found out that a respectable number of the
 tax-gatherers—it would be unkind to say all of them—collect
 the tax twice, instead of once; and that, inasmuch as they do it solely to
 discourage chinese immigration into the mines, it is a thing that is much
 applauded, and likewise regarded as being singularly facetious.
 it was in this way that he found out that when a white man robs a
 sluice-box (by the term white man is meant spaniards, mexicans,
 portuguese, irish, hondurans, peruvians, chileans, etc., etc.), they make
 him leave the camp; and when a chinaman does that thing, they hang him.
 it was in this way that he found out that in many districts of the vast
 pacific coast, so strong is the wild, free love of justice in the hearts
 of the people, that whenever any secret and mysterious crime is committed,
 they say, “let justice be done, though the heavens fall,” and
 go straightway and swing a chinaman.
 it was in this way that he found out that by studying one half of each day’s
 “local items,” it would appear that the police of san
 francisco were either asleep or dead, and by studying the other half it
 would seem that the reporters were gone mad with admiration of the energy,
 the virtue, the high effectiveness, and the dare-devil intrepidity of that
 very police-making exultant mention of how “the argus-eyed officer
 so-and-so” captured a wretched knave of a chinaman who was stealing
 chickens, and brought him gloriously to the city prison; and how “the
 gallant officer such-and-such-a-one” quietly kept an eye on the
 movements of an “unsuspecting, almond-eyed son of confucius”
 (your reporter is nothing if not facetious), following him around with
 that far-off look of vacancy and unconsciousness always so finely affected
 by that inscrutable being, the forty-dollar policeman, during a waking
 interval, and captured him at last in the very act of placing his hands in
 a suspicious manner upon a paper of tacks, left by the owner in an exposed
 situation; and how one officer performed this prodigious thing, and
 another officer that, and another the other—and pretty much every
 one of these performances having for a dazzling central incident a
 chinaman guilty of a shilling’s worth of crime, an unfortunate,
 whose misdemeanor must be hurrahed into something enormous in order to
 keep the public from noticing how many really important rascals went
 uncaptured in the mean time, and how overrated those glorified policemen
 actually are.
 it was in this way that the boy found out that the legislature, being
 aware that the constitution has made america an asylum for the poor and
 the oppressed of all nations, and that, therefore, the poor and oppressed
 who fly to our shelter must not be charged a disabling admission fee, made
 a law that every chinaman, upon landing, must be vaccinated upon the
 wharf, and pay to the state’s appointed officer ten dollars for the
 service, when there are plenty of doctors in san francisco who would be
 glad enough to do it for him for fifty cents.
 it was in this way that the boy found out that a chinaman had no rights
 that any man was bound to respect; that he had no sorrows that any man was
 bound to pity; that neither his life nor his liberty was worth the
 purchase of a penny when a white man needed a scapegoat; that nobody loved
 chinamen, nobody befriended them, nobody spared them suffering when it was
 convenient to inflict it; everybody, individuals, communities, the majesty
 of the state itself, joined in hating, abusing, and persecuting these
 humble strangers.
 and, therefore, what could have been more natural than for this
 sunny-hearted-boy, tripping along to sunday-school, with his mind teeming
 with freshly learned incentives to high and virtuous action, to say to
 himself:
 “ah, there goes a chinaman! god will not love me if i do not stone
 him.”
 and for this he was arrested and put in the city jail.
 everything conspired to teach him that it was a high and holy thing to
 stone a chinaman, and yet he no sooner attempts to do his duty than he is
 punished for it—he, poor chap, who has been aware all his life that
 one of the principal recreations of the police, out toward the gold
 refinery, is to look on with tranquil enjoyment while the butchers of
 brannan street set their dogs on unoffending chinamen, and make them flee
 for their lives.
 —[i have many such memories in my mind, but am thinking just at
 present of one particular one, where the brannan street butchers set their
 dogs on a chinaman who was quietly passing with a basket of clothes on his
 head; and while the dogs mutilated his flesh, a butcher increased the
 hilarity of the occasion by knocking some of the chinaman’s teeth
 down his throat with half a brick. this incident sticks in my memory with
 a more malevolent tenacity, perhaps, on account of the fact that i was in
 the employ of a san francisco journal at the time, and was not allowed to
 publish it because it might offend some of the peculiar element that
 subscribed for the paper.]
 keeping in mind the tuition in the humanities which the entire “pacific
 coast” gives its youth, there is a very sublimity of incongruity in
 the virtuous flourish with which the good city fathers of san francisco
 proclaim (as they have lately done) that “the police are positively
 ordered to arrest all boys, of every description and wherever found, who
 engage in assaulting chinamen.”
 still, let us be truly glad they have made the order, notwithstanding its
 inconsistency; and let us rest perfectly confident the police are glad,
 too. because there is no personal peril in arresting boys, provided they
 be of the small kind, and the reporters will have to laud their
 performances just as loyally as ever, or go without items.
 the new form for local items in san francisco will now be: “the
 ever-vigilant and efficient officer so-and-so succeeded, yesterday
 afternoon, in arresting master tommy jones, after a determined resistance,”
 etc., etc., followed by the customary statistics and final hurrah, with
 its unconscious sarcasm: “we are happy in being able to state that
 this is the forty-seventh boy arrested by this gallant officer since the
 new ordinance went into effect. the most extraordinary activity prevails
 in the police department. nothing like it has been seen since we can
 remember.”
 “i was sitting here,” said the judge, “in this old
 pulpit, holding court, and we were trying a big, wicked-looking spanish
 desperado for killing the husband of a bright, pretty mexican woman. it
 was a lazy summer day, and an awfully long one, and the witnesses were
 tedious. none of us took any interest in the trial except that nervous,
 uneasy devil of a mexican woman—because you know how they love and
 how they hate, and this one had loved her husband with all her might, and
 now she had boiled it all down into hate, and stood here spitting it at
 that spaniard with her eyes; and i tell you she would stir me up, too,
 with a little of her summer lightning, occasionally. well, i had my coat
 off and my heels up, lolling and sweating, and smoking one of those
 cabbage cigars the san francisco people used to think were good enough for
 us in those times; and the lawyers they all had their coats off, and were
 smoking and whittling, and the witnesses the same, and so was the
 prisoner. well, the fact is, there warn’t any interest in a murder
 trial then, because the fellow was always brought in not guilty,’
 the jury expecting him to do as much for them some time; and, although the
 evidence was straight and square against this spaniard, we knew we could
 not convict him without seeming to be rather high-handed and sort of
 reflecting on every gentleman in the community; for there warn’t any
 carriages and liveries then, and so the only ‘style’ there
 was, was to keep your private graveyard. but that woman seemed to have her
 heart set on hanging that spaniard; and you’d ought to have seen how
 she would glare on him a minute, and then look up at me in her pleading
 way, and then turn and for the next five minutes search the jury’s
 faces, and by and by drop her face in her hands for just a little while as
 if she was most ready to give up; but out she’d come again directly,
 and be as live and anxious as ever. but when the jury announced the
 verdict—not guilty—and i told the prisoner he was acquitted
 and free to go, that woman rose up till she appeared to be as tall and
 grand as a seventy-four-gun ship, and says she:
 “‘judge, do i understand you to say that this man is not
 guilty that murdered my husband without any cause before my own eyes and
 my little children’s, and that all has been done to him that ever
 justice and the law can do?’
 “‘the same,’ says i.
 “and then what do you reckon she did? why, she turned on that
 smirking spanish fool like a wildcat, and out with a ‘navy’
 and shot him dead in open court!”
 “that was spirited, i am willing to admit.”
 “wasn’t it, though?” said the judge admiringly.
 “i wouldn’t have missed it for anything. i adjourned court
 right on the spot, and we put on our coats and went out and took up a
 collection for her and her cubs, and sent them over the mountains to their
 friends. ah, she was a spirited wench!”
 december , .
 “could you give me any information respecting such islands, if any,
 as the government is going to purchase?”
 it is an uncle of mine that wants to know. he is an industrious man and
 well disposed, and wants to make a living in an honest, humble way, but
 more especially he wants to be quiet. he wishes to settle down, and be
 quiet and unostentatious. he has been to the new island st. thomas, but he
 says he thinks things are unsettled there. he went there early with an
 attache of the state department, who was sent down with money to pay for
 the island. my uncle had his money in the same box, and so when they went
 ashore, getting a receipt, the sailors broke open the box and took all the
 money, not making any distinction between government money, which was
 legitimate money to be stolen, and my uncle’s, which was his own
 private property, and should have been respected. but he came home and got
 some more and went back. and then he took the fever. there are seven kinds
 of fever down there, you know; and, as his blood was out of order by
 reason of loss of sleep and general wear and tear of mind, he failed to
 cure the first fever, and then somehow he got the other six. he is not a
 kind of man that enjoys fevers, though he is well meaning and always does
 what he thinks is right, and so he was a good deal annoyed when it
 appeared he was going to die.
 but he worried through, and got well and started a farm. he fenced it in,
 and the next day that great storm came on and washed the most of it over
 to gibraltar, or around there somewhere. he only said, in his patient way,
 that it was gone, and he wouldn’t bother about trying to find out
 where it went to, though it was his opinion it went to gibraltar.
 then he invested in a mountain, and started a farm up there, so as to be
 out of the way when the sea came ashore again. it was a good mountain, and
 a good farm, but it wasn’t any use; an earthquake came the next
 night and shook it all down. it was all fragments, you know, and so mixed
 up with another man’s property that he could not tell which were his
 fragments without going to law; and he would not do that, because his main
 object in going to st. thomas was to be quiet. all that he wanted was to
 settle down and be quiet.
 he thought it all over, and finally he concluded to try the low ground
 again, especially as he wanted to start a brickyard this time. he bought a
 flat, and put out a hundred thousand bricks to dry preparatory to baking
 them. but luck appeared to be against him. a volcano shoved itself through
 there that night, and elevated his brickyard about two thousand feet in
 the air. it irritated him a good deal. he has been up there, and he says
 the bricks are all baked right enough, but he can’t get them down.
 at first, he thought maybe the government would get the bricks down for
 him, because since government bought the island, it ought to protect the
 property where a man has invested in good faith; but all he wants is
 quiet, and so he is not going to apply for the subsidy he was thinking
 about.
 he went back there last week in a couple of ships of war, to prospect
 around the coast for a safe place for a farm where he could be quiet; but
 a great “tidal wave” came, and hoisted both of the ships out
 into one of the interior counties, and he came near losing his life. so he
 has given up prospecting in a ship, and is discouraged.
 well, now he don’t know what to do. he has tried alaska; but the
 bears kept after him so much, and kept him so much on the jump, as it
 were, that he had to leave the country. he could not be quiet there with
 those bears prancing after him all the time. that is how he came to go to
 the new island we have bought—st. thomas. but he is getting to think
 st. thomas is not quiet enough for a man of his turn of mind, and that is
 why he wishes me to find out if government is likely to buy some more
 islands shortly. he has heard that government is thinking about buying
 porto rico. if that is true, he wishes to try porto rico, if it is a quiet
 place. how is porto rico for his style of man? do you think the government
 will buy it?
 once the creatures of the forest held a great convention and appointed a
 commission consisting of the most illustrious scientists among them to go
 forth, clear beyond the forest and out into the unknown and unexplored
 world, to verify the truth of the matters already taught in their schools
 and colleges and also to make discoveries. it was the most imposing
 enterprise of the kind the nation had ever embarked in. true, the
 government had once sent dr. bull frog, with a picked crew, to hunt for a
 northwesterly passage through the swamp to the right-hand corner of the
 wood, and had since sent out many expeditions to hunt for dr. bull frog;
 but they never could find him, and so government finally gave him up and
 ennobled his mother to show its gratitude for the services her son had
 rendered to science. and once government sent sir grass hopper to hunt for
 the sources of the rill that emptied into the swamp; and afterward sent
 out many expeditions to hunt for sir grass, and at last they were
 successful—they found his body, but if he had discovered the sources
 meantime, he did not let on. so government acted handsomely by deceased,
 and many envied his funeral.
 but these expeditions were trifles compared with the present one; for this
 one comprised among its servants the very greatest among the learned; and
 besides it was to go to the utterly unvisited regions believed to lie
 beyond the mighty forest—as we have remarked before. how the members
 were banqueted, and glorified, and talked about! everywhere that one of
 them showed himself, straightway there was a crowd to gape and stare at
 him.
 finally they set off, and it was a sight to see the long procession of
 dry-land tortoises heavily laden with savants, scientific instruments,
 glow-worms and fire-flies for signal service, provisions, ants and
 tumble-bugs to fetch and carry and delve, spiders to carry the surveying
 chain and do other engineering duty, and so forth and so on; and after the
 tortoises came another long train of ironclads—stately and spacious
 mud turtles for marine transportation service; and from every tortoise and
 every turtle flaunted a flaming gladiolus or other splendid banner; at the
 head of the column a great band of bumble-bees, mosquitoes, katy-dids, and
 crickets discoursed martial music; and the entire train was under the
 escort and protection of twelve picked regiments of the army worm.
 at the end of three weeks the expedition emerged from the forest and
 looked upon the great unknown world. their eyes were greeted with an
 impressive spectacle. a vast level plain stretched before them, watered by
 a sinuous stream; and beyond there towered up against the sky a long and
 lofty barrier of some kind, they did not know what. the tumble-bug said he
 believed it was simply land tilted up on its edge, because he knew he
 could see trees on it. but professor snail and the others said:
 “you are hired to dig, sir—that is all. we need your muscle,
 not your brains. when we want your opinion on scientific matters, we will
 hasten to let you know. your coolness is intolerable, too—loafing
 about here meddling with august matters of learning, when the other
 laborers are pitching camp. go along and help handle the baggage.”
 the tumble-bug turned on his heel uncrushed, unabashed, observing to
 himself, “if it isn’t land tilted up, let me die the death of
 the unrighteous.”
 professor bull frog (nephew of the late explorer) said he believed the
 ridge was the wall that inclosed the earth. he continued:
 “our fathers have left us much learning, but they had not traveled
 far, and so we may count this a noble new discovery. we are safe for
 renown now, even though our labors began and ended with this single
 achievement. i wonder what this wall is built of? can it be fungus? fungus
 is an honorable good thing to build a wall of.”
 professor snail adjusted his field-glass and examined the rampart
 critically. finally he said:
 “‘the fact that it is not diaphanous convinces me that it is a
 dense vapor formed by the calorification of ascending moisture
 dephlogisticated by refraction. a few endiometrical experiments would
 confirm this, but it is not necessary. the thing is obvious.”
 so he shut up his glass and went into his shell to make a note of the
 discovery of the world’s end, and the nature of it.
 “profound mind!” said professor angle-worm to professor
 field-mouse; “profound mind! nothing can long remain a mystery to
 that august brain.”
 night drew on apace, the sentinel crickets were posted, the glow-worm and
 fire-fly lamps were lighted, and the camp sank to silence and sleep. after
 breakfast in the morning, the expedition moved on. about noon a great
 avenue was reached, which had in it two endless parallel bars of some kind
 of hard black substance, raised the height of the tallest bull frog above
 the general level. the scientists climbed up on these and examined and
 tested them in various ways. they walked along them for a great distance,
 but found no end and no break in them. they could arrive at no decision.
 there was nothing in the records of science that mentioned anything of
 this kind. but at last the bald and venerable geographer, professor mud
 turtle, a person who, born poor, and of a drudging low family, had, by his
 own native force raised himself to the headship of the geographers of his
 generation, said:
 “‘my friends, we have indeed made a discovery here. we have
 found in a palpable, compact, and imperishable state what the wisest of
 our fathers always regarded as a mere thing of the imagination. humble
 yourselves, my friends, for we stand in a majestic presence. these are
 parallels of latitude!”
 every heart and every head was bowed, so awful, so sublime was the
 magnitude of the discovery. many shed tears.
 the camp was pitched and the rest of the day given up to writing
 voluminous accounts of the marvel, and correcting astronomical tables to
 fit it. toward midnight a demoniacal shriek was heard, then a clattering
 and rumbling noise, and the next instant a vast terrific eye shot by, with
 a long tail attached, and disappeared in the gloom, still uttering
 triumphant shrieks.
 the poor camp laborers were stricken to the heart with fright, and
 stampeded for the high grass in a body. but not the scientists. they had
 no superstitions. they calmly proceeded to exchange theories. the ancient
 geographer’s opinion was asked. he went into his shell and
 deliberated long and profoundly. when he came out at last, they all knew
 by his worshiping countenance that he brought light. said he:
 “give thanks for this stupendous thing which we have been permitted
 to witness. it is the vernal equinox!”
 there were shoutings and great rejoicings.
 “but,” said the angle-worm, uncoiling after reflection,
 “this is dead summer-time.”
 “very well,” said the turtle, “we are far from our
 region; the season differs with the difference of time between the two
 points.”
 “ah, true. true enough. but it is night. how should the sun pass in
 the night?”
 “in these distant regions he doubtless passes always in the night at
 this hour.”
 “yes, doubtless that is true. but it being night, how is it that we
 could see him?”
 “it is a great mystery. i grant that. but i am persuaded that the
 humidity of the atmosphere in these remote regions is such that particles
 of daylight adhere to the disk and it was by aid of these that we were
 enabled to see the sun in the dark.”
 this was deemed satisfactory, and due entry was made of the decision.
 but about this moment those dreadful shriekings were heard again; again
 the rumbling and thundering came speeding up out of the night; and once
 more a flaming great eye flashed by and lost itself in gloom and distance.
 the camp laborers gave themselves up for lost. the savants were sorely
 perplexed. here was a marvel hard to account for. they thought and they
 talked, they talked and they thought. finally the learned and aged lord
 grand-daddy-longlegs, who had been sitting in deep study, with his slender
 limbs crossed and his stemmy arms folded, said:
 “deliver your opinions, brethren, and then i will tell my thought—for
 i think i have solved this problem.”
 “so be it, good your lordship,” piped the weak treble of the
 wrinkled and withered professor woodlouse, “for we shall hear from
 your lordship’s lips naught but wisdom.” [here the speaker
 threw in a mess of trite, threadbare, exasperating quotations from the
 ancient poets and philosophers, delivering them with unction in the
 sounding grandeurs of the original tongues, they being from the mastodon,
 the dodo, and other dead languages.] “perhaps i ought not to presume
 to meddle with matters pertaining to astronomy at all, in such a presence
 as this, i who have made it the business of my life to delve only among
 the riches of the extinct languages and unearth the opulence of their
 ancient lore; but still, as unacquainted as i am with the noble science of
 astronomy, i beg with deference and humility to suggest that inasmuch as
 the last of these wonderful apparitions proceeded in exactly the opposite
 direction from that pursued by the first, which you decide to be the
 vernal equinox, and greatly resembled it in all particulars, is it not
 possible, nay certain, that this last is the autumnal equi—”
 “o-o-o!” “o-o-o! go to bed! go to bed!” with
 annoyed derision from everybody. so the poor old woodlouse retreated out
 of sight, consumed with shame.
 further discussion followed, and then the united voice of the commission
 begged lord longlegs to speak. he said:
 “fellow-scientists, it is my belief that we have witnessed a thing
 which has occurred in perfection but once before in the knowledge of
 created beings. it is a phenomenon of inconceivable importance and
 interest, view it as one may, but its interest to us is vastly heightened
 by an added knowledge of its nature which no scholar has heretofore
 possessed or even suspected. this great marvel which we have just
 witnessed, fellow-savants (it almost takes my breath away), is nothing
 less than the transit of venus!”
 every scholar sprang to his feet pale with astonishment. then ensued
 tears, handshakings, frenzied embraces, and the most extravagant
 jubilations of every sort. but by and by, as emotion began to retire
 within bounds, and reflection to return to the front, the accomplished
 chief inspector lizard observed:
 “but how is this? venus should traverse the sun’s surface, not
 the earth’s.”
 the arrow went home. it carried sorrow to the breast of every apostle of
 learning there, for none could deny that this was a formidable criticism.
 but tranquilly the venerable duke crossed his limbs behind his ears and
 said:
 “my friend has touched the marrow of our mighty discovery. yes—all
 that have lived before us thought a transit of venus consisted of a flight
 across the sun’s face; they thought it, they maintained it, they
 honestly believed it, simple hearts, and were justified in it by the
 limitations of their knowledge; but to us has been granted the inestimable
 boon of proving that the transit occurs across the earth’s face, for
 we have seen it!”
 the assembled wisdom sat in speechless adoration of this imperial
 intellect. all doubts had instantly departed, like night before the
 lightning.
 the tumble-bug had just intruded, unnoticed. he now came reeling forward
 among the scholars, familiarly slapping first one and then another on the
 shoulder, saying “nice (’ic) nice old boy!” and smiling
 a smile of elaborate content. arrived at a good position for speaking, he
 put his left arm akimbo with his knuckles planted in his hip just under
 the edge of his cut-away coat, bent his right leg, placing his toe on the
 ground and resting his heel with easy grace against his left shin, puffed
 out his aldermanic stomach, opened his lips, leaned his right elbow on
 inspector lizard’s shoulder, and—
 but the shoulder was indignantly withdrawn and the hard-handed son of toil
 went to earth. he floundered a bit, but came up smiling, arranged his
 attitude with the same careful detail as before, only choosing professor
 dogtick’s shoulder for a support, opened his lips and—
 went to earth again. he presently scrambled up once more, still smiling,
 made a loose effort to brush the dust off his coat and legs, but a smart
 pass of his hand missed entirely, and the force of the unchecked impulse
 slewed him suddenly around, twisted his legs together, and projected him,
 limber and sprawling, into the lap of the lord longlegs. two or three
 scholars sprang forward, flung the low creature head over heels into a
 corner, and reinstated the patrician, smoothing his ruffled dignity with
 many soothing and regretful speeches. professor bull frog roared out:
 “no more of this, sirrah tumble-bug! say your say and then get you
 about your business with speed! quick—what is your errand? come move
 off a trifle; you smell like a stable; what have you been at?”
 “please (’ic!) please your worship i chanced to light upon a
 find. but no m(e-uck!) matter ’bout that. there’s b(’ic
 !) been another find which—beg pardon, your honors, what was that
 th(’ic!) thing that ripped by here first?”
 “it was the vernal equinox.”
 “inf(’ic!)fernal equinox. ’at’s all right. d(’ic
 !) dunno him. what’s other one?”
 “the transit of venus.
 “g(’ic !) got me again. no matter. las’ one dropped
 something.”
 “ah, indeed! good luck! good news! quick what is it?”
 “m(’ic!) mosey out ’n’ see. it’ll pay.”
 no more votes were taken for four-and-twenty hours. then the following
 entry was made:
 “the commission went in a body to view the find. it was found to
 consist of a hard, smooth, huge object with a rounded summit surmounted by
 a short upright projection resembling a section of a cabbage stalk divided
 transversely. this projection was not solid, but was a hollow cylinder
 plugged with a soft woody substance unknown to our region—that is,
 it had been so plugged, but unfortunately this obstruction had been
 heedlessly removed by norway rat, chief of the sappers and miners, before
 our arrival. the vast object before us, so mysteriously conveyed from the
 glittering domains of space, was found to be hollow and nearly filled with
 a pungent liquid of a brownish hue, like rainwater that has stood for some
 time. and such a spectacle as met our view!
 norway rat was perched upon the summit engaged in thrusting his tail into
 the cylindrical projection, drawing it out dripping, permitting the
 struggling multitude of laborers to suck the end of it, then straightway
 reinserting it and delivering the fluid to the mob as before. evidently
 this liquor had strangely potent qualities; for all that partook of it
 were immediately exalted with great and pleasurable emotions, and went
 staggering about singing ribald songs, embracing, fighting, dancing,
 discharging irruptions of profanity, and defying all authority. around us
 struggled a massed and uncontrolled mob—uncontrolled and likewise
 uncontrollable, for the whole army, down to the very sentinels, were mad
 like the rest, by reason of the drink. we were seized upon by these
 reckless creatures, and within the hour we, even we, were
 undistinguishable from the rest—the demoralization was complete and
 universal. in time the camp wore itself out with its orgies and sank into
 a stolid and pitiable stupor, in whose mysterious bonds rank was forgotten
 and strange bedfellows made, our eyes, at the resurrection, being blasted
 and our souls petrified with the incredible spectacle of that intolerable
 stinking scavenger, the tumble-bug, and the illustrious patrician my lord
 grand daddy, duke of longlegs, lying soundly steeped in sleep, and clasped
 lovingly in each other’s arms, the like whereof hath not been seen
 in all the ages that tradition compasseth, and doubtless none shall ever
 in this world find faith to master the belief of it save only we that have
 beheld the damnable and unholy vision. thus inscrutable be the ways of
 god, whose will be done!
 “this day, by order, did the engineer-in-chief, herr spider, rig the
 necessary tackle for the overturning of the vast reservoir, and so its
 calamitous contents were discharged in a torrent upon the thirsty earth,
 which drank it up, and now there is no more danger, we reserving but a few
 drops for experiment and scrutiny, and to exhibit to the king and
 subsequently preserve among the wonders of the museum. what this liquid is
 has been determined. it is without question that fierce and most
 destructive fluid called lightning. it was wrested, in its container, from
 its storehouse in the clouds, by the resistless might of the flying
 planet, and hurled at our feet as she sped by. an interesting discovery
 here results. which is, that lightning, kept to itself, is quiescent; it
 is the assaulting contact of the thunderbolt that releases it from
 captivity, ignites its awful fires, and so produces an instantaneous
 combustion and explosion which spread disaster and desolation far and wide
 in the earth.”
 after another day devoted to rest and recovery, the expedition proceeded
 upon its way. some days later it went into camp in a pleasant part of the
 plain, and the savants sallied forth to see what they might find. their
 reward was at hand. professor bull frog discovered a strange tree, and
 called his comrades. they inspected it with profound interest. it was very
 tall and straight, and wholly devoid of bark, limbs, or foliage. by
 triangulation lord longlegs determined its altitude; herr spider measured
 its circumference at the base and computed the circumference at its top by
 a mathematical demonstration based upon the warrant furnished by the
 uniform degree of its taper upward. it was considered a very extraordinary
 find; and since it was a tree of a hitherto unknown species, professor
 woodlouse gave it a name of a learned sound, being none other than that of
 professor bull frog translated into the ancient mastodon language, for it
 had always been the custom with discoverers to perpetuate their names and
 honor themselves by this sort of connection with their discoveries.
 now professor field-mouse having placed his sensitive ear to the tree,
 detected a rich, harmonious sound issuing from it. this surprising thing
 was tested and enjoyed by each scholar in turn, and great was the gladness
 and astonishment of all. professor woodlouse was requested to add to and
 extend the tree’s name so as to make it suggest the musical quality
 it possessed—which he did, furnishing the addition anthem singer,
 done into the mastodon tongue.
 by this time professor snail was making some telescopic inspections. he
 discovered a great number of these trees, extending in a single rank, with
 wide intervals between, as far as his instrument would carry, both
 southward and northward. he also presently discovered that all these trees
 were bound together, near their tops, by fourteen great ropes, one above
 another, which ropes were continuous, from tree to tree, as far as his
 vision could reach. this was surprising. chief engineer spider ran aloft
 and soon reported that these ropes were simply a web hung there by some
 colossal member of his own species, for he could see its prey dangling
 here and there from the strands, in the shape of mighty shreds and rags
 that had a woven look about their texture and were no doubt the discarded
 skins of prodigious insects which had been caught and eaten. and then he
 ran along one of the ropes to make a closer inspection, but felt a smart
 sudden burn on the soles of his feet, accompanied by a paralyzing shock,
 wherefore he let go and swung himself to the earth by a thread of his own
 spinning, and advised all to hurry at once to camp, lest the monster
 should appear and get as much interested in the savants as they were in
 him and his works. so they departed with speed, making notes about the
 gigantic web as they went. and that evening the naturalist of the
 expedition built a beautiful model of the colossal spider, having no need
 to see it in order to do this, because he had picked up a fragment of its
 vertebra by the tree, and so knew exactly what the creature looked like
 and what its habits and its preferences were by this simple evidence
 alone. he built it with a tail, teeth, fourteen legs, and a snout, and
 said it ate grass, cattle, pebbles, and dirt with equal enthusiasm. this
 animal was regarded as a very precious addition to science. it was hoped a
 dead one might be found to stuff. professor woodlouse thought that he and
 his brother scholars, by lying hid and being quiet, might maybe catch a
 live one. he was advised to try it. which was all the attention that was
 paid to his suggestion. the conference ended with the naming the monster
 after the naturalist, since he, after god, had created it.
 “and improved it, mayhap,” muttered the tumble-bug, who was
 intruding again, according to his idle custom and his unappeasable
 curiosity.
 a week later the expedition camped in the midst of a collection of
 wonderful curiosities. these were a sort of vast caverns of stone that
 rose singly and in bunches out of the plain by the side of the river which
 they had first seen when they emerged from the forest. these caverns stood
 in long, straight rows on opposite sides of broad aisles that were
 bordered with single ranks of trees. the summit of each cavern sloped
 sharply both ways. several horizontal rows of great square holes,
 obstructed by a thin, shiny, transparent substance, pierced the frontage
 of each cavern. inside were caverns within caverns; and one might ascend
 and visit these minor compartments by means of curious winding ways
 consisting of continuous regular terraces raised one above another. there
 were many huge, shapeless objects in each compartment which were
 considered to have been living creatures at one time, though now the thin
 brown skin was shrunken and loose, and rattled when disturbed. spiders
 were here in great number, and their cobwebs, stretched in all directions
 and wreathing the great skinny dead together, were a pleasant spectacle,
 since they inspired with life and wholesome cheer a scene which would
 otherwise have brought to the mind only a sense of forsakenness and
 desolation. information was sought of these spiders, but in vain. they
 were of a different nationality from those with the expedition, and their
 language seemed but a musical, meaningless jargon. they were a timid,
 gentle race, but ignorant, and heathenish worshipers of unknown gods. the
 expedition detailed a great detachment of missionaries to teach them the
 true religion, and in a week’s time a precious work had been wrought
 among those darkened creatures, not three families being by that time at
 peace with each other or having a settled belief in any system of religion
 whatever. this encouraged the expedition to establish a colony of
 missionaries there permanently, that the work of grace might go on.
 but let us not outrun our narrative. after close examination of the fronts
 of the caverns, and much thinking and exchanging of theories, the
 scientists determined the nature of these singular formations. they said
 that each belonged mainly to the old red sandstone period; that the cavern
 fronts rose in innumerable and wonderfully regular strata high in the air,
 each stratum about five frog-spans thick, and that in the present
 discovery lay an overpowering refutation of all received geology; for
 between every two layers of old red sandstone reposed a thin layer of
 decomposed limestone; so instead of there having been but one old red
 sandstone period there had certainly been not less than a hundred and
 seventy-five! and by the same token it was plain that there had also been
 a hundred and seventy-five floodings of the earth and depositings of
 limestone strata! the unavoidable deduction from which pair of facts was
 the overwhelming truth that the world, instead of being only two hundred
 thousand years old, was older by millions upon millions of years! and
 there was another curious thing: every stratum of old red sandstone was
 pierced and divided at mathematically regular intervals by vertical strata
 of limestone. up-shootings of igneous rock through fractures in water
 formations were common; but here was the first instance where water-formed
 rock had been so projected. it was a great and noble discovery, and its
 value to science was considered to be inestimable.
 a critical examination of some of the lower strata demonstrated the
 presence of fossil ants and tumble-bugs (the latter accompanied by their
 peculiar goods), and with high gratification the fact was enrolled upon
 the scientific record; for this was proof that these vulgar laborers
 belonged to the first and lowest orders of created beings, though at the
 same time there was something repulsive in the reflection that the perfect
 and exquisite creature of the modern uppermost order owed its origin to
 such ignominious beings through the mysterious law of development of
 species.
 the tumble-bug, overhearing this discussion, said he was willing that the
 parvenus of these new times should find what comfort they might in their
 wise-drawn theories, since as far as he was concerned he was content to be
 of the old first families and proud to point back to his place among the
 old original aristocracy of the land.
 “enjoy your mushroom dignity, stinking of the varnish of yesterday’s
 veneering, since you like it,” said he; “suffice it for the
 tumble-bugs that they come of a race that rolled their fragrant spheres
 down the solemn aisles of antiquity, and left their imperishable works
 embalmed in the old red sandstone to proclaim it to the wasting centuries
 as they file along the highway of time!”
 “oh, take a walk!” said the chief of the expedition, with
 derision.
 the summer passed, and winter approached. in and about many of the caverns
 were what seemed to be inscriptions. most of the scientists said they were
 inscriptions, a few said they were not. the chief philologist, professor
 woodlouse, maintained that they were writings, done in a character utterly
 unknown to scholars, and in a language equally unknown. he had early
 ordered his artists and draftsmen to make facsimiles of all that were
 discovered; and had set himself about finding the key to the hidden
 tongue. in this work he had followed the method which had always been used
 by decipherers previously. that is to say, he placed a number of copies of
 inscriptions before him and studied them both collectively and in detail.
 to begin with, he placed the following copies together:
 at first it seemed to the professor that this was a sign-language, and
 that each word was represented by a distinct sign; further examination
 convinced him that it was a written language, and that every letter of its
 alphabet was represented by a character of its own; and finally he decided
 that it was a language which conveyed itself partly by letters, and partly
 by signs or hieroglyphics. this conclusion was forced upon him by the
 discovery of several specimens of the following nature:
 he observed that certain inscriptions were met with in greater frequency
 than others. such as “for sale cheap”; “billiards”;
 draught.” naturally, then, these must be religious maxims. but this
 idea was cast aside by and by, as the mystery of the strange alphabet
 began to clear itself. in time, the professor was enabled to translate
 several of the inscriptions with considerable plausibility, though not to
 the perfect satisfaction of all the scholars. still, he made constant and
 encouraging progress.
 finally a cavern was discovered with these inscriptions upon it:
waterside museum. open at all hours. admission 
 cents. wonderful collection of wax-works, ancient fossils,
 professor woodlouse affirmed that the word “museum” was
 equivalent to the phrase “lumgath molo,” or “burial
 place.” upon entering, the scientists were well astonished. but what
 they saw may be best conveyed in the language of their own official
 report:
 “erect, in a row, were a sort of rigid great figures which struck us
 instantly as belonging to the long extinct species of reptile called man,
 described in our ancient records. this was a peculiarly gratifying
 discovery, because of late times it has become fashionable to regard this
 creature as a myth and a superstition, a work of the inventive
 imaginations of our remote ancestors. but here, indeed, was man perfectly
 preserved, in a fossil state. and this was his burial place, as already
 ascertained by the inscription. and now it began to be suspected that the
 caverns we had been inspecting had been his ancient haunts in that old
 time that he roamed the earth—for upon the breast of each of these
 tall fossils was an inscription in the character heretofore noticed. one
 read, ‘captain kidd the pirate’; another, ‘queen
 victoria’; another, ‘abe lincoln’; another, ‘george
 washington,’ etc.
 “with feverish interest we called for our ancient scientific records
 to discover if perchance the description of man there set down would tally
 with the fossils before us. professor woodlouse read it aloud in its
 quaint and musty phraseology, to wit:
 “‘in ye time of our fathers man still walked ye earth, as by
 tradition we know. it was a creature of exceeding great size, being
 compassed about with a loose skin, sometimes of one color, sometimes of
 many, the which it was able to cast at will; which being done, the hind
 legs were discovered to be armed with short claws like to a mole’s
 but broader, and ye forelegs with fingers of a curious slimness and a
 length much more prodigious than a frog’s, armed also with broad
 talons for scratching in ye earth for its food. it had a sort of feathers
 upon its head such as hath a rat, but longer, and a beak suitable for
 seeking its food by ye smell thereof. when it was stirred with happiness,
 it leaked water from its eyes; and when it suffered or was sad, it
 manifested it with a horrible hellish cackling clamor that was exceeding
 dreadful to hear and made one long that it might rend itself and perish,
 and so end its troubles. two mans being together, they uttered noises at
 each other like this: “haw-haw-haw—dam good, dam good,”
 together with other sounds of more or less likeness to these, wherefore ye
 poets conceived that they talked, but poets be always ready to catch at
 any frantic folly, god he knows. sometimes this creature goeth about with
 a long stick ye which it putteth to its face and bloweth fire and smoke
 through ye same with a sudden and most damnable bruit and noise that doth
 fright its prey to death, and so seizeth it in its talons and walketh away
 to its habitat, consumed with a most fierce and devilish joy.’
 “now was the description set forth by our ancestors wonderfully
 indorsed and confirmed by the fossils before us, as shall be seen. the
 specimen marked ‘captain kidd’ was examined in detail. upon
 its head and part of its face was a sort of fur like that upon the tail of
 a horse. with great labor its loose skin was removed, whereupon its body
 was discovered to be of a polished white texture, thoroughly petrified.
 the straw it had eaten, so many ages gone by, was still in its body,
 undigested—and even in its legs.
 “surrounding these fossils were objects that would mean nothing to
 the ignorant, but to the eye of science they were a revelation. they laid
 bare the secrets of dead ages. these musty memorials told us when man
 lived, and what were his habits. for here, side by side with man, were the
 evidences that he had lived in the earliest ages of creation, the
 companion of the other low orders of life that belonged to that forgotten
 time. here was the fossil nautilus that sailed the primeval seas; here was
 the skeleton of the mastodon, the ichthyosaurus, the cave-bear, the
 prodigious elk. here, also, were the charred bones of some of these
 extinct animals and of the young of man’s own species, split
 lengthwise, showing that to his taste the marrow was a toothsome luxury.
 it was plain that man had robbed those bones of their contents, since no
 toothmark of any beast was upon them albeit the tumble-bug intruded the
 remark that ‘no beast could mark a bone with its teeth, anyway.’
 here were proofs that man had vague, groveling notions of art; for this
 fact was conveyed by certain things marked with the untranslatable words,
 man.’ some of these seemed to be rude weapons chipped out of flint,
 and in a secret place was found some more in process of construction, with
 this untranslatable legend, on a thin, flimsy material, lying by:
 “‘jones, if you don’t want to be discharged from
 the musseum, make the next primeaveal weppons more careful—you
 couldn’t even fool one of these sleepy old syentific grannys from
 the coledge with the last ones. and mind you the animles you carved on
 some of the bone ornaments is a blame sight too good for any primeaveal
 man that was ever fooled.—varnum, manager.’
 “back of the burial place was a mass of ashes, showing that man
 always had a feast at a funeral—else why the ashes in such a place;
 and showing, also, that he believed in god and the immortality of the soul
 —else why these solemn ceremonies?
 “to, sum up. we believe that man had a written language. we know
 that he indeed existed at one time, and is not a myth; also, that he was
 the companion of the cave-bear, the mastodon, and other extinct species;
 that he cooked and ate them and likewise the young of his own kind; also,
 that he bore rude weapons, and knew something of art; that he imagined he
 had a soul, and pleased himself with the fancy that it was immortal. but
 let us not laugh; there may be creatures in existence to whom we and our
 vanities and profundities may seem as ludicrous.”
 near the margin of the great river the scientists presently found a huge,
 shapely stone, with this inscription:
 “in , in the spring, the river overflowed its banks and
 covered the whole township. the depth was from two to six feet. more
 than  head of cattle were lost, and many homes destroyed. the mayor
 ordered this memorial to be erected to perpetuate the event. god spare
 us the repetition of it!”
 with infinite trouble, professor woodlouse succeeded in making a
 translation of this inscription, which was sent home, and straightway an
 enormous excitement was created about it. it confirmed, in a remarkable
 way, certain treasured traditions of the ancients. the translation was
 slightly marred by one or two untranslatable words, but these did not
 impair the general clearness of the meaning. it is here presented:
 “one thousand eight hundred and forty-seven years ago, the
 (fires?) descended and consumed the whole city. only some nine hundred
 souls were saved, all others destroyed. the (king?) commanded this stone
 to be set up to . . . (untranslatable) . . . prevent the repetition of
 it.”
 this was the first successful and satisfactory translation that had been
 made of the mysterious character left behind him by extinct man, and it
 gave professor woodlouse such reputation that at once every seat of
 learning in his native land conferred a degree of the most illustrious
 grade upon him, and it was believed that if he had been a soldier and had
 turned his splendid talents to the extermination of a remote tribe of
 reptiles, the king would have ennobled him and made him rich. and this,
 too, was the origin of that school of scientists called manologists, whose
 specialty is the deciphering of the ancient records of the extinct bird
 termed man. [for it is now decided that man was a bird and not a reptile.]
 but professor woodlouse began and remained chief of these, for it was
 granted that no translations were ever so free from error as his. others
 made mistakes—he seemed incapable of it. many a memorial of the lost
 race was afterward found, but none ever attained to the renown and
 veneration achieved by the “mayoritish stone” it being so
 called from the word “mayor” in it, which, being translated
 “king,” “mayoritish stone” was but another way of
 saying “king stone.”
 another time the expedition made a great “find.” it was a vast
 round flattish mass, ten frog-spans in diameter and five or six high.
 professor snail put on his spectacles and examined it all around, and then
 climbed up and inspected the top. he said:
 “the result of my perlustration and perscontation of this
 isoperimetrical protuberance is a belief at it is one of those rare and
 wonderful creations left by the mound builders. the fact that this one is
 lamellibranchiate in its formation, simply adds to its interest as being
 possibly of a different kind from any we read of in the records of
 science, but yet in no manner marring its authenticity. let the
 megalophonous grasshopper sound a blast and summon hither the perfunctory
 and circumforaneous tumble-bug, to the end that excavations may be made
 and learning gather new treasures.”
 not a tumble-bug could be found on duty, so the mound was excavated by a
 working party of ants. nothing was discovered. this would have been a
 great disappointment, had not the venerable longlegs explained the matter.
 he said:
 “it is now plain to me that the mysterious and forgotten race of
 mound builders did not always erect these edifices as mausoleums, else in
 this case, as in all previous cases, their skeletons would be found here,
 along with the rude implements which the creatures used in life. is not
 this manifest?”
 “true! true!” from everybody.
 “then we have made a discovery of peculiar value here; a discovery
 which greatly extends our knowledge of this creature in place of
 diminishing it; a discovery which will add luster to the achievements of
 this expedition and win for us the commendations of scholars everywhere.
 for the absence of the customary relics here means nothing less than this:
 the mound builder, instead of being the ignorant, savage reptile we have
 been taught to consider him, was a creature of cultivation and high
 intelligence, capable of not only appreciating worthy achievements of the
 great and noble of his species, but of commemorating them!
 fellow-scholars, this stately mound is not a sepulcher, it is a monument!”
 a profound impression was produced by this.
 but it was interrupted by rude and derisive laughter—and the
 tumble-bug appeared.
 “a monument!” quoth he. “a monument setup by a mound
 builder! aye, so it is! so it is, indeed, to the shrewd keen eye of
 science; but to an ignorant poor devil who has never seen a college, it is
 not a monument, strictly speaking, but is yet a most rich and noble
 property; and with your worship’s good permission i will proceed to
 manufacture it into spheres of exceeding grace and—”
 the tumble-bug was driven away with stripes, and the draftsmen of the
 expedition were set to making views of the monument from different
 standpoints, while professor woodlouse, in a frenzy of scientific zeal,
 traveled all over it and all around it hoping to find an inscription. but
 if there had ever been one, it had decayed or been removed by some vandal
 as a relic.
 the views having been completed, it was now considered safe to load the
 precious monument itself upon the backs of four of the largest tortoises
 and send it home to the king’s museum, which was done; and when it
 arrived it was received with enormous éclat and escorted to its
 future abiding-place by thousands of enthusiastic citizens, king bullfrog
 xvi. himself attending and condescending to sit enthroned upon it
 throughout the progress.
 the growing rigor of the weather was now admonishing the scientists to
 close their labors for the present, so they made preparations to journey
 homeward. but even their last day among the caverns bore fruit; for one of
 the scholars found in an out-of-the-way corner of the museum or “burial
 place” a most strange and extraordinary thing. it was nothing less
 than a double man-bird lashed together breast to breast by a natural
 ligament, and labeled with the untranslatable words, “siamese twins.”
 the official report concerning this thing closed thus:
 “wherefore it appears that there were in old times two distinct
 species of this majestic fowl, the one being single and the other double.
 nature has a reason for all things. it is plain to the eye of science that
 the double-man originally inhabited a region where dangers abounded; hence
 he was paired together to the end that while one part slept the other
 might watch; and likewise that, danger being discovered, there might
 always be a double instead of a single power to oppose it. all honor to
 the mystery-dispelling eye of godlike science!”
 and near the double man-bird was found what was plainly an ancient record
 of his, marked upon numberless sheets of a thin white substance and bound
 together. almost the first glance that professor woodlouse threw into it
 revealed this following sentence, which he instantly translated and laid
 before the scientists, in a tremble, and it uplifted every soul there with
 exultation and astonishment:
 “in truth it is believed by many that the lower animals reason and
 talk together.”
 when the great official report of the expedition appeared, the above
 sentence bore this comment:
 “then there are lower animals than man! this remarkable passage can
 mean nothing else. man himself is extinct, but they may still exist. what
 can they be? where do they inhabit? one’s enthusiasm bursts all
 bounds in the contemplation of the brilliant field of discovery and
 investigation here thrown open to science. we close our labors with the
 humble prayer that your majesty will immediately appoint a commission and
 command it to rest not nor spare expense until the search for this
 hitherto unsuspected race of the creatures of god shall be crowned with
 success.”
 the expedition then journeyed homeward after its long absence and its
 faithful endeavors, and was received with a mighty ovation by the whole
 grateful country. there were vulgar, ignorant carpers, of course, as there
 always are and always will be; and naturally one of these was the obscene
 tumble-bug. he said that all he had learned by his travels was that
 science only needed a spoonful of supposition to build a mountain of
 demonstrated fact out of; and that for the future he meant to be content
 with the knowledge that nature had made free to all creatures and not go
 prying into the august secrets of the deity.
 [written about ]
 i am not a private secretary to a senator any more now. i held the berth
 two months in security and in great cheerfulness of spirit, but my bread
 began to return from over the waters then—that is to say, my works
 came back and revealed themselves. i judged it best to resign. the way of
 it was this. my employer sent for me one morning tolerably early, and, as
 soon as i had finished inserting some conundrums clandestinely into his
 last great speech upon finance, i entered the presence. there was
 something portentous in his appearance. his cravat was untied, his hair
 was in a state of disorder, and his countenance bore about it the signs of
 a suppressed storm. he held a package of letters in his tense grasp, and i
 knew that the dreaded pacific mail was in. he said:
 “i thought you were worthy of confidence.”
 i said, “yes, sir.”
 he said, “i gave you a letter from certain of my constituents in the
 state of nevada, asking the establishment of a post-office at baldwin’s
 ranch, and told you to answer it, as ingeniously as you could, with
 arguments which should persuade them that there was no real necessity for
 an office at that place.”
 i felt easier. “oh, if that is all, sir, i did do that.”
 “yes, you did. i will read your answer for your own humiliation:
 ‘washington, nov.  ‘messrs. smith, jones,
 and others. ‘gentlemen: what the mischief do you
 suppose you want with a post-office at baldwin’s ranch? it would
 not do you any good. if any letters came there, you couldn’t read
 them, you know; and, besides, such letters as ought to pass through,
 with money in them, for other localities, would not be likely to get
 through, you must perceive at once; and that would make trouble for us
 all. no, don’t bother about a post-office in your camp. i have
 your best interests at heart, and feel that it would only be an
 ornamental folly. what you want is a nice jail, you know—a nice,
 substantial jail and a free school. these will be a lasting benefit to
 you. these will make you really contented and happy. i will move in the
 matter at once. ‘very truly, etc., mark twain,
 ‘for james w. n———, u. s. senator.’
 “that is the way you answered that letter. those people say they
 will hang me, if i ever enter that district again; and i am perfectly
 satisfied they will, too.”
 “well, sir, i did not know i was doing any harm. i only wanted to
 convince them.”
 “ah. well, you did convince them, i make no manner of doubt. now,
 here is another specimen. i gave you a petition from certain gentlemen of
 nevada, praying that i would get a bill through congress incorporating the
 methodist episcopal church of the state of nevada. i told you to say, in
 reply, that the creation of such a law came more properly within the
 province of the state legislature; and to endeavor to show them that, in
 the present feebleness of the religious element in that new commonwealth,
 the expediency of incorporating the church was questionable. what did you
 write?
 “‘washington, nov. . “‘rev.
 john halifax and others. “‘gentlemen: you will
 have to go to the state legislature about that speculation of yours—congress
 don’t know anything about religion. but don’t you hurry to
 go there, either; because this thing you propose to do out in that new
 country isn’t expedient—in fact, it is ridiculous. your
 religious people there are too feeble, in intellect, in morality, in
 piety in everything, pretty much. you had better drop this—you can’t
 make it work. you can’t issue stock on an incorporation like that—or
 if you could, it would only keep you in trouble all the time. the other
 denominations would abuse it, and “bear” it, and “sell
 it short,” and break it down. they would do with it just as they
 would with one of your silver-mines out there—they would try to
 make all the world believe it was “wildcat.” you ought not
 to do anything that is calculated to bring a sacred thing into
 disrepute. you ought to be ashamed of yourselves—that is what i
 think about it. you close your petition with the words: “and we
 will ever pray.” i think you had better—you need to do it.
 “‘very truly, etc., “‘mark twain,
 “‘for james w. n——-, u. s. senator.’
 “that luminous epistle finishes me with the religious element among
 my constituents. but that my political murder might be made sure, some
 evil instinct prompted me to hand you this memorial from the grave company
 of elders composing the board of aldermen of the city of san francisco, to
 try your hand upon—a memorial praying that the city’s right to
 the water-lots upon the city front might be established by law of
 congress. i told you this was a dangerous matter to move in. i told you to
 write a non-committal letter to the aldermen—an ambiguous letter—a
 letter that should avoid, as far as possible, all real consideration and
 discussion of the water-lot question. if there is any feeling left in you—any
 shame—surely this letter you wrote, in obedience to that order,
 ought to evoke it, when its words fall upon your ears:
 ‘washington, nov.  ‘the honorable board
 of aldermen, etc. ‘gentlemen: george washington, the
 revered father of his country, is dead. his long and brilliant career is
 closed, alas! forever. he was greatly respected in this section of the
 country, and his untimely decease cast a gloom over the whole community.
 he died on the th day of december, . he passed peacefully away
 from the scene of his honors and his great achievements, the most
 lamented hero and the best beloved that ever earth hath yielded unto
 death. at such a time as this, you speak of water-lots! what a lot was
 his! ‘what is fame! fame is an accident. sir isaac
 newton discovered an apple falling to the ground—a trivial
 discovery, truly, and one which a million men had made before him—but
 his parents were influential, and so they tortured that small
 circumstance into something wonderful, and, lo! the simple world took up
 the shout and, in almost the twinkling of an eye, that man was famous.
 treasure these thoughts. ‘poesy, sweet poesy, who shall
 estimate what the world owes to thee! “mary had a
 little lamb, its fleece was white as snow—and everywhere that
 mary went, the lamb was sure to go."
 “jack and gill went up the hill to draw a pail of water;
 jack fell down and broke his crown, and gill came tumbling after.”
 ‘for simplicity, elegance of diction, and freedom from
 immoral tendencies, i regard those two poems in the light of gems. they
 are suited to all grades of intelligence, to every sphere of life
 —to the field, to the nursery, to the guild. especially should no
 board of aldermen be without them. ‘venerable fossils!
 write again. nothing improves one so much as friendly correspondence.
 write again—and if there is anything in this memorial of yours
 that refers to anything in particular, do not be backward about
 explaining it. we shall always be happy to hear you chirp. 
 ‘very truly, etc., “‘mark twain, 
 ‘for james w. n——-, u. s. senator.’
 “that is an atrocious, a ruinous epistle! distraction!”
 “well, sir, i am really sorry if there is anything wrong about it—but—but
 it appears to me to dodge the water-lot question.”
 “dodge the mischief! oh!—but never mind. as long as
 destruction must come now, let it be complete. let it be complete—let
 this last of your performances, which i am about to read, make a finality
 of it. i am a ruined man. i had my misgivings when i gave you the letter
 from humboldt, asking that the post route from indian gulch to shakespeare
 gap and intermediate points be changed partly to the old mormon trail. but
 i told you it was a delicate question, and warned you to deal with it
 deftly—to answer it dubiously, and leave them a little in the dark.
 and your fatal imbecility impelled you to make this disastrous reply. i
 should think you would stop your ears, if you are not dead to all shame:
 “‘washington, nov. . “‘messers.
 perkins, wagner, et at. “‘gentlemen: it is a
 delicate question about this indian trail, but, handled with proper
 deftness and dubiousness, i doubt not we shall succeed in some measure
 or otherwise, because the place where the route leaves the lassen
 meadows, over beyond where those two shawnee chiefs, dilapidated
 vengeance and biter-of-the-clouds, were scalped last winter, this being
 the favorite direction to some, but others preferring something else in
 consequence of things, the mormon trail leaving mosby’s at three
 in the morning, and passing through jawbone flat to blucher, and then
 down by jug-handle, the road passing to the right of it, and naturally
 leaving it on the right, too, and dawson’s on the left of the
 trail where it passes to the left of said dawson’s and onward
 thence to tomahawk, thus making the route cheaper, easier of access to
 all who can get at it, and compassing all the desirable objects so
 considered by others, and, therefore, conferring the most good upon the
 greatest number, and, consequently, i am encouraged to hope we shall.
 however, i shall be ready, and happy, to afford you still further
 information upon the subject, from time to time, as you may desire it
 and the post-office department be enabled to furnish it to me.
 “‘very truly, etc., “‘mark twain,
 “‘for james w. n——-, u. s. senator.’
 “there—now what do you think of that?”
 “well, i don’t know, sir. it—well, it appears to me—to
 be dubious enough.”
 “du—leave the house! i am a ruined man. those humboldt savages
 never will forgive me for tangling their brains up with this inhuman
 letter. i have lost the respect of the methodist church, the board of
 aldermen—”
 “well, i haven’t anything to say about that, because i may
 have missed it a little in their cases, but i was too many for the baldwin’s
 ranch people, general!”
 “leave the house! leave it forever and forever, too.”
 i regarded that as a sort of covert intimation that my service could be
 dispensed with, and so i resigned. i never will be a private secretary to
 a senator again. you can’t please that kind of people. they don’t
 know anything. they can’t appreciate a party’s efforts.
 [written about ]
 at general g——’s reception the other night, the most
 fashionably dressed lady was mrs. g. c. she wore a pink satin dress, plain
 in front but with a good deal of rake to it—to the train, i mean; it
 was said to be two or three yards long. one could see it creeping along
 the floor some little time after the woman was gone. mrs. c. wore also a
 white bodice, cut bias, with pompadour sleeves, flounced with ruches; low
 neck, with the inside handkerchief not visible, with white kid gloves. she
 had on a pearl necklace, which glinted lonely, high up the midst of that
 barren waste of neck and shoulders. her hair was frizzled into a tangled
 chaparral, forward of her ears, aft it was drawn together, and compactly
 bound and plaited into a stump like a pony’s tail, and furthermore
 was canted upward at a sharp angle, and ingeniously supported by a red
 velvet crupper, whose forward extremity was made fast with a half-hitch
 around a hairpin on the top of her head. her whole top hamper was neat and
 becoming. she had a beautiful complexion when she first came, but it faded
 out by degrees in an unaccountable way. however, it is not lost for good.
 i found the most of it on my shoulder afterward. (i stood near the door
 when she squeezed out with the throng.) there were other ladies present,
 but i only took notes of one as a specimen. i would gladly enlarge upon
 the subject were i able to do it justice.
 one of the best men in washington—or elsewhere—is riley,
 correspondent of one of the great san francisco dailies.
 riley is full of humor, and has an unfailing vein of irony, which makes
 his conversation to the last degree entertaining (as long as the remarks
 are about somebody else). but notwithstanding the possession of these
 qualities, which should enable a man to write a happy and an appetizing
 letter, riley’s newspaper letters often display a more than earthly
 solemnity, and likewise an unimaginative devotion to petrified facts,
 which surprise and distress all men who know him in his unofficial
 character. he explains this curious thing by saying that his employers
 sent him to washington to write facts, not fancy, and that several times
 he has come near losing his situation by inserting humorous remarks which,
 not being looked for at headquarters, and consequently not understood,
 were thought to be dark and bloody speeches intended to convey signals and
 warnings to murderous secret societies, or something of that kind, and so
 were scratched out with a shiver and a prayer and cast into the stove.
 riley says that sometimes he is so afflicted with a yearning to write a
 sparkling and absorbingly readable letter that he simply cannot resist it,
 and so he goes to his den and revels in the delight of untrammeled
 scribbling; and then, with suffering such as only a mother can know, he
 destroys the pretty children of his fancy and reduces his letter to the
 required dismal accuracy. having seen riley do this very thing more than
 once, i know whereof i speak. often i have laughed with him over a happy
 passage, and grieved to see him plow his pen through it. he would say,
 “i had to write that or die; and i’ve got to scratch it out or
 starve. they wouldn’t stand it, you know.”
 i think riley is about the most entertaining company i ever saw. we lodged
 together in many places in washington during the winter of ‘-,
 moving comfortably from place to place, and attracting attention by paying
 our board—a course which cannot fail to make a person conspicuous in
 washington. riley would tell all about his trip to california in the early
 days, by way of the isthmus and the san juan river; and about his baking
 bread in san francisco to gain a living, and setting up tenpins, and
 practising law, and opening oysters, and delivering lectures, and teaching
 french, and tending bar, and reporting for the newspapers, and keeping
 dancing-schools, and interpreting chinese in the courts—which latter
 was lucrative, and riley was doing handsomely and laying up a little money
 when people began to find fault because his translations were too “free,”
 a thing for which riley considered he ought not to be held responsible,
 since he did not know a word of the chinese tongue, and only adopted
 interpreting as a means of gaining an honest livelihood. through the
 machinations of enemies he was removed from the position of official
 interpreter, and a man put in his place who was familiar with the chinese
 language, but did not know any english. and riley used to tell about
 publishing a newspaper up in what is alaska now, but was only an iceberg
 then, with a population composed of bears, walruses, indians, and other
 animals; and how the iceberg got adrift at last, and left all his paying
 subscribers behind, and as soon as the commonwealth floated out of the
 jurisdiction of russia the people rose and threw off their allegiance and
 ran up the english flag, calculating to hook on and become an english
 colony as they drifted along down the british possessions; but a land
 breeze and a crooked current carried them by, and they ran up the stars
 and stripes and steered for california, missed the connection again and
 swore allegiance to mexico, but it wasn’t any use; the anchors came
 home every time, and away they went with the northeast trades drifting off
 sideways toward the sandwich islands, whereupon they ran up the cannibal
 flag and had a grand human barbecue in honor of it, in which it was
 noticed that the better a man liked a friend the better he enjoyed him;
 and as soon as they got fairly within the tropics the weather got so
 fearfully hot that the iceberg began to melt, and it got so sloppy under
 foot that it was almost impossible for ladies to get about at all; and at
 last, just as they came in sight of the islands, the melancholy remnant of
 the once majestic iceberg canted first to one side and then to the other,
 and then plunged under forever, carrying the national archives along with
 it—and not only the archives and the populace, but some eligible
 town lots which had increased in value as fast as they diminished in size
 in the tropics, and which riley could have sold at thirty cents a pound
 and made himself rich if he could have kept the province afloat ten hours
 longer and got her into port.
 riley is very methodical, untiringly accommodating, never forgets anything
 that is to be attended to, is a good son, a stanch friend, and a permanent
 reliable enemy. he will put himself to any amount of trouble to oblige a
 body, and therefore always has his hands full of things to be done for the
 helpless and the shiftless. and he knows how to do nearly everything, too.
 he is a man whose native benevolence is a well-spring that never goes dry.
 he stands always ready to help whoever needs help, as far as he is able—and
 not simply with his money, for that is a cheap and common charity, but
 with hand and brain, and fatigue of limb and sacrifice of time. this sort
 of men is rare.
 riley has a ready wit, a quickness and aptness at selecting and applying
 quotations, and a countenance that is as solemn and as blank as the back
 side of a tombstone when he is delivering a particularly exasperating
 joke. one night a negro woman was burned to death in a house next door to
 us, and riley said that our landlady would be oppressively emotional at
 breakfast, because she generally made use of such opportunities as
 offered, being of a morbidly sentimental turn, and so we should find it
 best to let her talk along and say nothing back—it was the only way
 to keep her tears out of the gravy. riley said there never was a funeral
 in the neighborhood but that the gravy was watery for a week.
 and, sure enough, at breakfast the landlady was down in the very sloughs
 of woe—entirely brokenhearted. everything she looked at reminded her
 of that poor old negro woman, and so the buckwheat cakes made her sob, the
 coffee forced a groan, and when the beefsteak came on she fetched a wail
 that made our hair rise. then she got to talking about deceased, and kept
 up a steady drizzle till both of us were soaked through and through.
 presently she took a fresh breath and said, with a world of sobs:
 “ah, to think of it, only to think of it!—the poor old
 faithful creature. for she was so faithful. would you believe it, she had
 been a servant in that selfsame house and that selfsame family for twenty
 seven years come christmas, and never a cross word and never a lick! and,
 oh, to think she should meet such a death at last!—a-sitting over
 the red hot stove at three o’clock in the morning and went to sleep
 and fell on it and was actually roasted! not just frizzled up a bit, but
 literally roasted to a crisp! poor faithful creature, how she was cooked!
 i am but a poor woman, but even if i have to scrimp to do it, i will put
 up a tombstone over that lone sufferer’s grave—and mr. riley
 if you would have the goodness to think up a little epitaph to put on it
 which would sort of describe the awful way in which she met her—”
 “put it, ‘well done, good and faithful servant,’”
 said riley, and never smiled.
 john wagner, the oldest man in buffalo—one hundred and four years
 old—recently walked a mile and a half in two weeks.
 he is as cheerful and bright as any of these other old men that charge
 around so persistently and tiresomely in the newspapers, and in every way
 as remarkable.
 last november he walked five blocks in a rainstorm, without any shelter
 but an umbrella, and cast his vote for grant, remarking that he had voted
 for forty-seven presidents—which was a lie.
 his “second crop” of rich brown hair arrived from new york
 yesterday, and he has a new set of teeth coming from—philadelphia.
 he is to be married next week to a girl one hundred and two years old, who
 still takes in washing.
 they have been engaged eighty years, but their parents persistently
 refused their consent until three days ago.
 john wagner is two years older than the rhode island veteran, and yet has
 never tasted a drop of liquor in his life—unless—unless you
 count whisky.
 [written about ]
 at that time, in kentucky (said the hon. mr. k——-); the law
 was very strict against what is termed “games of chance.”
 about a dozen of the boys were detected playing “seven up” or
 “old sledge” for money, and the grand jury found a true bill
 against them. jim sturgis was retained to defend them when the case came
 up, of course. the more he studied over the matter, and looked into the
 evidence, the plainer it was that he must lose a case at last—there
 was no getting around that painful fact. those boys had certainly been
 betting money on a game of chance. even public sympathy was roused in
 behalf of sturgis. people said it was a pity to see him mar his successful
 career with a big prominent case like this, which must go against him.
 but after several restless nights an inspired idea flashed upon sturgis,
 and he sprang out of bed delighted. he thought he saw his way through. the
 next day he whispered around a little among his clients and a few friends,
 and then when the case came up in court he acknowledged the seven-up and
 the betting, and, as his sole defense, had the astounding effrontery to
 put in the plea that old sledge was not a game of chance! there was the
 broadest sort of a smile all over the faces of that sophisticated
 audience. the judge smiled with the rest. but sturgis maintained a
 countenance whose earnestness was even severe. the opposite counsel tried
 to ridicule him out of his position, and did not succeed. the judge jested
 in a ponderous judicial way about the thing, but did not move him. the
 matter was becoming grave. the judge lost a little of his patience, and
 said the joke had gone far enough. jim sturgis said he knew of no joke in
 the matter—his clients could not be punished for indulging in what
 some people chose to consider a game of chance until it was proven
 that it was a game of chance. judge and counsel said that would be an easy
 matter, and forthwith called deacons job, peters, burke, and johnson, and
 dominies wirt and miggles, to testify; and they unanimously and with
 strong feeling put down the legal quibble of sturgis by pronouncing that
 old sledge was a game of chance.
 “what do you call it now?” said the judge.
 “i call it a game of science!” retorted sturgis; “and i’ll
 prove it, too!”
 they saw his little game.
 he brought in a cloud of witnesses, and produced an overwhelming mass of
 testimony, to show that old sledge was not a game of chance but a game of
 science.
 instead of being the simplest case in the world, it had somehow turned out
 to be an excessively knotty one. the judge scratched his head over it
 awhile, and said there was no way of coming to a determination, because
 just as many men could be brought into court who would testify on one side
 as could be found to testify on the other. but he said he was willing to
 do the fair thing by all parties, and would act upon any suggestion mr.
 sturgis would make for the solution of the difficulty.
 mr. sturgis was on his feet in a second.
 “impanel a jury of six of each, luck versus science. give them
 candles and a couple of decks of cards. send them into the jury-room, and
 just abide by the result!”
 there was no disputing the fairness of the proposition. the four deacons
 and the two dominies were sworn in as the “chance” jurymen,
 and six inveterate old seven-up professors were chosen to represent the
 “science” side of the issue. they retired to the jury-room.
 in about two hours deacon peters sent into court to borrow three dollars
 from a friend. [sensation.] in about two hours more dominie miggles sent
 into court to borrow a “stake” from a friend. [sensation.]
 during the next three or four hours the other dominie and the other
 deacons sent into court for small loans. and still the packed audience
 waited, for it was a prodigious occasion in bull’s corners, and one
 in which every father of a family was necessarily interested.
 the rest of the story can be told briefly. about daylight the jury came
 in, and deacon job, the foreman, read the following:
 verdict: we, the jury in the case of the commonwealth
 of kentucky vs. john wheeler et al., have carefully considered the
 points of the case, and tested the merits of the several theories
 advanced, and do hereby unanimously decide that the game commonly known
 as old sledge or seven-up is eminently a game of science and not of
 chance. in demonstration whereof it is hereby and herein stated,
 iterated, reiterated, set forth, and made manifest that, during the
 entire night, the “chance” men never won a game or turned a
 jack, although both feats were common and frequent to the opposition;
 and furthermore, in support of this our verdict, we call attention to
 the significant fact that the “chance” men are all busted,
 and the “science” men have got the money. it is the
 deliberate opinion of this jury, that the “chance” theory
 concerning seven-up is a pernicious doctrine, and calculated to inflict
 untold suffering and pecuniary loss upon any community that takes stock
 in it.
 “that is the way that seven-up came to be set apart and
 particularized in the statute-books of kentucky as being a game not of
 chance but of science, and therefore not punishable under the law,”
 said mr. k——-. “that verdict is of record, and holds
 good to this day.”
 [written about ]
 [“never put off till to-morrow what you can do day after to-morrow
 just as well.”—b. f.]
 this party was one of those persons whom they call philosophers. he was
 twins, being born simultaneously in two different houses in the city of
 boston. these houses remain unto this day, and have signs upon them worded
 in accordance with the facts. the signs are considered well enough to
 have, though not necessary, because the inhabitants point out the two
 birthplaces to the stranger anyhow, and sometimes as often as several
 times in the same day. the subject of this memoir was of a vicious
 disposition, and early prostituted his talents to the invention of maxims
 and aphorisms calculated to inflict suffering upon the rising generation
 of all subsequent ages. his simplest acts, also, were contrived with a
 view to their being held up for the emulation of boys forever—boys
 who might otherwise have been happy. it was in this spirit that he became
 the son of a soap-boiler, and probably for no other reason than that the
 efforts of all future boys who tried to be anything might be looked upon
 with suspicion unless they were the sons of soap-boilers. with a
 malevolence which is without parallel in history, he would work all day,
 and then sit up nights, and let on to be studying algebra by the light of
 a smoldering fire, so that all other boys might have to do that also, or
 else have benjamin franklin thrown up to them.
 not satisfied with these proceedings, he had a fashion of living wholly on
 bread and water, and studying astronomy at meal-time—a thing which
 has brought affliction to millions of boys since, whose fathers had read
 franklin’s pernicious biography.
 his maxims were full of animosity toward boys. nowadays a boy cannot
 follow out a single natural instinct without tumbling over some of those
 everlasting aphorisms and hearing from franklin on the spot. if he buys
 two cents’ worth of peanuts, his father says, “remember what
 franklin has said, my son—‘a grout a day’s a penny a
 year”’; and the comfort is all gone out of those peanuts. if
 he wants to spin his top when he has done work, his father quotes, “procrastination
 is the thief of time.” if he does a virtuous action, he never gets
 anything for it, because “virtue is its own reward.” and that
 boy is hounded to death and robbed of his natural rest, because franklin,
 said once, in one of his inspired flights of malignity:
 early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy and wealthy and
 wise.
 as if it were any object to a boy to be healthy and wealthy and wise on
 such terms. the sorrow that that maxim has cost me, through my parents,
 experimenting on me with it, tongue cannot tell. the legitimate result is
 my present state of general debility, indigence, and mental aberration. my
 parents used to have me up before nine o’clock in the morning
 sometimes when i was a boy. if they had let me take my natural rest where
 would i have been now? keeping store, no doubt, and respected by all.
 and what an adroit old adventurer the subject of this memoir was! in order
 to get a chance to fly his kite on sunday he used to hang a key on the
 string and let on to be fishing for lightning. and a guileless public
 would go home chirping about the “wisdom” and the “genius”
 of the hoary sabbath-breaker. if anybody caught him playing “mumblepeg”
 by himself, after the age of sixty, he would immediately appear to be
 ciphering out how the grass grew—as if it was any of his business.
 my grandfather knew him well, and he says franklin was always fixed—always
 ready. if a body, during his old age, happened on him unexpectedly when he
 was catching flies, or making mud-pies, or sliding on a cellar door, he
 would immediately look wise, and rip out a maxim, and walk off with his
 nose in the air and his cap turned wrong side before, trying to appear
 absent-minded and eccentric. he was a hard lot.
 he invented a stove that would smoke your head off in four hours by the
 clock. one can see the almost devilish satisfaction he took in it by his
 giving it his name.
 he was always proud of telling how he entered philadelphia for the first
 time, with nothing in the world but two shillings in his pocket and four
 rolls of bread under his arm. but really, when you come to examine it
 critically, it was nothing. anybody could have done it.
 to the subject of this memoir belongs the honor of recommending the army
 to go back to bows and arrows in place of bayonets and muskets. he
 observed, with his customary force, that the bayonet was very well under
 some circumstances, but that he doubted whether it could be used with
 accuracy at a long range.
 benjamin franklin did a great many notable things for his country, and
 made her young name to be honored in many lands as the mother of such a
 son. it is not the idea of this memoir to ignore that or cover it up. no;
 the simple idea of it is to snub those pretentious maxims of his, which he
 worked up with a great show of originality out of truisms that had become
 wearisome platitudes as early as the dispersion from babel; and also to
 snub his stove, and his military inspirations, his unseemly endeavor to
 make himself conspicuous when he entered philadelphia, and his flying his
 kite and fooling away his time in all sorts of such ways when he ought to
 have been foraging for soap-fat, or constructing candles.
 i merely desired to do away with somewhat of the prevalent calamitous idea
 among heads of families that franklin acquired his great genius by working
 for nothing, studying by moonlight, and getting up in the night instead of
 waiting till morning like a christian; and that this program, rigidly
 inflicted, will make a franklin of every father’s fool. it is time
 these gentlemen were finding out that these execrable eccentricities of
 instinct and conduct are only the evidences of genius, not the creators of
 it. i wish i had been the father of my parents long enough to make them
 comprehend this truth, and thus prepare them to let their son have an
 easier time of it. when i was a child i had to boil soap, notwithstanding
 my father was wealthy, and i had to get up early and study geometry at
 breakfast, and peddle my own poetry, and do everything just as franklin
 did, in the solemn hope that i would be a franklin some day. and here i
 am.
 [written about ]
 our esteemed friend, mr. john william bloke, of virginia city, walked into
 the office where we are sub-editor at a late hour last night, with an
 expression of profound and heartfelt suffering upon his countenance, and,
 sighing heavily, laid the following item reverently upon the desk, and
 walked slowly out again. he paused a moment at the door, and seemed
 struggling to command his feelings sufficiently to enable him to speak,
 and then, nodding his head toward his manuscript, ejaculated in a broken
 voice, “friend of mine—oh! how sad!” and burst into
 tears. we were so moved at his distress that we did not think to call him
 back and endeavor to comfort him until he was gone, and it was too late.
 the paper had already gone to press, but knowing that our friend would
 consider the publication of this item important, and cherishing the hope
 that to print it would afford a melancholy satisfaction to his sorrowing
 heart, we stopped the press at once and inserted it in our columns:
 distressing accident.—last evening, about six o’clock,
 as mr. william schuyler, an old and respectable citizen of south park,
 was leaving his residence to go down-town, as has been his usual custom
 for many years with the exception only of a short interval in the spring
 of , during which he was confined to his bed by injuries received in
 attempting to stop a runaway horse by thoughtlessly placing himself
 directly in its wake and throwing up his hands and shouting, which if he
 had done so even a single moment sooner, must inevitably have frightened
 the animal still more instead of checking its speed, although disastrous
 enough to himself as it was, and rendered more melancholy and
 distressing by reason of the presence of his wife’s mother, who
 was there and saw the sad occurrence notwithstanding it is at least
 likely, though not necessarily so, that she should be reconnoitering in
 another direction when incidents occur, not being vivacious and on the
 lookout, as a general thing, but even the reverse, as her own mother is
 said to have stated, who is no more, but died in the full hope of a
 glorious resurrection, upwards of three years ago; aged eighty-six,
 being a christian woman and without guile, as it were, or property, in
 consequence of the fire of , which destroyed every single thing she
 had in the world. but such is life. let us all take warning by this
 solemn occurrence, and let us endeavor so to conduct ourselves that when
 we come to die we can do it. let us place our hands upon our heart, and
 say with earnestness and sincerity that from this day forth we will
 beware of the intoxicating bowl.—‘first edition of the
 californian.’
 the head editor has been in here raising the mischief, and tearing his
 hair and kicking the furniture about, and abusing me like a pickpocket. he
 says that every time he leaves me in charge of the paper for half an hour
 i get imposed upon by the first infant or the first idiot that comes
 along. and he says that that distressing item of mr. bloke’s is
 nothing but a lot of distressing bosh, and has no point to it, and no
 sense in it, and no information in it, and that there was no sort of
 necessity for stopping the press to publish it.
 now all this comes of being good-hearted. if i had been as unaccommodating
 and unsympathetic as some people, i would have told mr. bloke that i
 wouldn’t receive his communication at such a late hour; but no, his
 snuffling distress touched my heart, and i jumped at the chance of doing
 something to modify his misery. i never read his item to see whether there
 was anything wrong about it, but hastily wrote the few lines which
 preceded it, and sent it to the printers. and what has my kindness done
 for me? it has done nothing but bring down upon me a storm of abuse and
 ornamental blasphemy.
 now i will read that item myself, and see if there is any foundation for
 all this fuss. and if there is, the author of it shall hear from me.
 i have read it, and i am bound to admit that it seems a little mixed at a
 first glance. however, i will peruse it once more.
 i have read it again, and it does really seem a good deal more mixed than
 ever.
 i have read it over five times, but if i can get at the meaning of it i
 wish i may get my just deserts. it won’t bear analysis. there are
 things about it which i cannot understand at all. it don’t say
 whatever became of william schuyler. it just says enough about him to get
 one interested in his career, and then drops him. who is william schuyler,
 anyhow, and what part of south park did he live in, and if he started
 down-town at six o’clock, did he ever get there, and if he did, did
 anything happen to him? is he the individual that met with the “distressing
 accident”? considering the elaborate circumstantiality of detail
 observable in the item, it seems to me that it ought to contain more
 information than it does. on the contrary, it is obscure—and not
 only obscure, but utterly incomprehensible. was the breaking of mr.
 schuyler’s leg, fifteen years ago, the “distressing accident”
 that plunged mr. bloke into unspeakable grief, and caused him to come up
 here at dead of night and stop our press to acquaint the world with the
 circumstance? or did the “distressing accident” consist in the
 destruction of schuyler’s mother-in-law’s property in early
 times? or did it consist in the death of that person herself three years
 ago (albeit it does not appear that she died by accident)? in a word, what
 did that “distressing accident” consist in? what did that
 driveling ass of a schuyler stand in the wake of a runaway horse for, with
 his shouting and gesticulating, if he wanted to stop him? and how the
 mischief could he get run over by a horse that had already passed beyond
 him? and what are we to take “warning” by? and how is this
 extraordinary chapter of incomprehensibilities going to be a “lesson”
 to us? and, above all, what has the intoxicating “bowl” got to
 do with it, anyhow? it is not stated that schuyler drank, or that his wife
 drank, or that his mother-in-law drank, or that the horse drank—wherefore,
 then, the reference to the intoxicating bowl? it does seem to me that if
 mr. bloke had let the intoxicating bowl alone himself, he never would have
 got into so much trouble about this exasperating imaginary accident. i
 have read this absurd item over and over again, with all its insinuating
 plausibility, until my head swims; but i can make neither head nor tail of
 it. there certainly seems to have been an accident of some kind or other,
 but it is impossible to determine what the nature of it was, or who was
 the sufferer by it. i do not like to do it, but i feel compelled to
 request that the next time anything happens to one of mr. bloke’s
 friends, he will append such explanatory notes to his account of it as
 will enable me to find out what sort of an accident it was and whom it
 happened to. i had rather all his friends should die than that i should be
 driven to the verge of lunacy again in trying to cipher out the meaning of
 another such production as the above.
a medieval romance [written about
 it was night. stillness reigned in the grand old feudal castle of
 klugenstein. the year  was drawing to a close. far away up in the
 tallest of the castle’s towers a single light glimmered. a secret
 council was being held there. the stern old lord of klugenstein sat in a
 chair of state meditating. presently he said, with a tender accent:
 “my daughter!”
 a young man of noble presence, clad from head to heel in knightly mail,
 answered:
 “speak, father!”
 “my daughter, the time is come for the revealing of the mystery that
 hath puzzled all your young life. know, then, that it had its birth in the
 matters which i shall now unfold. my brother ulrich is the great duke of
 brandenburgh. our father, on his deathbed, decreed that if no son were
 born to ulrich, the succession should pass to my house, provided a son
 were born to me. and further, in case no son were born to either, but only
 daughters, then the succession should pass to ulrich’s daughter, if
 she proved stainless; if she did not, my daughter should succeed, if she
 retained a blameless name. and so i, and my old wife here, prayed
 fervently for the good boon of a son, but the prayer was vain. you were
 born to us. i was in despair. i saw the mighty prize slipping from my
 grasp—the splendid dream vanishing away. and i had been so hopeful!
 five years had ulrich lived in wedlock, and yet his wife had borne no heir
 of either sex.
 “‘but hold,’ i said, ‘all is not lost.’ a
 saving scheme had shot athwart my brain. you were born at midnight. only
 the leech, the nurse, and six waiting-women knew your sex. i hanged them
 every one before an hour had sped. next morning all the barony went mad
 with rejoicing over the proclamation that a son was born to klugenstein—an
 heir to mighty brandenburgh! and well the secret has been kept. your
 mother’s own sister nursed your infancy, and from that time forward
 we feared nothing.
 “when you were ten years old, a daughter was born to ulrich. we
 grieved, but hoped for good results from measles, or physicians, or other
 natural enemies of infancy, but were always disappointed. she lived, she
 throve—heaven’s malison upon her! but it is nothing. we are
 safe. for, ha-ha! have we not a son? and is not our son the future duke?
 our well-beloved conrad, is it not so?—for, woman of
 eight-and-twenty years—as you are, my child, none other name than
 that hath ever fallen to you!
 “now it hath come to pass that age hath laid its hand upon my
 brother, and he waxes feeble. the cares of state do tax him sore,
 therefore he wills that you shall come to him and be already—duke in
 act, though not yet in name. your servitors are ready—you journey
 forth to-night.
 “now listen well. remember every word i say. there is a law as old
 as germany, that if any woman sit for a single instant in the great ducal
 chair before she hath been absolutely crowned in presence of the people,
 she shall die! so heed my words. pretend humility. pronounce your
 judgments from the premier’s chair, which stands at the foot of the
 throne. do this until you are crowned and safe. it is not likely that your
 sex will ever be discovered, but still it is the part of wisdom to make
 all things as safe as may be in this treacherous earthly life.”
 “oh, my father, is it for this my life hath been a lie! was it that
 i might cheat my unoffending cousin of her rights? spare me, father, spare
 your child!”
 “what, hussy! is this my reward for the august fortune my brain has
 wrought for thee? by the bones of my father, this puling sentiment of
 thine but ill accords with my humor.
 “betake thee to the duke, instantly! and beware how thou meddlest
 with my purpose!”
 let this suffice, of the conversation. it is enough for us to know that
 the prayers, the entreaties, and the tears of the gentle-natured girl
 availed nothing. neither they nor anything could move the stout old lord
 of klugenstein. and so, at last, with a heavy heart, the daughter saw the
 castle gates close behind her, and found herself riding away in the
 darkness surrounded by a knightly array of armed vassals and a brave
 following of servants.
 the old baron sat silent for many minutes after his daughter’s
 departure, and then he turned to his sad wife and said:
 “dame, our matters seem speeding fairly. it is full three months
 since i sent the shrewd and handsome count detzin on his devilish mission
 to my brother’s daughter constance. if he fail, we are not wholly
 safe; but if he do succeed, no power can bar our girl from being duchess e’en
 though ill-fortune should decree she never should be duke!”
 “my heart is full of bodings, yet all may still be well.”
 “tush, woman! leave the owls to croak. to bed with ye, and dream of
 brandenburgh and grandeur!”
 six days after the occurrences related in the above chapter, the brilliant
 capital of the duchy of brandenburgh was resplendent with military
 pageantry, and noisy with the rejoicings of loyal multitudes, for conrad,
 the young heir to the crown, was come. the old duke’s heart was full
 of happiness, for conrad’s handsome person and graceful bearing had
 won his love at once. the great halls of the palace were thronged with
 nobles, who welcomed conrad bravely; and so bright and happy did all
 things seem, that he felt his fears and sorrows passing away and giving
 place to a comforting contentment.
 but in a remote apartment of the palace a scene of a different nature was
 transpiring. by a window stood the duke’s only child, the lady
 constance. her eyes were red and swollen, and full of tears. she was
 alone. presently she fell to weeping anew, and said aloud:
 “the villain detzin is gone—has fled the dukedom! i could not
 believe it at first, but alas! it is too true. and i loved him so. i dared
 to love him though i knew the duke, my father, would never let me wed him.
 i loved him—but now i hate him! with all my soul i hate him! oh,
 what is to become of me! i am lost, lost, lost! i shall go mad!”
 few months drifted by. all men published the praises of the young conrad’s
 government and extolled the wisdom of his judgments, the mercifulness of
 his sentences, and the modesty with which he bore himself in his great
 office. the old duke soon gave everything into his hands, and sat apart
 and listened with proud satisfaction while his heir delivered the decrees
 of the crown from the seat of the premier. it seemed plain that one so
 loved and praised and honored of all men as conrad was, could not be
 otherwise than happy. but, strangly enough, he was not. for he saw with
 dismay that the princess constance had begun to love him! the love of the
 rest of the world was happy fortune for him, but this was freighted with
 danger! and he saw, moreover, that the delighted duke had discovered his
 daughter’s passion likewise, and was already dreaming of a marriage.
 every day somewhat of the deep sadness that had been in the princess’s
 face faded away; every day hope and animation beamed brighter from her
 eye; and by and by even vagrant smiles visited the face that had been so
 troubled.
 conrad was appalled. he bitterly cursed himself for having yielded to the
 instinct that had made him seek the companionship of one of his own sex
 when he was new and a stranger in the palace—when he was sorrowful
 and yearned for a sympathy such as only women can give or feel. he now
 began to avoid his cousin. but this only made matters worse, for,
 naturally enough, the more he avoided her the more she cast herself in his
 way. he marveled at this at first, and next it startled him. the girl
 haunted him; she hunted him; she happened upon him at all times and in all
 places, in the night as well as in the day. she seemed singularly anxious.
 there was surely a mystery somewhere.
 this could not go on forever. all the world was talking about it. the duke
 was beginning to look perplexed. poor conrad was becoming a very ghost
 through dread and dire distress. one day as he was emerging from a private
 ante-room attached to the picture-gallery, constance confronted him, and
 seizing both his hands, in hers, exclaimed:
 “oh, why do you avoid me? what have i done—what have i said,
 to lose your kind opinion of me—for surely i had it once? conrad, do
 not despise me, but pity a tortured heart? i cannot,—cannot hold the
 words unspoken longer, lest they kill me—i love you, conrad! there,
 despise me if you must, but they would be uttered!”
 conrad was speechless. constance hesitated a moment, and then,
 misinterpreting his silence, a wild gladness flamed in her eyes, and she
 flung her arms about his neck and said:
 “you relent! you relent! you can love me—you will love me! oh,
 say you will, my own, my worshipped conrad!”
 conrad groaned aloud. a sickly pallor overspread his countenance, and he
 trembled like an aspen. presently, in desperation, he thrust the poor girl
 from him, and cried:
 “you know not what you ask! it is forever and ever impossible!”
 and then he fled like a criminal, and left the princess stupefied with
 amazement. a minute afterward she was crying and sobbing there, and conrad
 was crying and sobbing in his chamber. both were in despair. both saw ruin
 staring them in the face.
 by and by constance rose slowly to her feet and moved away, saying:
 “to think that he was despising my love at the very moment that i
 thought it was melting his cruel heart! i hate him! he spurned me—did
 this man—he spurned me from him like a dog!”
 time passed on. a settled sadness rested once more upon the countenance of
 the good duke’s daughter. she and conrad were seen together no more
 now. the duke grieved at this. but as the weeks wore away, conrad’s
 color came back to his cheeks and his old-time vivacity to his eye, and he
 administered the government with a clear and steadily ripening wisdom.
 presently a strange whisper began to be heard about the palace. it grew
 louder; it spread farther. the gossips of the city got hold of it. it
 swept the dukedom. and this is what the whisper said:
 “the lady constance hath given birth to a child!”
 when the lord of klugenstein heard it, he swung his plumed helmet thrice
 around his head and shouted:
 “long live duke conrad!—for lo, his crown is sure from this
 day forward! detzin has done his errand well, and the good scoundrel shall
 be rewarded!”
 and he spread the tidings far and wide, and for eight-and-forty hours no
 soul in all the barony but did dance and sing, carouse and illuminate, to
 celebrate the great event, and all at proud and happy old klugenstein’s
 expense.
 the trial was at hand. all the great lords and barons of brandenburgh were
 assembled in the hall of justice in the ducal palace. no space was left
 unoccupied where there was room for a spectator to stand or sit. conrad,
 clad in purple and ermine, sat in the premier’s chair, and on either
 side sat the great judges of the realm. the old duke had sternly commanded
 that the trial of his daughter should proceed without favor, and then had
 taken to his bed broken-hearted. his days were numbered. poor conrad had
 begged, as for his very life, that he might be spared the misery of
 sitting in judgment upon his cousin’s crime, but it did not avail.
 the saddest heart in all that great assemblage was in conrad’s
 breast.
 the gladdest was in his father’s, for unknown to his daughter
 “conrad,” the old baron klugenstein was come, and was among
 the crowd of nobles, triumphant in the swelling fortunes of his house.
 after the heralds had made due proclamation and the other preliminaries
 had followed, the venerable lord chief justice said:
 “prisoner, stand forth!”
 the unhappy princess rose, and stood unveiled before the vast multitude.
 the lord chief justice continued:
 “most noble lady, before the great judges of this realm it hath been
 charged and proven that out of holy wedlock your grace hath given birth
 unto a child; and by our ancient law the penalty is death, excepting in
 one sole contingency whereof his grace the acting duke, our good lord
 conrad, will advertise you in his solemn sentence now; wherefore, give
 heed.”
 conrad stretched forth the reluctant sceptre, and in the selfsame moment
 the womanly heart beneath his robe yearned pityingly toward the doomed
 prisoner, and the tears came into his eyes. he opened his lips to speak,
 but the lord chief justice said quickly:
 “not there, your grace, not there! it is not lawful to pronounce
 judgment upon any of the ducal line save from the ducal throne!”
 a shudder went to the heart of poor conrad, and a tremor shook the iron
 frame of his old father likewise. conrad had not been crowned—dared
 he profane the throne? he hesitated and turned pale with fear. but it must
 be done. wondering eyes were already upon him. they would be suspicious
 eyes if he hesitated longer. he ascended the throne. presently he
 stretched forth the sceptre again, and said:
 “prisoner, in the name of our sovereign lord, ulrich, duke of
 brandenburgh, i proceed to the solemn duty that hath devolved upon me.
 give heed to my words. by the ancient law of the land, except you produce
 the partner of your guilt and deliver him up to the executioner, you must
 surely die. embrace this opportunity—save yourself while yet you
 may. name the father of your child!”
 a solemn hush fell upon the great court—a silence so profound that
 men could hear their own hearts beat. then the princess slowly turned,
 with eyes gleaming with hate, and pointing her finger straight at conrad,
 said:
 “thou art the man!”
 an appalling conviction of his helpless, hopeless peril struck a chill to
 conrad’s heart like the chill of death itself. what power on earth
 could save him! to disprove the charge he must reveal that he was a woman;
 and for an uncrowned woman to sit in the ducal chair was death! at one and
 the same moment he and his grim old father swooned and fell to the ground.
 the remainder of this thrilling and eventful story will not be found in
 this or any other publication, either now or at any future time.
 the truth is, i have got my hero (or heroine) into such a particularly
 close place that i do not see how i am ever going to get him (or her) out
 of it again—and therefore i will wash my hands of the whole
 business, and leave that person to get out the best way that offers—or
 else stay there. i thought it was going to be easy enough to straighten
 out that little difficulty, but it looks different now.
whereas, the constitution guarantees equal rights to all, backed
 by the declaration of independence; and
whereas, under our laws, the right of property in real estate is
 perpetual; and
whereas, under our laws, the right of property in the literary
 result of a citizen’s intellectual labor is restricted to
 forty-two years; and
whereas, forty-two years seems an exceedingly just and righteous
 term, and a sufficiently long one for the retention of property;
therefore, your petitioner, having the good of his country solely
 at heart, humbly prays that “equal rights” and fair and
 equal treatment may be meted out to all citizens, by the restriction of
 rights in all property, real estate included, to the beneficent term of
 forty-two years. then shall all men bless your honorable body and be
 happy. and for this will your petitioner ever pray. 
 the charming absurdity of restricting property-rights in books to
 forty-two years sticks prominently out in the fact that hardly any man’s
 books ever live forty-two years, or even the half of it; and so, for the
 sake of getting a shabby advantage of the heirs of about one scott or
 burns or milton in a hundred years, the lawmakers of the “great”
 republic are content to leave that poor little pilfering edict upon the
 statute-books. it is like an emperor lying in wait to rob a phoenix’s
 nest, and waiting the necessary century to get the chance.
 mr. chairman and ladies and gentlemen: i thank you for the compliment
 which has just been tendered me, and to show my appreciation of it i will
 not afflict you with many words. it is pleasant to celebrate in this
 peaceful way, upon this old mother soil, the anniversary of an experiment
 which was born of war with this same land so long ago, and wrought out to
 a successful issue by the devotion of our ancestors. it has taken nearly a
 hundred years to bring the english and americans into kindly and mutually
 appreciative relations, but i believe it has been accomplished at last. it
 was a great step when the two last misunderstandings were settled by
 arbitration instead of cannon. it is another great step when england
 adopts our sewing-machines without claiming the invention—as usual.
 it was another when they imported one of our sleeping-cars the other day.
 and it warmed my heart more than i can tell, yesterday, when i witnessed
 the spectacle of an englishman ordering an american sherry cobbler of his
 own free will and accord—and not only that but with a great brain
 and a level head reminding the barkeeper not to forget the strawberries.
 with a common origin, a common language, a common literature, a common
 religion and—common drinks, what is longer needful to the cementing
 of the two nations together in a permanent bond of brotherhood?
 this is an age of progress, and ours is a progressive land. a great and
 glorious land, too—a land which has developed a washington, a
 franklin, a william m. tweed, a longfellow, a motley, a jay gould, a
 samuel c. pomeroy, a recent congress which has never had its equal (in
 some respects), and a united states army which conquered sixty indians in
 eight months by tiring them out—which is much better than
 uncivilized slaughter, god knows. we have a criminal jury system which is
 superior to any in the world; and its efficiency is only marred by the
 difficulty of finding twelve men every day who don’t know anything
 and can’t read. and i may observe that we have an insanity plea that
 would have saved cain. i think i can say, and say with pride, that we have
 some legislatures that bring higher prices than any in the world.
 i refer with effusion to our railway system, which consents to let us
 live, though it might do the opposite, being our owners. it only destroyed
 three thousand and seventy lives last year by collisions, and twenty-seven
 thousand two hundred and sixty by running over heedless and unnecessary
 people at crossings. the companies seriously regretted the killing of
 these thirty thousand people, and went so far as to pay for some of them—voluntarily,
 of course, for the meanest of us would not claim that we possess a court
 treacherous enough to enforce a law against a railway company. but, thank
 heaven, the railway companies are generally disposed to do the right and
 kindly thing without compulsion. i know of an instance which greatly
 touched me at the time. after an accident the company sent home the
 remains of a dear distant old relative of mine in a basket, with the
 remark, “please state what figure you hold him at—and return
 the basket.” now there couldn’t be anything friendlier than
 that.
 but i must not stand here and brag all night. however, you won’t
 mind a body bragging a little about his country on the fourth of july. it
 is a fair and legitimate time to fly the eagle. i will say only one more
 word of brag—and a hopeful one. it is this. we have a form of
 government which gives each man a fair chance and no favor. with us no
 individual is born with a right to look down upon his neighbor and hold
 him in contempt. let such of us as are not dukes find our consolation in
 that. and we may find hope for the future in the fact that as unhappy as
 is the condition of our political morality to-day, england has risen up
 out of a far fouler since the days when charles i. ennobled courtesans and
 all political place was a matter of bargain and sale. there is hope for us
 yet.
 [at least the above is the speech which i was going to make, but our
 minister, general schenck, presided, and after the blessing, got up and
 made a great long inconceivably dull harangue, and wound up by saying
 that inasmuch as speech-making did not seem to exhilarate the guests
 much, all further oratory would be dispensed with during the evening,
 and we could just sit and talk privately to our elbow-neighbors and have
 a good sociable time. it is known that in consequence of that remark
 forty-four perfected speeches died in the womb. the depression, the
 gloom, the solemnity that reigned over the banquet from that time forth
 will be a lasting memory with many that were there. by that one
 thoughtless remark general schenck lost forty-four of the best friends
 he had in england. more than one said that night, “and this is the
 sort of person that is sent to represent us in a great sister empire!”]
 i had heard so much about the celebrated fortune-teller madame—
 —, that i went to see her yesterday. she has a dark complexion
 naturally, and this effect is heightened by artificial aids which cost her
 nothing. she wears curls—very black ones, and i had an impression
 that she gave their native attractiveness a lift with rancid butter. she
 wears a reddish check handkerchief, cast loosely around her neck, and it
 was plain that her other one is slow getting back from the wash. i presume
 she takes snuff. at any rate, something resembling it had lodged among the
 hairs sprouting from her upper lip. i know she likes garlic—i knew
 that as soon as she sighed. she looked at me searchingly for nearly a
 minute, with her black eyes, and then said:
 “it is enough. come!”
 she started down a very dark and dismal corridor—i stepping close
 after her. presently she stopped, and said that, as the way was so crooked
 and dark, perhaps she had better get a light. but it seemed ungallant to
 allow a woman to put herself to so much trouble for me, and so i said:
 “it is not worth while, madam. if you will heave another sigh, i
 think i can follow it.”
 so we got along all right. arrived at her official and mysterious den, she
 asked me to tell her the date of my birth, the exact hour of that
 occurrence, and the color of my grandmother’s hair. i answered as
 accurately as i could. then she said:
 “young man, summon your fortitude—do not tremble. i am about
 to reveal the past.”
 “information concerning the future would be, in a general way, more—”
 “silence! you have had much trouble, some joy, some good fortune,
 some bad. your great grandfather was hanged.”
 “that is a l—”
 “silence! hanged sir. but it was not his fault. he could not help
 it.”
 “i am glad you do him justice.”
 “ah—grieve, rather, that the jury did. he was hanged. his star
 crosses yours in the fourth division, fifth sphere. consequently you will
 be hanged also.”
 “in view of this cheerful—”
 “i must have silence. yours was not, in the beginning, a criminal
 nature, but circumstances changed it. at the age of nine you stole sugar.
 at the age of fifteen you stole money. at twenty you stole horses. at
 twenty-five you committed arson. at thirty, hardened in crime, you became
 an editor. you are now a public lecturer. worse things are in store for
 you. you will be sent to congress. next, to the penitentiary. finally,
 happiness will come again—all will be well—you will be hanged.”
 i was now in tears. it seemed hard enough to go to congress; but to be
 hanged—this was too sad, too dreadful. the woman seemed surprised at
 my grief. i told her the thoughts that were in my mind. then she comforted
 me.
 “why, man,” she said, “hold up your head—you have
 nothing to grieve about. listen.
 —[in this paragraph the fortune-teller details the exact history of
 the pike-brown assassination case in new hampshire, from the succoring and
 saving of the stranger pike by the browns, to the subsequent hanging and
 coffining of that treacherous miscreant. she adds nothing, invents
 nothing, exaggerates nothing (see any new england paper for november,
 ). this pike-brown case is selected merely as a type, to illustrate a
 custom that prevails, not in new hampshire alone, but in every state in
 the union—i mean the sentimental custom of visiting, petting,
 glorifying, and snuffling over murderers like this pike, from the day they
 enter the jail under sentence of death until they swing from the gallows.
 the following extract from the temple bar () reveals the fact that
 this custom is not confined to the united states.—“on december
 , , a man named john johnes, a shoemaker, murdered his sweetheart,
 mary hallam, the daughter of a respectable laborer, at mansfield, in the
 county of nottingham. he was executed on march , . he was a man of
 unsteady habits, and gave way to violent fits of passion. the girl
 declined his addresses, and he said if he did not have her no one else
 should. after he had inflicted the first wound, which was not immediately
 fatal, she begged for her life, but seeing him resolved, asked for time to
 pray. he said that he would pray for both, and completed the crime. the
 wounds were inflicted by a shoemaker’s knife, and her throat was cut
 barbarously. after this he dropped on his knees some time, and prayed god
 to have mercy on two unfortunate lovers. he made no attempt to escape, and
 confessed the crime. after his imprisonment he behaved in a most decorous
 manner; he won upon the good opinion of the jail chaplain, and he was
 visited by the bishop of lincoln. it does not appear that he expressed any
 contrition for the crime, but seemed to pass away with triumphant
 certainty that he was going to rejoin his victim in heaven. he was visited
 by some pious and benevolent ladies of nottingham, some of whom declared
 he was a child of god, if ever there was one. one of the ladies sent him a
 white camellia to wear at his execution.”]
 “you will live in new hampshire. in your sharp need and distress the
 brown family will succor you—such of them as pike the assassin left
 alive. they will be benefactors to you. when you shall have grown fat upon
 their bounty, and are grateful and happy, you will desire to make some
 modest return for these things, and so you will go to the house some night
 and brain the whole family with an ax. you will rob the dead bodies of
 your benefactors, and disburse your gains in riotous living among the
 rowdies and courtesans of boston. then you will be arrested, tried,
 condemned to be hanged, thrown into prison. now is your happy day. you
 will be converted—you will be converted just as soon as every effort
 to compass pardon, commutation, or reprieve has failed—and then!—why,
 then, every morning and every afternoon, the best and purest young ladies
 of the village will assemble in your cell and sing hymns. this will show
 that assassination is respectable. then you will write a touching letter,
 in which you will forgive all those recent browns. this will excite the
 public admiration. no public can withstand magnanimity. next, they will
 take you to the scaffold, with great éclat, at the head of an
 imposing procession composed of clergymen, officials, citizens generally,
 and young ladies walking pensively two and two, and bearing bouquets and
 immortelles. you will mount the scaffold, and while the great concourse
 stand uncovered in your presence, you will read your sappy little speech
 which the minister has written for you. and then, in the midst of a grand
 and impressive silence, they will swing you into per—paradise, my
 son. there will not be a dry eye on the ground. you will be a hero! not a
 rough there but will envy you. not a rough there but will resolve to
 emulate you. and next, a great procession will follow you to the tomb—will
 weep over your remains—the young ladies will sing again the hymns
 made dear by sweet associations connected with the jail, and, as a last
 tribute of affection, respect, and appreciation of your many sterling
 qualities, they will walk two and two around your bier, and strew wreaths
 of flowers on it. and lo! you are canonized.
 think of it, son-ingrate, assassin, robber of the dead, drunken brawler
 among thieves and harlots in the slums of boston one month, and the pet of
 the pure and innocent daughters of the land the next! a bloody and hateful
 devil—a bewept, bewailed, and sainted martyr—all in a month!
 fool!—so noble a fortune, and yet you sit here grieving!”
 “no, madam,” i said, “you do me wrong, you do, indeed. i
 am perfectly satisfied. i did not know before that my great-grandfather
 was hanged, but it is of no consequence. he has probably ceased to bother
 about it by this time—and i have not commenced yet. i confess,
 madam, that i do something in the way of editing and lecturing, but the
 other crimes you mention have escaped my memory. yet i must have committed
 them—you would not deceive a stranger. but let the past be as it
 was, and let the future be as it may—these are nothing. i have only
 cared for one thing. i have always felt that i should be hanged some day,
 and somehow the thought has annoyed me considerably; but if you can only
 assure me that i shall be hanged in new hampshire—”
 “not a shadow of a doubt!”
 “bless you, my benefactress!—excuse this embrace—you
 have removed a great load from my breast. to be hanged in new hampshire is
 happiness—it leaves an honored name behind a man, and introduces him
 at once into the best new hampshire society in the other world.”
 i then took leave of the fortune-teller. but, seriously, is it well to
 glorify a murderous villain on the scaffold, as pike was glorified in new
 hampshire? is it well to turn the penalty for a bloody crime into a
 reward? is it just to do it? is it safe?
 this country, during the last thirty or forty years, has produced some of
 the most remarkable cases of insanity of which there is any mention in
 history. for instance, there was the baldwin case, in ohio, twenty-two
 years ago. baldwin, from his boyhood up, had been of a vindictive,
 malignant, quarrelsome nature. he put a boy’s eye out once, and
 never was heard upon any occasion to utter a regret for it. he did many
 such things. but at last he did something that was serious. he called at a
 house just after dark one evening, knocked, and when the occupant came to
 the door, shot him dead, and then tried to escape, but was captured. two
 days before, he had wantonly insulted a helpless cripple, and the man he
 afterward took swift vengeance upon with an assassin bullet had knocked
 him down. such was the baldwin case. the trial was long and exciting; the
 community was fearfully wrought up. men said this spiteful, bad-hearted
 villain had caused grief enough in his time, and now he should satisfy the
 law. but they were mistaken; baldwin was insane when he did the deed—they
 had not thought of that. by the argument of counsel it was shown that at
 half past ten in the morning on the day of the murder, baldwin became
 insane, and remained so for eleven hours and a half exactly. this just
 covered the case comfortably, and he was acquitted. thus, if an unthinking
 and excited community had been listened to instead of the arguments of
 counsel, a poor crazy creature would have been held to a fearful
 responsibility for a mere freak of madness. baldwin went clear, and
 although his relatives and friends were naturally incensed against the
 community for their injurious suspicions and remarks, they said let it go
 for this time, and did not prosecute. the baldwins were very wealthy. this
 same baldwin had momentary fits of insanity twice afterward, and on both
 occasions killed people he had grudges against. and on both these
 occasions the circumstances of the killing were so aggravated, and the
 murders so seemingly heartless and treacherous, that if baldwin had not
 been insane he would have been hanged without the shadow of a doubt. as it
 was, it required all his political and family influence to get him clear
 in one of the cases, and cost him not less than ten thousand dollars to
 get clear in the other. one of these men he had notoriously been
 threatening to kill for twelve years. the poor creature happened, by the
 merest piece of ill fortune, to come along a dark alley at the very moment
 that baldwin’s insanity came upon him, and so he was shot in the
 back with a gun loaded with slugs.
 take the case of lynch hackett, of pennsylvania. twice, in public, he
 attacked a german butcher by the name of bemis feldner, with a cane, and
 both times feldner whipped him with his fists. hackett was a vain,
 wealthy, violent gentleman, who held his blood and family in high esteem,
 and believed that a reverent respect was due to his great riches. he
 brooded over the shame of his chastisement for two weeks, and then, in a
 momentary fit of insanity, armed himself to the teeth, rode into town,
 waited a couple of hours until he saw feldner coming down the street with
 his wife on his arm, and then, as the couple passed the doorway in which
 he had partially concealed himself, he drove a knife into feldner’s
 neck, killing him instantly. the widow caught the limp form and eased it
 to the earth. both were drenched with blood. hackett jocosely remarked to
 her that as a professional butcher’s recent wife she could
 appreciate the artistic neatness of the job that left her in condition to
 marry again, in case she wanted to. this remark, and another which he made
 to a friend, that his position in society made the killing of an obscure
 citizen simply an “eccentricity” instead of a crime, were
 shown to be evidences of insanity, and so hackett escaped punishment. the
 jury were hardly inclined to accept these as proofs at first, inasmuch as
 the prisoner had never been insane before the murder, and under the
 tranquilizing effect of the butchering had immediately regained his right
 mind; but when the defense came to show that a third cousin of hackett’s
 wife’s stepfather was insane, and not only insane, but had a nose
 the very counterpart of hackett’s, it was plain that insanity was
 hereditary in the family, and hackett had come by it by legitimate
 inheritance.
 of course the jury then acquitted him. but it was a merciful providence
 that mrs. h.’s people had been afflicted as shown, else hackett
 would certainly have been hanged.
 however, it is not possible to recount all the marvelous cases of insanity
 that have come under the public notice in the last thirty or forty years.
 there was the durgin case in new jersey three years ago. the servant girl,
 bridget durgin, at dead of night, invaded her mistress’s bedroom and
 carved the lady literally to pieces with a knife. then she dragged the
 body to the middle of the floor, and beat and banged it with chairs and
 such things. next she opened the feather beds, and strewed the contents
 around, saturated everything with kerosene, and set fire to the general
 wreck. she now took up the young child of the murdered woman in her blood
 smeared hands and walked off, through the snow, with no shoes on, to a
 neighbor’s house a quarter of a mile off, and told a string of wild,
 incoherent stories about some men coming and setting fire to the house;
 and then she cried piteously, and without seeming to think there was
 anything suggestive about the blood upon her hands, her clothing, and the
 baby, volunteered the remark that she was afraid those men had murdered
 her mistress! afterward, by her own confession and other testimony, it was
 proved that the mistress had always been kind to the girl, consequently
 there was no revenge in the murder; and it was also shown that the girl
 took nothing away from the burning house, not even her own shoes, and
 consequently robbery was not the motive.
 now, the reader says, “here comes that same old plea of insanity
 again.” but the reader has deceived himself this time. no such plea
 was offered in her defense. the judge sentenced her, nobody persecuted the
 governor with petitions for her pardon, and she was promptly hanged.
 there was that youth in pennsylvania, whose curious confession was
 published some years ago. it was simply a conglomeration of incoherent
 drivel from beginning to end, and so was his lengthy speech on the
 scaffold afterward. for a whole year he was haunted with a desire to
 disfigure a certain young woman, so that no one would marry her. he did
 not love her himself, and did not want to marry her, but he did not want
 anybody else to do it. he would not go anywhere with her, and yet was
 opposed to anybody else’s escorting her. upon one occasion he
 declined to go to a wedding with her, and when she got other company, lay
 in wait for the couple by the road, intending to make them go back or kill
 the escort. after spending sleepless nights over his ruling desire for a
 full year, he at last attempted its execution—that is, attempted to
 disfigure the young woman. it was a success. it was permanent. in trying
 to shoot her cheek (as she sat at the supper-table with her parents and
 brothers and sisters) in such a manner as to mar its comeliness, one of
 his bullets wandered a little out of the course, and she dropped dead. to
 the very last moment of his life he bewailed the ill luck that made her
 move her face just at the critical moment. and so he died, apparently
 about half persuaded that somehow it was chiefly her own fault that she
 got killed. this idiot was hanged. the plea of insanity was not offered.
 insanity certainly is on the increase in the world, and crime is dying
 out. there are no longer any murders—none worth mentioning, at any
 rate. formerly, if you killed a man, it was possible that you were insane—but
 now, if you, having friends and money, kill a man, it is evidence that you
 are a lunatic. in these days, too, if a person of good family and high
 social standing steals anything, they call it kleptomania, and send him to
 the lunatic asylum. if a person of high standing squanders his fortune in
 dissipation, and closes his career with strychnine or a bullet, “temporary
 aberration” is what was the trouble with him.
 is not this insanity plea becoming rather common? is it not so common that
 the reader confidently expects to see it offered in every criminal case
 that comes before the courts? and is it not so cheap, and so common, and
 often so trivial, that the reader smiles in derision when the newspaper
 mentions it? and is it not curious to note how very often it wins
 acquittal for the prisoner? of late years it does not seem possible for a
 man to so conduct himself, before killing another man, as not to be
 manifestly insane. if he talks about the stars, he is insane. if he
 appears nervous and uneasy an hour before the killing, he is insane. if he
 weeps over a great grief, his friends shake their heads, and fear that he
 is “not right.” if, an hour after the murder, he seems ill at
 ease, preoccupied, and excited, he is, unquestionably insane.
 really, what we want now, is not laws against crime, but a law against
 insanity. there is where the true evil lies.
a curious dream [written about .]
 night before last i had a singular dream. i seemed to be sitting on a
 doorstep (in no particular city perhaps) ruminating, and the time of night
 appeared to be about twelve or one o’clock. the weather was balmy
 and delicious. there was no human sound in the air, not even a footstep.
 there was no sound of any kind to emphasize the dead stillness, except the
 occasional hollow barking of a dog in the distance and the fainter answer
 of a further dog. presently up the street i heard a bony clack-clacking,
 and guessed it was the castanets of a serenading party. in a minute more a
 tall skeleton, hooded, and half clad in a tattered and moldy shroud, whose
 shreds were flapping about the ribby latticework of its person, swung by
 me with a stately stride and disappeared in the gray gloom of the
 starlight. it had a broken and worm-eaten coffin on its shoulder and a
 bundle of something in its hand. i knew what the clack-clacking was then;
 it was this party’s joints working together, and his elbows knocking
 against his sides as he walked. i may say i was surprised. before i could
 collect my thoughts and enter upon any speculations as to what this
 apparition might portend, i heard another one coming for i recognized his
 clack-clack. he had two-thirds of a coffin on his shoulder, and some foot
 and head boards under his arm. i mightily wanted to peer under his hood
 and speak to him, but when he turned and smiled upon me with his cavernous
 sockets and his projecting grin as he went by, i thought i would not
 detain him. he was hardly gone when i heard the clacking again, and
 another one issued from the shadowy half-light. this one was bending under
 a heavy gravestone, and dragging a shabby coffin after him by a string.
 when he got to me he gave me a steady look for a moment or two, and then
 rounded to and backed up to me, saying:
 “ease this down for a fellow, will you?”
 i eased the gravestone down till it rested on the ground, and in doing so
 noticed that it bore the name of “john baxter copmanhurst,”
 with “may, ,” as the date of his death. deceased sat
 wearily down by me, and wiped his os frontis with his major maxillary—chiefly
 from former habit i judged, for i could not see that he brought away any
 perspiration.
 “it is too bad, too bad,” said he, drawing the remnant of the
 shroud about him and leaning his jaw pensively on his hand. then he put
 his left foot up on his knee and fell to scratching his anklebone absently
 with a rusty nail which he got out of his coffin.
 “what is too bad, friend?”
 “oh, everything, everything. i almost wish i never had died.”
 “you surprise me. why do you say this? has anything gone wrong? what
 is the matter?”
 “matter! look at this shroud-rags. look at this gravestone, all
 battered up. look at that disgraceful old coffin. all a man’s
 property going to ruin and destruction before his eyes, and ask him if
 anything is wrong? fire and brimstone!”
 “calm yourself, calm yourself,” i said. “it is too bad—it
 is certainly too bad, but then i had not supposed that you would much mind
 such matters, situated as you are.”
 “well, my dear sir, i do mind them. my pride is hurt, and my comfort
 is impaired—destroyed, i might say. i will state my case—i
 will put it to you in such a way that you can comprehend it, if you will
 let me,” said the poor skeleton, tilting the hood of his shroud
 back, as if he were clearing for action, and thus unconsciously giving
 himself a jaunty and festive air very much at variance with the grave
 character of his position in life—so to speak—and in prominent
 contrast with his distressful mood.
 “proceed,” said i.
 “i reside in the shameful old graveyard a block or two above you
 here, in this street—there, now, i just expected that cartilage
 would let go!—third rib from the bottom, friend, hitch the end of it
 to my spine with a string, if you have got such a thing about you, though
 a bit of silver wire is a deal pleasanter, and more durable and becoming,
 if one keeps it polished—to think of shredding out and going to
 pieces in this way, just on account of the indifference and neglect of one’s
 posterity!”—and the poor ghost grated his teeth in a way that
 gave me a wrench and a shiver—for the effect is mightily increased
 by the absence of muffling flesh and cuticle. “i reside in that old
 graveyard, and have for these thirty years; and i tell you things are
 changed since i first laid this old tired frame there, and turned over,
 and stretched out for a long sleep, with a delicious sense upon me of
 being done with bother, and grief, and anxiety, and doubt, and fear,
 forever and ever, and listening with comfortable and increasing
 satisfaction to the sexton’s work, from the startling clatter of his
 first spadeful on my coffin till it dulled away to the faint patting that
 shaped the roof of my new home—delicious! my! i wish you could try
 it to-night!” and out of my reverie deceased fetched me a rattling
 slap with a bony hand.
 “yes, sir, thirty years ago i laid me down there, and was happy. for
 it was out in the country then—out in the breezy, flowery, grand old
 woods, and the lazy winds gossiped with the leaves, and the squirrels
 capered over us and around us, and the creeping things visited us, and the
 birds filled the tranquil solitude with music. ah, it was worth ten years
 of a man’s life to be dead then! everything was pleasant. i was in a
 good neighborhood, for all the dead people that lived near me belonged to
 the best families in the city. our posterity appeared to think the world
 of us. they kept our graves in the very best condition; the fences were
 always in faultless repair, head-boards were kept painted or whitewashed,
 and were replaced with new ones as soon as they began to look rusty or
 decayed; monuments were kept upright, railings intact and bright, the
 rose-bushes and shrubbery trimmed, trained, and free from blemish, the
 walks clean and smooth and graveled. but that day is gone by. our
 descendants have forgotten us. my grandson lives in a stately house built
 with money made by these old hands of mine, and i sleep in a neglected
 grave with invading vermin that gnaw my shroud to build them nests withal!
 i and friends that lie with me founded and secured the prosperity of this
 fine city, and the stately bantling of our loves leaves us to rot in a
 dilapidated cemetery which neighbors curse and strangers scoff at. see the
 difference between the old time and this—for instance: our graves
 are all caved in now; our head-boards have rotted away and tumbled down;
 our railings reel this way and that, with one foot in the air, after a
 fashion of unseemly levity; our monuments lean wearily, and our
 gravestones bow their heads discouraged; there be no adornments any more—no
 roses, nor shrubs, nor graveled walks, nor anything that is a comfort to
 the eye; and even the paintless old board fence that did make a show of
 holding us sacred from companionship with beasts and the defilement of
 heedless feet, has tottered till it overhangs the street, and only
 advertises the presence of our dismal resting-place and invites yet more
 derision to it. and now we cannot hide our poverty and tatters in the
 friendly woods, for the city has stretched its withering arms abroad and
 taken us in, and all that remains of the cheer of our old home is the
 cluster of lugubrious forest trees that stand, bored and weary of a city
 life, with their feet in our coffins, looking into the hazy distance and
 wishing they were there. i tell you it is disgraceful!
 “you begin to comprehend—you begin to see how it is. while our
 descendants are living sumptuously on our money, right around us in the
 city, we have to fight hard to keep skull and bones together. bless you,
 there isn’t a grave in our cemetery that doesn’t leak—not
 one. every time it rains in the night we have to climb out and roost in
 the trees, and sometimes we are wakened suddenly by the chilly water
 trickling down the back of our necks. then i tell you there is a general
 heaving up of old graves and kicking over of old monuments, and scampering
 of old skeletons for the trees! bless me, if you had gone along there some
 such nights after twelve you might have seen as many as fifteen of us
 roosting on one limb, with our joints rattling drearily and the wind
 wheezing through our ribs! many a time we have perched there for three or
 four dreary hours, and then come down, stiff and chilled through and
 drowsy, and borrowed each other’s skulls to bail out our graves with—if
 you will glance up in my mouth now as i tilt my head back, you can see
 that my head-piece is half full of old dry sediment—how top-heavy
 and stupid it makes me sometimes! yes, sir, many a time if you had
 happened to come along just before the dawn you’d have caught us
 bailing out the graves and hanging our shrouds on the fence to dry. why, i
 had an elegant shroud stolen from there one morning—think a party by
 the name of smith took it, that resides in a plebeian graveyard over
 yonder—i think so because the first time i ever saw him he hadn’t
 anything on but a check shirt, and the last time i saw him, which was at a
 social gathering in the new cemetery, he was the best-dressed corpse in
 the company—and it is a significant fact that he left when he saw
 me; and presently an old woman from here missed her coffin—she
 generally took it with her when she went anywhere, because she was liable
 to take cold and bring on the spasmodic rheumatism that originally killed
 her if she exposed herself to the night air much. she was named hotchkiss—anna
 matilda hotchkiss—you might know her? she has two upper front teeth,
 is tall, but a good deal inclined to stoop, one rib on the left side gone,
 has one shred of rusty hair hanging from the left side of her head, and
 one little tuft just above and a little forward of her right ear, has her
 underjaw wired on one side where it had worked loose, small bone of left
 forearm gone—lost in a fight—has a kind of swagger in her gait
 and a ‘gallus’ way of going with her arms akimbo and her
 nostrils in the air—has been pretty free and easy, and is all
 damaged and battered up till she looks like a queensware crate in ruins—maybe
 you have met her?”
 “god forbid!” i involuntarily ejaculated, for somehow i was
 not looking for that form of question, and it caught me a little off my
 guard. but i hastened to make amends for my rudeness, and say, “i
 simply meant i had not had the honor—for i would not deliberately
 speak discourteously of a friend of yours. you were saying that you were
 robbed—and it was a shame, too—but it appears by what is left
 of the shroud you have on that it was a costly one in its day. how did—”
 a most ghastly expression began to develop among the decayed features and
 shriveled integuments of my guest’s face, and i was beginning to
 grow uneasy and distressed, when he told me he was only working up a deep,
 sly smile, with a wink in it, to suggest that about the time he acquired
 his present garment a ghost in a neighboring cemetery missed one. this
 reassured me, but i begged him to confine himself to speech thenceforth,
 because his facial expression was uncertain. even with the most elaborate
 care it was liable to miss fire. smiling should especially be avoided.
 what he might honestly consider a shining success was likely to strike me
 in a very different light. i said i liked to see a skeleton cheerful, even
 decorously playful, but i did not think smiling was a skeleton’s
 best hold.
 “yes, friend,” said the poor skeleton, “the facts are
 just as i have given them to you. two of these old graveyards—the
 one that i resided in and one further along—have been deliberately
 neglected by our descendants of to-day until there is no occupying them
 any longer. aside from the osteological discomfort of it—and that is
 no light matter this rainy weather—the present state of things is
 ruinous to property. we have got to move or be content to see our effects
 wasted away and utterly destroyed.
 “now, you will hardly believe it, but it is true, nevertheless, that
 there isn’t a single coffin in good repair among all my acquaintance—now
 that is an absolute fact. i do not refer to low people who come in a pine
 box mounted on an express-wagon, but i am talking about your high-toned,
 silver-mounted burial-case, your monumental sort, that travel under black
 plumes at the head of a procession and have choice of cemetery lots—i
 mean folks like the jarvises, and the bledsoes and burlings, and such.
 they are all about ruined. the most substantial people in our set, they
 were. and now look at them—utterly used up and poverty-stricken. one
 of the bledsoes actually traded his monument to a late barkeeper for some
 fresh shavings to put under his head. i tell you it speaks volumes, for
 there is nothing a corpse takes so much pride in as his monument. he loves
 to read the inscription. he comes after a while to believe what it says
 himself, and then you may see him sitting on the fence night after night
 enjoying it. epitaphs are cheap, and they do a poor chap a world of good
 after he is dead, especially if he had hard luck while he was alive. i
 wish they were used more. now i don’t complain, but confidentially i
 do think it was a little shabby in my descendants to give me nothing but
 this old slab of a gravestone—and all the more that there isn’t
 a compliment on it. it used to have:
 on it, and i was proud when i first saw it, but by and by i noticed that
 whenever an old friend of mine came along he would hook his chin on the
 railing and pull a long face and read along down till he came to that, and
 then he would chuckle to himself and walk off, looking satisfied and
 comfortable. so i scratched it off to get rid of those fools. but a dead
 man always takes a deal of pride in his monument. yonder goes half a dozen
 of the jarvises now, with the family monument along. and smithers and some
 hired specters went by with his awhile ago. hello, higgins, good-by, old
 friend! that’s meredith higgins—died in ‘—belongs
 to our set in the cemetery—fine old family— great-grandmother
 was an injun—i am on the most familiar terms with him—he didn’t
 hear me was the reason he didn’t answer me. and i am sorry, too,
 because i would have liked to introduce you. you would admire him. he is
 the most disjointed, sway-backed, and generally distorted old skeleton you
 ever saw, but he is full of fun. when he laughs it sounds like rasping two
 stones together, and he always starts it off with a cheery screech like
 raking a nail across a window-pane. hey, jones! that is old columbus jones—shroud
 cost four hundred dollars—entire trousseau, including monument,
 twenty-seven hundred. this was in the spring of ‘. it was enormous
 style for those days. dead people came all the way from the alleghanies to
 see his things—the party that occupied the grave next to mine
 remembers it well. now do you see that individual going along with a piece
 of a head-board under his arm, one leg-bone below his knee gone, and not a
 thing in the world on? that is barstow dalhousie, and next to columbus
 jones he was the most sumptuously outfitted person that ever entered our
 cemetery. we are all leaving. we cannot tolerate the treatment we are
 receiving at the hands of our descendants. they open new cemeteries, but
 they leave us to our ignominy. they mend the streets, but they never mend
 anything that is about us or belongs to us. look at that coffin of mine—yet
 i tell you in its day it was a piece of furniture that would have
 attracted attention in any drawing-room in this city. you may have it if
 you want it—i can’t afford to repair it. put a new bottom in
 her, and part of a new top, and a bit of fresh lining along the left side,
 and you’ll find her about as comfortable as any receptacle of her
 species you ever tried. no thanks—no, don’t mention it—
 you have been civil to me, and i would give you all the property i have
 got before i would seem ungrateful. now this winding-sheet is a kind of a
 sweet thing in its way, if you would like to—no? well, just as you
 say, but i wished to be fair and liberal—there’s nothing mean
 about me. good-by, friend, i must be going. i may have a good way to go
 to-night—don’t know. i only know one thing for certain, and
 that is that i am on the emigrant trail now, and i’ll never sleep in
 that crazy old cemetery again. i will travel till i find respectable
 quarters, if i have to hoof it to new jersey. all the boys are going. it
 was decided in public conclave, last night, to emigrate, and by the time
 the sun rises there won’t be a bone left in our old habitations.
 such cemeteries may suit my surviving friends, but they do not suit the
 remains that have the honor to make these remarks. my opinion is the
 general opinion. if you doubt it, go and see how the departing ghosts
 upset things before they started. they were almost riotous in their
 demonstrations of distaste. hello, here are some of the bledsoes, and if
 you will give me a lift with this tombstone i guess i will join company
 and jog along with them—mighty respectable old family, the bledsoes,
 and used to always come out in six-horse hearses and all that sort of
 thing fifty years ago when i walked these streets in daylight. good-by,
 friend.”
 and with his gravestone on his shoulder he joined the grisly procession,
 dragging his damaged coffin after him, for notwithstanding he pressed it
 upon me so earnestly, i utterly refused his hospitality. i suppose that
 for as much as two hours these sad outcasts went clacking by, laden with
 their dismal effects, and all that time i sat pitying them. one or two of
 the youngest and least dilapidated among them inquired about midnight
 trains on the railways, but the rest seemed unacquainted with that mode of
 travel, and merely asked about common public roads to various towns and
 cities, some of which are not on the map now, and vanished from it and
 from the earth as much as thirty years ago, and some few of them never had
 existed anywhere but on maps, and private ones in real-estate agencies at
 that. and they asked about the condition of the cemeteries in these towns
 and cities, and about the reputation the citizens bore as to reverence for
 the dead.
 this whole matter interested me deeply, and likewise compelled my sympathy
 for these homeless ones. and it all seeming real, and i not knowing it was
 a dream, i mentioned to one shrouded wanderer an idea that had entered my
 head to publish an account of this curious and very sorrowful exodus, but
 said also that i could not describe it truthfully, and just as it
 occurred, without seeming to trifle with a grave subject and exhibit an
 irreverence for the dead that would shock and distress their surviving
 friends. but this bland and stately remnant of a former citizen leaned him
 far over my gate and whispered in my ear, and said:
 “do not let that disturb you. the community that can stand such
 graveyards as those we are emigrating from can stand anything a body can
 say about the neglected and forsaken dead that lie in them.”
 at that very moment a cock crowed, and the weird procession vanished and
 left not a shred or a bone behind. i awoke, and found myself lying with my
 head out of the bed and “sagging” downward considerably—a
 position favorable to dreaming dreams with morals in them, maybe, but not
 poetry.
 note.—the reader is assured that if the cemeteries in his town are
 kept in good order, this dream is not leveled at his town at all, but is
 leveled particularly and venomously at the next town.
 repeated word for word as i heard it—[written about ]
 it was summer-time, and twilight. we were sitting on the porch of the
 farmhouse, on the summit of the hill, and “aunt rachel” was
 sitting respectfully below our level, on the steps—for she was our
 servant, and colored. she was of mighty frame and stature; she was sixty
 years old, but her eye was undimmed and her strength unabated. she was a
 cheerful, hearty soul, and it was no more trouble for her to laugh than it
 is for a bird to sing. she was under fire now, as usual when the day was
 done. that is to say, she was being chaffed without mercy, and was
 enjoying it. she would let off peal after peal of laughter, and then sit
 with her face in her hands and shake with throes of enjoyment which she
 could no longer get breath enough to express. at such a moment as this a
 thought occurred to me, and i said:
 “aunt rachel, how is it that you’ve lived sixty years and
 never had any trouble?”
 she stopped quaking. she paused, and there was moment of silence. she
 turned her face over her shoulder toward me, and said, without even a
 smile her voice:
 “misto c——, is you in ’arnest?”
 it surprised me a good deal; and it sobered my manner and my speech, too.
 i said:
 “why, i thought—that is, i meant—why, you can’t
 have had any trouble. i’ve never heard you sigh, and never seen your
 eye when there wasn’t a laugh in it.”
 she faced fairly around now, and was full earnestness.
 “has i had any trouble? misto c——-, i’s gwyne to
 tell you, den i leave it to you. i was bawn down ’mongst de slaves;
 i knows all ’bout slavery, ’case i ben one of ’em my own
 se’f. well sah, my ole man—dat’s my husban’—he
 was lovin’ an’ kind to me, jist as kind as you is to yo’
 own wife. an’ we had chil’en—seven chil’en—an’
 we loved dem chil’en jist de same as you loves yo’ chil’en.
 dey was black, but de lord can’t make chil’en so black but
 what dey mother loves ’em an’ wouldn’t give ’em
 up, no, not for anything dat’s in dis whole world.
 “well, sah, i was raised in ole fo’ginny, but my mother she
 was raised in maryland; an’ my souls she was turrible when she’d
 git started! my lan! but she’d make de fur fly! when she’d git
 into dem tantrums, she always had one word dat she said. she’d
 straighten herse’f up an’ put her fists in her hips an’
 say, ‘i want you to understan’ dat i wa’n’t bawn
 in the mash to be fool’ by trash! i’s one o’ de ole blue
 hen’s chickens, i is!’ ca’se you see, dat’s what
 folks dat’s bawn in maryland calls deyselves, an’ dey’s
 proud of it. well, dat was her word. i don’t ever forgit it, beca’se
 she said it so much, an’ beca’se she said it one day when my
 little henry tore his wris’ awful, and most busted ’is head,
 right up at de top of his forehead, an’ de niggers didn’t fly
 aroun’ fas’ enough to tend to him. an’ when dey talk’
 back at her, she up an’ she says, look-a-heah!’ she says,
 ‘i want you niggers to understan’ dat i wa’n’t
 bawn in de mash be fool’ by trash! i’s one o’ de ole
 blue hen’s chickens, i is!’ an’ den she clar’ dat
 kitchen an’ bandage’ up de chile herse’f. so i says dat
 word, too, when i’s riled.
 “well, bymeby my ole mistis say she’s broke, an’ she got
 to sell all de niggers on de place. an’ when i heah dat dey gwyne to
 sell us all off at oction in richmon’, oh, de good gracious! i know
 what dat mean!”
 aunt rachel had gradually risen, while she warmed to her subject, and now
 she towered above us, black against the stars.
 “dey put chains on us an’ put us on a stan’ as high as
 dis po’ch—twenty foot high—an’ all de people stood
 aroun’, crowds an’ crowds. an’ dey’d come up dah
 an’ look at us all roun’, an’ squeeze our arm, an’
 make us git up an’ walk, an’ den say, dis one too ole,’
 or ’dis one lame,’ or dis one don’t ’mount to
 much.’ an’ dey sole my ole man, an’ took him away, an’
 dey begin to sell my chil’en an’ take dem away, an’ i
 begin to cry; an’ de man say, ’shet up yo’ damn
 blubberin’,’ an’ hit me on de mouf wid his han’.
 an’ when de las’ one was gone but my little henry, i grab’
 him clost up to my breas’ so, an’ i ris up an’ says,
 ‘you sha’nt take him away,’ i says; ‘i’ll
 kill de man dat tetches him!’ i says. but my little henry whisper an’
 say ‘i gwyne to run away, an’ den i work an’ buy yo’
 freedom.’ oh, bless de chile, he always so good! but dey got him—dey
 got him, de men did; but i took and tear de clo’es mos’ off of
 ’em an’ beat ’em over de head wid my chain; an’
 dey give it to me too, but i didn’t mine dat.
 “well, dah was my ole man gone, an’ all my chil’en, all
 my seven chil’en—an’ six of ’em i hain’t set
 eyes on ag’in to dis day, an’ dat’s twenty-two year ago
 las’ easter. de man dat bought me b’long’ in newbern, an’
 he took me dah. well, bymeby de years roll on an’ de waw come. my
 marster he was a confedrit colonel, an’ i was his family’s
 cook. so when de unions took dat town, dey all run away an’ lef’
 me all by myse’f wid de other niggers in dat mons’us big
 house. so de big union officers move in dah, an’ dey ask me would i
 cook for dem. ‘lord bless you,’ says i, ’dat what i’s
 for.’
 “dey wa’n’t no small-fry officers, mine you, dey was de
 biggest dey is; an’ de way dey made dem sojers mosey roun’! de
 gen’l he tole me to boss dat kitchen; an’ he say, ‘if
 anybody come meddlin’ wid you, you jist make em walk chalk; don’t
 you be afeared,’ he say; ‘you’s ’mong frens now.’
 “well, i thinks to myse’f, if my little henry ever got a
 chance to run away, he’d make to de norf, o’ course. so one
 day i comes in dah whar de big officers was, in de parlor, an’ i
 drops a kurtchy, so, an’ i up an’ tole ’em ’bout
 my henry, dey a-listenin’ to my troubles jist de same as if i was
 white folks; an’ i says, ‘what i come for is beca’se if
 he got away and got up norf whar you gemmen comes from, you might ’a’
 seen him, maybe, an’ could tell me so as i could fine him ag’in;
 he was very little, an’ he had a sk-yar on his lef’ wris’
 an’ at de top of his forehead.’ den dey look mournful, an’
 de gen’l says, ‘how long sence you los’ him?’ an’
 i say, ‘thirteen year.’ den de gen’l say, ‘he
 wouldn’t be little no mo’ now—he’s a man!’
 “i never thought o’ dat befo’! he was only dat little
 feller to me yit. i never thought ’bout him growin’ up an’
 bein’ big. but i see it den. none o’ de gemmen had run acrost
 him, so dey couldn’t do nothin’ for me. but all dat time, do’
 i didn’t know it, my henry was run off to de norf, years an’
 years, an’ he was a barber, too, an’ worked for hisse’f.
 an’ bymeby, when de waw come he ups an’ he says: ‘i’s
 done barberin’,’ he says, ‘i’s gwyne to fine my
 ole mammy, less’n she’s dead.’ so he sole out an’
 went to whar dey was recruitin’, an’ hired hisse’f out
 to de colonel for his servant; an’ den he went all froo de battles
 everywhah, huntin’ for his ole mammy; yes, indeedy, he’d hire
 to fust one officer an’ den another, tell he’d ransacked de
 whole souf; but you see i didn’t know nuffin bout dis. how
 was i gwyne to know it?
 “well, one night we had a big sojer ball; de sojers dah at newbern
 was always havin’ balls an’ carryin’ on. dey had ’em
 in my kitchen, heaps o’ times, ’ca’se it was so big.
 mine you, i was down on sich doin’s; beca’se my place was wid
 de officers, an’ it rasp me to have dem common sojers cavortin’
 roun’ in my kitchen like dat. but i alway’ stood aroun’
 an kep’ things straight, i did; an’ sometimes dey’d git
 my dander up, an’ den i’d make ’em clar dat kitchen,
 mine i tell you!
 “well, one night—it was a friday night—dey comes a whole
 platoon f’m a nigger ridgment da was on guard at de house—de
 house was head quarters, you know-an’ den i was jist a-bilin’
 mad? i was jist a-boomin’! i swelled aroun’, an swelled aroun’;
 i jist was a-itchin’ for em to do somefin for to start me. an’
 dey was a-waltzin’ an a dancin’! my but dey was havin’ a
 time! an i jist a-swellin’ an’ a-swellin’ up! pooty
 soon, ’long comes sich a spruce young nigger a-sailin’ down de
 room wid a yaller wench roun’ de wais’; an’ roun an’
 roun’ an roun’ dey went, enough to make a body drunk to look
 at ’em; an’ when dey got abreas’ o’ me, dey went
 to kin’ o’ balancin’ aroun’ fust on one leg an’
 den on t’other, an’ smilin’ at my big red turban, an’
 makin’ fun, an’ i ups an’ says ’git along wid you!—rubbage!’
 de young man’s face kin’ o’ changed, all of a sudden,
 for ’bout a second, but den he went to smilin’ ag’in,
 same as he was befo’. well, ’bout dis time, in comes some
 niggers dat played music and b’long’ to de ban’, an’
 dey never could git along widout puttin’ on airs. an’ de very
 fust air dey put on dat night, i lit into em! dey laughed, an’ dat
 made me wuss. de res’ o’ de niggers got to laughin’, an’
 den my soul alive but i was hot! my eye was jist a-blazin’! i jist
 straightened myself up so—jist as i is now, plum to de ceilin’,
 mos’—an’ i digs my fists into my hips, an’ i says,
 ‘look-a-heah!’ i says, ‘i want you niggers to understan’
 dat i wa’n’t bawn in de mash to be fool’ by trash! i’s
 one o’ de ole blue hen’s chickens, i is!’—an’
 den i see dat young man stan’ a-starin’ an’ stiff,
 lookin’ kin’ o’ up at de ceilin’ like he fo’got
 somefin, an’ couldn’t ’member it no mo’. well, i
 jist march’ on dem niggers—so, lookin’ like a gen’l—an’
 dey jist cave’ away befo’ me an’ out at de do’. an’
 as dis young man a-goin’ out, i heah him say to another nigger, jim,’
 he says, ‘you go ’long an’ tell de cap’n i be on
 han’ ’bout eight o’clock in de mawnin’; dey’s
 somefin on my mine,’ he says; ‘i don’t sleep no mo’
 dis night. you go ’long,’ he says, ‘an’ leave me
 by my own se’f.’
 “dis was ’bout one o’clock in de mawnin’. well,
 ’bout seven, i was up an’ on han’, gittin’ de
 officers’ breakfast. i was a-stoopin’ down by de stove—jist
 so, same as if yo’ foot was de stove—an’ i’d
 opened de stove do’ wid my right han’—so, pushin’
 it back, jist as i pushes yo’ foot—an’ i’d jist
 got de pan o’ hot biscuits in my han’ an’ was ’bout
 to raise up, when i see a black face come aroun’ under mine, an’
 de eyes a-lookin’ up into mine, jist as i’s a-lookin’ up
 clost under yo’ face now; an’ i jist stopped right dah, an’
 never budged! jist gazed an’ gazed so; an’ de pan begin to
 tremble, an’ all of a sudden i knowed! de pan drop’ on de flo’
 an’ i grab his lef’ han’ an’ shove back his sleeve—jist
 so, as i’s doin’ to you—an’ den i goes for his
 forehead an’ push de hair back so, an’ ‘boy!’ i
 says, ‘if you an’t my henry, what is you doin’ wid dis
 welt on yo’ wris’ an’ dat sk-yar on yo’ forehead?
 de lord god ob heaven be praise’, i got my own ag’in!’
 “oh no’ misto c———, i hain’t had no
 trouble. an’ no joy!”
 [written about .]
 i do not wish to write of the personal habits of these strange creatures
 solely, but also of certain curious details of various kinds concerning
 them, which, belonging only to their private life, have never crept into
 print. knowing the twins intimately, i feel that i am peculiarly well
 qualified for the task i have taken upon myself.
 the siamese twins are naturally tender and affectionate in disposition,
 and have clung to each other with singular fidelity throughout a long and
 eventful life. even as children they were inseparable companions; and it
 was noticed that they always seemed to prefer each other’s society
 to that of any other persons. they nearly always played together; and, so
 accustomed was their mother to this peculiarity, that, whenever both of
 them chanced to be lost, she usually only hunted for one of them—satisfied
 that when she found that one she would find his brother somewhere in the
 immediate neighborhood. and yet these creatures were ignorant and
 unlettered—barbarians themselves and the offspring of barbarians,
 who knew not the light of philosophy and science. what a withering rebuke
 is this to our boasted civilization, with its quarrelings, its wranglings,
 and its separations of brothers!
 as men, the twins have not always lived in perfect accord; but still there
 has always been a bond between them which made them unwilling to go away
 from each other and dwell apart. they have even occupied the same house,
 as a general thing, and it is believed that they have never failed to even
 sleep together on any night since they were born. how surely do the habits
 of a lifetime become second nature to us! the twins always go to bed at
 the same time; but chang usually gets up about an hour before his brother.
 by an understanding between themselves, chang does all the indoor work and
 eng runs all the errands. this is because eng likes to go out; chang’s
 habits are sedentary. however, chang always goes along. eng is a baptist,
 but chang is a roman catholic; still, to please his brother, chang
 consented to be baptized at the same time that eng was, on condition that
 it should not “count.” during the war they were strong
 partisans, and both fought gallantly all through the great struggle—eng
 on the union side and chang on the confederate. they took each other
 prisoners at seven oaks, but the proofs of capture were so evenly balanced
 in favor of each, that a general army court had to be assembled to
 determine which one was properly the captor and which the captive. the
 jury was unable to agree for a long time; but the vexed question was
 finally decided by agreeing to consider them both prisoners, and then
 exchanging them. at one time chang was convicted of disobedience of
 orders, and sentenced to ten days in the guard-house, but eng, in spite of
 all arguments, felt obliged to share his imprisonment, notwithstanding he
 himself was entirely innocent; and so, to save the blameless brother from
 suffering, they had to discharge both from custody—the just reward
 of faithfulness.
 upon one occasion the brothers fell out about something, and chang knocked
 eng down, and then tripped and fell on him, whereupon both clinched and
 began to beat and gouge each other without mercy. the bystanders
 interfered, and tried to separate them, but they could not do it, and so
 allowed them to fight it out. in the end both were disabled, and were
 carried to the hospital on one and the same shutter.
 their ancient habit of going always together had its drawbacks when they
 reached man’s estate, and entered upon the luxury of courting. both
 fell in love with the same girl. each tried to steal clandestine
 interviews with her, but at the critical moment the other would always
 turn up. by and by eng saw, with distraction, that chang had won the girl’s
 affections; and, from that day forth, he had to bear with the agony of
 being a witness to all their dainty billing and cooing. but with a
 magnanimity that did him infinite credit, he succumbed to his fate, and
 gave countenance and encouragement to a state of things that bade fair to
 sunder his generous heart-strings. he sat from seven every evening until
 two in the morning, listening to the fond foolishness of the two lovers,
 and to the concussion of hundreds of squandered kisses—for the
 privilege of sharing only one of which he would have given his right hand.
 but he sat patiently, and waited, and gaped, and yawned, and stretched,
 and longed for two o’clock to come. and he took long walks with the
 lovers on moonlight evenings—sometimes traversing ten miles,
 notwithstanding he was usually suffering from rheumatism. he is an
 inveterate smoker; but he could not smoke on these occasions, because the
 young lady was painfully sensitive to the smell of tobacco. eng cordially
 wanted them married, and done with it; but although chang often asked the
 momentous question, the young lady could not gather sufficient courage to
 answer it while eng was by. however, on one occasion, after having walked
 some sixteen miles, and sat up till nearly daylight, eng dropped asleep,
 from sheer exhaustion, and then the question was asked and answered. the
 lovers were married. all acquainted with the circumstance applauded the
 noble brother-in-law. his unwavering faithfulness was the theme of every
 tongue. he had stayed by them all through their long and arduous
 courtship; and when at last they were married, he lifted his hands above
 their heads, and said with impressive unction, “bless ye, my
 children, i will never desert ye!” and he kept his word. fidelity
 like this is all too rare in this cold world.
 by and by eng fell in love with his sister-in-law’s sister, and
 married her, and since that day they have all lived together, night and
 day, in an exceeding sociability which is touching and beautiful to
 behold, and is a scathing rebuke to our boasted civilization.
 the sympathy existing between these two brothers is so close and so
 refined that the feelings, the impulses, the emotions of the one are
 instantly experienced by the other. when one is sick, the other is sick;
 when one feels pain, the other feels it; when one is angered, the other’s
 temper takes fire. we have already seen with what happy facility they both
 fell in love with the same girl. now chang is bitterly opposed to all
 forms of intemperance, on principle; but eng is the reverse—for,
 while these men’s feelings and emotions are so closely wedded, their
 reasoning faculties are unfettered; their thoughts are free. chang belongs
 to the good templars, and is a hard-working, enthusiastic supporter of all
 temperance reforms. but, to his bitter distress, every now and then eng
 gets drunk, and, of course, that makes chang drunk too. this unfortunate
 thing has been a great sorrow to chang, for it almost destroys his
 usefulness in his favorite field of effort. as sure as he is to head a
 great temperance procession eng ranges up alongside of him, prompt to the
 minute, and drunk as a lord; but yet no more dismally and hopelessly drunk
 than his brother, who has not tasted a drop. and so the two begin to hoot
 and yell, and throw mud and bricks at the good templars; and, of course,
 they break up the procession. it would be manifestly wrong to punish chang
 for what eng does, and, therefore, the good templars accept the untoward
 situation, and suffer in silence and sorrow. they have officially and
 deliberately examined into the matter, and find chang blameless. they have
 taken the two brothers and filled chang full of warm water and sugar and
 eng full of whisky, and in twenty-five minutes it was not possible to tell
 which was the drunkest. both were as drunk as loons—and on hot
 whisky punches, by the smell of their breath. yet all the while chang’s
 moral principles were unsullied, his conscience clear; and so all just men
 were forced to confess that he was not morally, but only physically,
 drunk. by every right and by every moral evidence the man was strictly
 sober; and, therefore, it caused his friends all the more anguish to see
 him shake hands with the pump and try to wind his watch with his
 night-key.
 there is a moral in these solemn warnings—or, at least, a warning in
 these solemn morals; one or the other. no matter, it is somehow. let us
 heed it; let us profit by it.
 i could say more of an instructive nature about these interesting beings,
 but let what i have written suffice.
 having forgotten to mention it sooner, i will remark in conclusion that
 the ages of the siamese twins are respectively fifty-one and fifty-three
 years.
 [written about .]
 at the anniversary festival of the scottish corporation of london on
 monday evening, in response to the toast of “the ladies,” mark
 twain replied. the following is his speech as reported in the london
 observer:
 i am proud, indeed, of the distinction of being chosen to respond to this
 especial toast, to ‘the ladies,’ or to women if you please,
 for that is the preferable term, perhaps; it is certainly the older, and
 therefore the more entitled to reverence [laughter.] i have noticed that
 the bible, with that plain, blunt honesty which is such a conspicuous
 characteristic of the scriptures, is always particular to never refer to
 even the illustrious mother of all mankind herself as a ‘lady,’
 but speaks of her as a woman. [laughter.] it is odd, but you will find it
 is so. i am peculiarly proud of this honor, because i think that the toast
 to women is one which, by right and by every rule of gallantry, should
 take precedence of all others—of the army, of the navy, of even
 royalty itself—perhaps, though the latter is not necessary in this
 day and in this land, for the reason that, tacitly, you do drink a broad
 general health to all good women when you drink the health of the queen of
 england and the princess of wales. [loud cheers.] i have in mind a poem
 just now which is familiar to you all, familiar to everybody. and what an
 inspiration that was (and how instantly the present toast recalls the
 verses to all our minds) when the most noble, the most gracious, the
 purest, and sweetest of all poets says:
 “woman! o woman!—er— wom—”
 [laughter.] however, you remember the lines; and you remember how
 feelingly, how daintily, how almost imperceptibly the verses raise up
 before you, feature by feature, the ideal of a true and perfect woman; and
 how, as you contemplate the finished marvel, your homage grows into
 worship of the intellect that could create so fair a thing out of mere
 breath, mere words. and you call to mind now, as i speak, how the poet,
 with stern fidelity to the history of all humanity, delivers this
 beautiful child of his heart and his brain over to the trials and sorrows
 that must come to all, sooner or later, that abide in the earth, and how
 the pathetic story culminates in that apostrophe—so wild, so
 regretful, so full of mournful retrospection. the lines run thus:
 “alas!—alas!—a—alas! ——alas!————alas!”
 —and so on. [laughter.] i do not remember the rest; but, taken
 together, it seems to me that poem is the noblest tribute to woman that
 human genius has ever brought forth—[laughter]—and i feel that
 if i were to talk hours i could not do my great theme completer or more
 graceful justice than i have now done in simply quoting that poet’s
 matchless words. [renewed laughter.] the phases of the womanly nature are
 infinite in their variety. take any type of woman, and you shall find in
 it something to respect, something to admire, something to love. and you
 shall find the whole joining you heart and hand. who was more patriotic
 than joan of arc? who was braver? who has given us a grander instance of
 self-sacrificing devotion? ah! you remember, you remember well, what a
 throb of pain, what a great tidal wave of grief swept over us all when
 joan of arc fell at waterloo. [much laughter.] who does not sorrow for the
 loss of sappho, the sweet singer of israel? [laughter.] who among us does
 not miss the gentle ministrations, the softening influences, the humble
 piety of lucretia borgia? [laughter.] who can join in the heartless libel
 that says woman is extravagant in dress when he can look back and call to
 mind our simple and lowly mother eve arrayed in her modification of the
 highland costume. [roars of laughter.] sir, women have been soldiers,
 women have been painters, women have been poets. as long as language lives
 the name of cleopatra will live.
 and, not because she conquered george iii.—[laughter]—but
 because she wrote those divine lines:
 “let dogs delight to bark and bite, for god hath made them so.”
 [more laughter.] the story of the world is adorned with the names of
 illustrious ones of our own sex—some of them sons of st. andrew, too—scott,
 bruce, burns, the warrior wallace, ben nevis—[laughter]—the
 gifted ben lomond, and the great new scotchman, ben disraeli.* [great
 laughter.] out of the great plains of history tower whole mountain ranges
 of sublime women—the queen of sheba, josephine, semiramis, sairey
 gamp; the list is endless—[laughter]—but i will not call the
 mighty roll, the names rise up in your own memories at the mere
 suggestion, luminous with the glory of deeds that cannot die, hallowed by
 the loving worship of the good and the true of all epochs and all climes.
 [cheers.] suffice it for our pride and our honor that we in our day have
 added to it such names as those of grace darling and florence nightingale.
 [cheers.] woman is all that she should be—gentle, patient, long
 suffering, trustful, unselfish, full of generous impulses. it is her
 blessed mission to comfort the sorrowing, plead for the erring, encourage
 the faint of purpose, succor the distressed, uplift the fallen, befriend
 the friendless—in a word, afford the healing of her sympathies and a
 home in her heart for all the bruised and persecuted children of
 misfortune that knock at its hospitable door. [cheers.] and when i say,
 god bless her, there is none among us who has known the ennobling
 affection of a wife, or the steadfast devotion of a mother, but in his
 heart will say, amen! [loud and prolonged cheering.]
 —[* mr. benjamin disraeli, at that time prime minister of england,
 had just been elected lord rector of glasgow university, and had made a
 speech which gave rise to a world of discussion.]
 i took a large room, far up broadway, in a huge old building whose upper
 stories had been wholly unoccupied for years until i came. the place had
 long been given up to dust and cobwebs, to solitude and silence. i seemed
 groping among the tombs and invading the privacy of the dead, that first
 night i climbed up to my quarters. for the first time in my life a
 superstitious dread came over me; and as i turned a dark angle of the
 stairway and an invisible cobweb swung its slazy woof in my face and clung
 there, i shuddered as one who had encountered a phantom.
 i was glad enough when i reached my room and locked out the mold and the
 darkness. a cheery fire was burning in the grate, and i sat down before it
 with a comforting sense of relief. for two hours i sat there, thinking of
 bygone times; recalling old scenes, and summoning half-forgotten faces out
 of the mists of the past; listening, in fancy, to voices that long ago
 grew silent for all time, and to once familiar songs that nobody sings
 now. and as my reverie softened down to a sadder and sadder pathos, the
 shrieking of the winds outside softened to a wail, the angry beating of
 the rain against the panes diminished to a tranquil patter, and one by one
 the noises in the street subsided, until the hurrying footsteps of the
 last belated straggler died away in the distance and left no sound behind.
 the fire had burned low. a sense of loneliness crept over me. i arose and
 undressed, moving on tiptoe about the room, doing stealthily what i had to
 do, as if i were environed by sleeping enemies whose slumbers it would be
 fatal to break. i covered up in bed, and lay listening to the rain and
 wind and the faint creaking of distant shutters, till they lulled me to
 sleep.
 i slept profoundly, but how long i do not know. all at once i found myself
 awake, and filled with a shuddering expectancy. all was still. all but my
 own heart—i could hear it beat. presently the bedclothes began to
 slip away slowly toward the foot of the bed, as if some one were pulling
 them! i could not stir; i could not speak. still the blankets slipped
 deliberately away, till my breast was uncovered. then with a great effort
 i seized them and drew them over my head. i waited, listened, waited. once
 more that steady pull began, and once more i lay torpid a century of
 dragging seconds till my breast was naked again. at last i roused my
 energies and snatched the covers back to their place and held them with a
 strong grip. i waited. by and by i felt a faint tug, and took a fresh
 grip. the tug strengthened to a steady strain—it grew stronger and
 stronger. my hold parted, and for the third time the blankets slid away. i
 groaned. an answering groan came from the foot of the bed! beaded drops of
 sweat stood upon my forehead. i was more dead than alive. presently i
 heard a heavy footstep in my room—the step of an elephant, it seemed
 to me—it was not like anything human. but it was moving from me—there
 was relief in that. i heard it approach the door—pass out without
 moving bolt or lock—and wander away among the dismal corridors,
 straining the floors and joists till they creaked again as it passed—and
 then silence reigned once more.
 when my excitement had calmed, i said to myself, “this is a dream—simply
 a hideous dream.” and so i lay thinking it over until i convinced
 myself that it was a dream, and then a comforting laugh relaxed my lips
 and i was happy again. i got up and struck a light; and when i found that
 the locks and bolts were just as i had left them, another soothing laugh
 welled in my heart and rippled from my lips. i took my pipe and lit it,
 and was just sitting down before the fire, when—down went the pipe
 out of my nerveless fingers, the blood forsook my cheeks, and my placid
 breathing was cut short with a gasp! in the ashes on the hearth, side by
 side with my own bare footprint, was another, so vast that in comparison
 mine was but an infant’s! then i had had a visitor, and the elephant
 tread was explained.
 i put out the light and returned to bed, palsied with fear. i lay a long
 time, peering into the darkness, and listening.—then i heard a
 grating noise overhead, like the dragging of a heavy body across the
 floor; then the throwing down of the body, and the shaking of my windows
 in response to the concussion. in distant parts of the building i heard
 the muffled slamming of doors. i heard, at intervals, stealthy footsteps
 creeping in and out among the corridors, and up and down the stairs.
 sometimes these noises approached my door, hesitated, and went away again.
 i heard the clanking of chains faintly, in remote passages, and listened
 while the clanking grew nearer—while it wearily climbed the
 stairways, marking each move by the loose surplus of chain that fell with
 an accented rattle upon each succeeding step as the goblin that bore it
 advanced. i heard muttered sentences; half-uttered screams that seemed
 smothered violently; and the swish of invisible garments, the rush of
 invisible wings. then i became conscious that my chamber was invaded—that
 i was not alone. i heard sighs and breathings about my bed, and mysterious
 whisperings. three little spheres of soft phosphorescent light appeared on
 the ceiling directly over my head, clung and glowed there a moment, and
 then dropped—two of them upon my face and one upon the pillow. they
 spattered, liquidly, and felt warm. intuition told me they had turned to
 gouts of blood as they fell—i needed no light to satisfy myself of
 that. then i saw pallid faces, dimly luminous, and white uplifted hands,
 floating bodiless in the air—floating a moment and then
 disappearing. the whispering ceased, and the voices and the sounds, and a
 solemn stillness followed. i waited and listened. i felt that i must have
 light or die. i was weak with fear. i slowly raised myself toward a
 sitting posture, and my face came in contact with a clammy hand! all
 strength went from me apparently, and i fell back like a stricken invalid.
 then i heard the rustle of a garment—it seemed to pass to the door
 and go out.
 when everything was still once more, i crept out of bed, sick and feeble,
 and lit the gas with a hand that trembled as if it were aged with a
 hundred years. the light brought some little cheer to my spirits. i sat
 down and fell into a dreamy contemplation of that great footprint in the
 ashes. by and by its outlines began to waver and grow dim. i glanced up
 and the broad gas-flame was slowly wilting away. in the same moment i
 heard that elephantine tread again. i noted its approach, nearer and
 nearer, along the musty halls, and dimmer and dimmer the light waned. the
 tread reached my very door and paused—the light had dwindled to a
 sickly blue, and all things about me lay in a spectral twilight. the door
 did not open, and yet i felt a faint gust of air fan my cheek, and
 presently was conscious of a huge, cloudy presence before me. i watched it
 with fascinated eyes. a pale glow stole over the thing; gradually its
 cloudy folds took shape—an arm appeared, then legs, then a body, and
 last a great sad face looked out of the vapor. stripped of its filmy
 housings, naked, muscular and comely, the majestic cardiff giant loomed
 above me!
 all my misery vanished—for a child might know that no harm could
 come with that benignant countenance. my cheerful spirits returned at
 once, and in sympathy with them the gas flamed up brightly again. never a
 lonely outcast was so glad to welcome company as i was to greet the
 friendly giant. i said:
 “why, is it nobody but you? do you know, i have been scared to death
 for the last two or three hours? i am most honestly glad to see you. i
 wish i had a chair—here, here, don’t try to sit down in that
 thing—”
 but it was too late. he was in it before i could stop him and down he went—i
 never saw a chair shivered so in my life.
 “stop, stop, you’ll ruin ev—”
 too late again. there was another crash, and another chair was resolved
 into its original elements.
 “confound it, haven’t you got any judgment at all? do you want
 to ruin all the furniture on the place? here, here, you petrified fool—”
 but it was no use. before i could arrest him he had sat down on the bed,
 and it was a melancholy ruin.
 “now what sort of a way is that to do? first you come lumbering
 about the place bringing a legion of vagabond goblins along with you to
 worry me to death, and then when i overlook an indelicacy of costume which
 would not be tolerated anywhere by cultivated people except in a
 respectable theater, and not even there if the nudity were of your sex,
 you repay me by wrecking all the furniture you can find to sit down on.
 and why will you? you damage yourself as much as you do me. you have
 broken off the end of your spinal column, and littered up the floor with
 chips of your hams till the place looks like a marble yard. you ought to
 be ashamed of yourself—you are big enough to know better.”
 “well, i will not break any more furniture. but what am i to do? i
 have not had a chance to sit down for a century.” and the tears came
 into his eyes.
 “poor devil,” i said, “i should not have been so harsh
 with you. and you are an orphan, too, no doubt. but sit down on the floor
 here—nothing else can stand your weight—and besides, we cannot
 be sociable with you away up there above me; i want you down where i can
 perch on this high counting-house stool and gossip with you face to face.”
 so he sat down on the floor, and lit a pipe which i gave him, threw one of
 my red blankets over his shoulders, inverted my sitz-bath on his head,
 helmet fashion, and made himself picturesque and comfortable. then he
 crossed his ankles, while i renewed the fire, and exposed the flat,
 honeycombed bottoms of his prodigious feet to the grateful warmth.
 “what is the matter with the bottom of your feet and the back of
 your legs, that they are gouged up so?”
 “infernal chilblains—i caught them clear up to the back of my
 head, roosting out there under newell’s farm. but i love the place;
 i love it as one loves his old home. there is no peace for me like the
 peace i feel when i am there.”
 we talked along for half an hour, and then i noticed that he looked tired,
 and spoke of it.
 “tired?” he said. “well, i should think so. and now i
 will tell you all about it, since you have treated me so well. i am the
 spirit of the petrified man that lies across the street there in the
 museum. i am the ghost of the cardiff giant. i can have no rest, no peace,
 till they have given that poor body burial again. now what was the most
 natural thing for me to do, to make men satisfy this wish? terrify them
 into it!— haunt the place where the body lay! so i haunted the
 museum night after night. i even got other spirits to help me. but it did
 no good, for nobody ever came to the museum at midnight. then it occurred
 to me to come over the way and haunt this place a little. i felt that if i
 ever got a hearing i must succeed, for i had the most efficient company
 that perdition could furnish. night after night we have shivered around
 through these mildewed halls, dragging chains, groaning, whispering,
 tramping up and down stairs, till, to tell you the truth, i am almost worn
 out. but when i saw a light in your room to-night i roused my energies
 again and went at it with a deal of the old freshness. but i am tired out—entirely
 fagged out. give me, i beseech you, give me some hope!”
 i lit off my perch in a burst of excitement, and exclaimed:
 “this transcends everything! everything that ever did occur! why you
 poor blundering old fossil, you have had all your trouble for nothing—you
 have been haunting a plaster cast of yourself—the real cardiff giant
 is in albany!—[a fact. the original fraud was ingeniously and
 fraudfully duplicated, and exhibited in new york as the “only
 genuine” cardiff giant (to the unspeakable disgust of the owners of
 the real colossus) at the very same time that the latter was drawing
 crowds at a museum in albany,]—confound it, don’t you know
 your own remains?”
 i never saw such an eloquent look of shame, of pitiable humiliation,
 overspread a countenance before.
 the petrified man rose slowly to his feet, and said:
 “honestly, is that true?”
 “as true as i am sitting here.”
 he took the pipe from his mouth and laid it on the mantel, then stood
 irresolute a moment (unconsciously, from old habit, thrusting his hands
 where his pantaloons pockets should have been, and meditatively dropping
 his chin on his breast) and finally said:
 “well—i never felt so absurd before. the petrified man has
 sold everybody else, and now the mean fraud has ended by selling its own
 ghost! my son, if there is any charity left in your heart for a poor
 friendless phantom like me, don’t let this get out. think how you
 would feel if you had made such an ass of yourself.”
 i heard his stately tramp die away, step by step down the stairs and out
 into the deserted street, and felt sorry that he was gone, poor fellow—and
 sorrier still that he had carried off my red blanket and my bath-tub.
 [scene-an artist’s studio in rome.]
 “oh, george, i do love you!”
 “bless your dear heart, mary, i know that—why is your father
 so obdurate?”
 “george, he means well, but art is folly to him—he only
 understands groceries. he thinks you would starve me.”
 “confound his wisdom—it savors of inspiration. why am i not a
 money-making bowelless grocer, instead of a divinely gifted sculptor with
 nothing to eat?”
 “do not despond, georgy, dear—all his prejudices will fade
 away as soon as you shall have acquired fifty thousand dol—”
 “fifty thousand demons! child, i am in arrears for my board!”
 [scene-a dwelling in rome.]
 “my dear sir, it is useless to talk. i haven’t anything
 against you, but i can’t let my daughter marry a hash of love, art,
 and starvation—i believe you have nothing else to offer.”
 “sir, i am poor, i grant you. but is fame nothing? the hon. bellamy
 foodle of arkansas says that my new statue of america is a clever piece of
 sculpture, and he is satisfied that my name will one day be famous.”
 “bosh! what does that arkansas ass know about it? fame’s
 nothing—the market price of your marble scarecrow is the thing to
 look at. it took you six months to chisel it, and you can’t sell it
 for a hundred dollars. no, sir! show me fifty thousand dollars and you can
 have my daughter—otherwise she marries young simper. you have just
 six months to raise the money in. good morning, sir.”
 “alas! woe is me!”
 [ scene-the studio.]
 “oh, john, friend of my boyhood, i am the unhappiest of men.”
 “you’re a simpleton!”
 “i have nothing left to love but my poor statue of america—and
 see, even she has no sympathy for me in her cold marble countenance—so
 beautiful and so heartless!”
 “you’re a dummy!”
 “oh, john!”
 “oh, fudge! didn’t you say you had six months to raise the
 money in?”
 “don’t deride my agony, john. if i had six centuries what good
 would it do? how could it help a poor wretch without name, capital, or
 friends?”
 “idiot! coward! baby! six months to raise the money in—and
 five will do!”
 “are you insane?”
 “six months—an abundance. leave it to me. i’ll raise it.”
 “what do you mean, john? how on earth can you raise such a monstrous
 sum for me?”
 “will you let that be my business, and not meddle? will you leave
 the thing in my hands? will you swear to submit to whatever i do? will you
 pledge me to find no fault with my actions?”
 “i am dizzy—bewildered—but i swear.”
 john took up a hammer and deliberately smashed the nose of america! he
 made another pass and two of her fingers fell to the floor—another,
 and part of an ear came away—another, and a row of toes was mangled
 and dismembered—another, and the left leg, from the knee down, lay a
 fragmentary ruin!
 john put on his hat and departed.
 george gazed speechless upon the battered and grotesque nightmare before
 him for the space of thirty seconds, and then wilted to the floor and went
 into convulsions.
 john returned presently with a carriage, got the broken-hearted artist and
 the broken-legged statue aboard, and drove off, whistling low and
 tranquilly.
 he left the artist at his lodgings, and drove off and disappeared down the
 via quirinalis with the statue.
 [scene—the studio.]
 “the six months will be up at two o’clock to-day! oh, agony!
 my life is blighted. i would that i were dead. i had no supper yesterday.
 i have had no breakfast to-day. i dare not enter an eating-house. and
 hungry? —don’t mention it! my bootmaker duns me to death—my
 tailor duns me—my landlord haunts me. i am miserable. i haven’t
 seen john since that awful day. she smiles on me tenderly when we meet in
 the great thoroughfares, but her old flint of a father makes her look in
 the other direction in short order. now who is knocking at that door? who
 is come to persecute me? that malignant villain the bootmaker, i’ll
 warrant. come in!”
 “ah, happiness attend your highness—heaven be propitious to
 your grace! i have brought my lord’s new boots—ah, say nothing
 about the pay, there is no hurry, none in the world. shall be proud if my
 noble lord will continue to honor me with his custom—ah, adieu!”
 “brought the boots himself! don’t want his pay! takes his
 leave with a bow and a scrape fit to honor majesty withal! desires a
 continuance of my custom! is the world coming to an end? of all the—come
 in!”
 “pardon, signore, but i have brought your new suit of clothes for—”
 “come in!”
 “a thousand pardons for this intrusion, your worship. but i have
 prepared the beautiful suite of rooms below for you—this wretched
 den is but ill suited to—”
 “come in!”
 “i have called to say that your credit at our bank, some time since
 unfortunately interrupted, is entirely and most satisfactorily restored,
 and we shall be most happy if you will draw upon us for any—”
 “my noble boy, she is yours! she’ll be here in a moment! take
 her—marry her—love her—be happy!—god bless you
 both! hip, hip, hur—”
 “oh, george, my own darling, we are saved!”
 “oh, mary, my own darling, we are saved—but i’ll swear i
 don’t know why nor how!”
 [scene-a roman cafe.]
 one of a group of american gentlemen reads and translates from the weekly
 edition of ‘il slangwhanger di roma’ as follows:
 wonderful discovery—some six months ago signor john smitthe,
 an american gentleman now some years a resident of rome, purchased for a
 trifle a small piece of ground in the campagna, just beyond the tomb of
 the scipio family, from the owner, a bankrupt relative of the princess
 borghese. mr. smitthe afterward went to the minister of the public
 records and had the piece of ground transferred to a poor american
 artist named george arnold, explaining that he did it as payment and
 satisfaction for pecuniary damage accidentally done by him long since
 upon property belonging to signor arnold, and further observed that he
 would make additional satisfaction by improving the ground for signor
 a., at his own charge and cost. four weeks ago, while making some
 necessary excavations upon the property, signor smitthe unearthed the
 most remarkable ancient statue that has ever been added to the opulent
 art treasures of rome. it was an exquisite figure of a woman, and though
 sadly stained by the soil and the mold of ages, no eye can look unmoved
 upon its ravishing beauty. the nose, the left leg from the knee down, an
 ear, and also the toes of the right foot and two fingers of one of the
 hands were gone, but otherwise the noble figure was in a remarkable
 state of preservation. the government at once took military possession
 of the statue, and appointed a commission of art-critics, antiquaries,
 and cardinal princes of the church to assess its value and determine the
 remuneration that must go to the owner of the ground in which it was
 found. the whole affair was kept a profound secret until last night. in
 the mean time the commission sat with closed doors and deliberated. last
 night they decided unanimously that the statue is a venus, and the work
 of some unknown but sublimely gifted artist of the third century before
 christ. they consider it the most faultless work of art the world has
 any knowledge of. at midnight they held a final conference
 and decided that the venus was worth the enormous sum of ten million
 francs! in accordance with roman law and roman usage, the government
 being half-owner in all works of art found in the campagna, the state
 has naught to do but pay five million francs to mr. arnold and take
 permanent possession of the beautiful statue. this morning the venus
 will be removed to the capitol, there to remain, and at noon the
 commission will wait upon signor arnold with his holiness the pope’s
 order upon the treasury for the princely sum of five million francs in
 gold!
 chorus of voices.—“luck! it’s no name for it!”
 another voice.—“gentlemen, i propose that we immediately form
 an american joint-stock company for the purchase of lands and excavations
 of statues here, with proper connections in wall street to bull and bear
 the stock.”
 all.—“agreed.”
 [scene—the roman capitol ten years later.]
 “dearest mary, this is the most celebrated statue in the world. this
 is the renowned ‘capitoline venus’ you’ve heard so much
 about. here she is with her little blemishes ‘restored’ (that
 is, patched) by the most noted roman artists—and the mere fact that
 they did the humble patching of so noble a creation will make their names
 illustrious while the world stands. how strange it seems—this place!
 the day before i last stood here, ten happy years ago, i wasn’t a
 rich man bless your soul, i hadn’t a cent. and yet i had a good deal
 to do with making rome mistress of this grandest work of ancient art the
 world contains.”
 “the worshiped, the illustrious capitoline venus—and what a
 sum she is valued at! ten millions of francs!”
 “yes—now she is.”
 “and oh, georgy, how divinely beautiful she is!”
 “ah, yes but nothing to what she was before that blessed john smith
 broke her leg and battered her nose. ingenious smith!—gifted smith!—noble
 smith! author of all our bliss! hark! do you know what that wheeze means?
 mary, that cub has got the whooping-cough. will you never learn to take
 care of the children!”
 the capitoline venus is still in the capitol at rome, and is still the
 most charming and most illustrious work of ancient art the world can boast
 of. but if ever it shall be your fortune to stand before it and go into
 the customary ecstasies over it, don’t permit this true and secret
 history of its origin to mar your bliss—and when you read about a
 gigantic petrified man being dug up near syracuse, in the state of new
 york, or near any other place, keep your own counsel—and if the
 barnum that buried him there offers to sell to you at an enormous sum, don’t
 you buy. send him to the pope!
 [note.—the above sketch was written at the time the famous swindle
 of the “petrified giant” was the sensation of the day in the
 united states]
 gentlemen: i am glad, indeed, to assist in welcoming the distinguished
 guest of this occasion to a city whose fame as an insurance center has
 extended to all lands, and given us the name of being a quadruple band of
 brothers working sweetly hand in hand—the colt’s arms company
 making the destruction of our race easy and convenient, our life insurance
 citizens paying for the victims when they pass away, mr. batterson
 perpetuating their memory with his stately monuments, and our
 fire-insurance comrades taking care of their hereafter. i am glad to
 assist in welcoming our guest—first, because he is an englishman,
 and i owe a heavy debt of hospitality to certain of his fellow-countrymen;
 and secondly, because he is in sympathy with insurance and has been the
 means of making many other men cast their sympathies in the same
 direction.
 certainly there is no nobler field for human effort than the insurance
 line of business—especially accident insurance. ever since i have
 been a director in an accident-insurance company i have felt that i am a
 better man. life has seemed more precious. accidents have assumed a
 kindlier aspect. distressing special providences have lost half their
 horror. i look upon a cripple now with affectionate interest—as an
 advertisement. i do not seem to care for poetry any more. i do not care
 for politics—even agriculture does not excite me. but to me now
 there is a charm about a railway collision that is unspeakable.
 there is nothing more beneficent than accident insurance. i have seen an
 entire family lifted out of poverty and into affluence by the simple boon
 of a broken leg. i have had people come to me on crutches, with tears in
 their eyes, to bless this beneficent institution. in all my experience of
 life, i have seen nothing so seraphic as the look that comes into a
 freshly mutilated man’s face when he feels in his vest pocket with
 his remaining hand and finds his accident ticket all right. and i have
 seen nothing so sad as the look that came into another splintered customer’s
 face when he found he couldn’t collect on a wooden leg.
 i will remark here, by way of advertisement, that that noble charity which
 we have named the hartford accident insurance company—[the speaker
 is a director of the company named.]—is an institution which is
 peculiarly to be depended upon. a man is bound to prosper who gives it his
 custom.
 no man can take out a policy in it and not get crippled before the year is
 out. now there was one indigent man who had been disappointed so often
 with other companies that he had grown disheartened, his appetite left
 him, he ceased to smile—life was but a weariness. three weeks ago i
 got him to insure with us, and now he is the brightest, happiest spirit in
 this land—has a good steady income and a stylish suit of new
 bandages every day, and travels around on a shutter.
 i will say, in conclusion, that my share of the welcome to our guest is
 none the less hearty because i talk so much nonsense, and i know that i
 can say the same for the rest of the speakers.
 as i passed along by one of those monster american tea stores in new york,
 i found a chinaman sitting before it acting in the capacity of a sign.
 everybody that passed by gave him a steady stare as long as their heads
 would twist over their shoulders without dislocating their necks, and a
 group had stopped to stare deliberately.
 is it not a shame that we, who prate so much about civilization and
 humanity, are content to degrade a fellow-being to such an office as this?
 is it not time for reflection when we find ourselves willing to see in
 such a being matter for frivolous curiosity instead of regret and grave
 reflection? here was a poor creature whom hard fortune had exiled from his
 natural home beyond the seas, and whose troubles ought to have touched
 these idle strangers that thronged about him; but did it? apparently not.
 men calling themselves the superior race, the race of culture and of
 gentle blood, scanned his quaint chinese hat, with peaked roof and ball on
 top, and his long queue dangling down his back; his short silken blouse,
 curiously frogged and figured (and, like the rest of his raiment, rusty,
 dilapidated, and awkwardly put on); his blue cotton, tight-legged pants,
 tied close around the ankles; and his clumsy blunt-toed shoes with thick
 cork soles; and having so scanned him from head to foot, cracked some
 unseemly joke about his outlandish attire or his melancholy face, and
 passed on. in my heart i pitied the friendless mongol. i wondered what was
 passing behind his sad face, and what distant scene his vacant eye was
 dreaming of. were his thoughts with his heart, ten thousand miles away,
 beyond the billowy wastes of the pacific? among the ricefields and the
 plumy palms of china? under the shadows of remembered mountain peaks, or
 in groves of bloomy shrubs and strange forest trees unknown to climes like
 ours? and now and then, rippling among his visions and his dreams, did he
 hear familiar laughter and half-forgotten voices, and did he catch fitful
 glimpses of the friendly faces of a bygone time? a cruel fate it is, i
 said, that is befallen this bronzed wanderer. in order that the group of
 idlers might be touched at least by the words of the poor fellow, since
 the appeal of his pauper dress and his dreary exile was lost upon them, i
 touched him on the shoulder and said:
 “cheer up—don’t be downhearted. it is not america that
 treats you in this way, it is merely one citizen, whose greed of gain has
 eaten the humanity out of his heart. america has a broader hospitality for
 the exiled and oppressed. america and americans are always ready to help
 the unfortunate. money shall be raised—you shall go back to china—you
 shall see your friends again. what wages do they pay you here?”
 “divil a cint but four dollars a week and find meself; but it’s
 aisy, barrin’ the troublesome furrin clothes that’s so
 expinsive.”
 the exile remains at his post. the new york tea merchants who need
 picturesque signs are not likely to run out of chinamen.
 [written about .]
 i did not take temporary editorship of an agricultural paper without
 misgivings. neither would a landsman take command of a ship without
 misgivings. but i was in circumstances that made the salary an object. the
 regular editor of the paper was going off for a holiday, and i accepted
 the terms he offered, and took his place.
 the sensation of being at work again was luxurious, and i wrought all the
 week with unflagging pleasure. we went to press, and i waited a day with
 some solicitude to see whether my effort was going to attract any notice.
 as i left the office, toward sundown, a group of men and boys at the foot
 of the stairs dispersed with one impulse, and gave me passageway, and i
 heard one or two of them say: “that’s him!” i was
 naturally pleased by this incident. the next morning i found a similar
 group at the foot of the stairs, and scattering couples and individuals
 standing here and there in the street and over the way, watching me with
 interest. the group separated and fell back as i approached, and i heard a
 man say, “look at his eye!” i pretended not to observe the
 notice i was attracting, but secretly i was pleased with it, and was
 purposing to write an account of it to my aunt. i went up the short flight
 of stairs, and heard cheery voices and a ringing laugh as i drew near the
 door, which i opened, and caught a glimpse of two young rural-looking men,
 whose faces blanched and lengthened when they saw me, and then they both
 plunged through the window with a great crash. i was surprised.
 in about half an hour an old gentleman, with a flowing beard and a fine
 but rather austere face, entered, and sat down at my invitation. he seemed
 to have something on his mind. he took off his hat and set it on the
 floor, and got out of it a red silk handkerchief and a copy of our paper.
 he put the paper on his lap, and while he polished his spectacles with his
 handkerchief he said, “are you the new editor?”
 i said i was.
 “have you ever edited an agricultural paper before?”
 “no,” i said; “this is my first attempt.”
 “very likely. have you had any experience in agriculture
 practically?”
 “no; i believe i have not.”
 “some instinct told me so,” said the old gentleman, putting on
 his spectacles, and looking over them at me with asperity, while he folded
 his paper into a convenient shape. “i wish to read you what must
 have made me have that instinct. it was this editorial. listen, and see if
 it was you that wrote it:
 “‘turnips should never be pulled, it injures them. it is
 much better to send a boy up and let him shake the tree.’
 “now, what do you think of that?—for i really suppose you
 wrote it?”
 “think of it? why, i think it is good. i think it is sense. i have
 no doubt that every year millions and millions of bushels of turnips are
 spoiled in this township alone by being pulled in a half-ripe condition,
 when, if they had sent a boy up to shake the tree—”
 “shake your grandmother! turnips don’t grow on trees!”
 “oh, they don’t, don’t they? well, who said they did?
 the language was intended to be figurative, wholly figurative. anybody
 that knows anything will know that i meant that the boy should shake the
 vine.”
 then this old person got up and tore his paper all into small shreds, and
 stamped on them, and broke several things with his cane, and said i did
 not know as much as a cow; and then went out and banged the door after
 him, and, in short, acted in such a way that i fancied he was displeased
 about something. but not knowing what the trouble was, i could not be any
 help to him.
 pretty soon after this a long, cadaverous creature, with lanky locks
 hanging down to his shoulders, and a week’s stubble bristling from
 the hills and valleys of his face, darted within the door, and halted,
 motionless, with finger on lip, and head and body bent in listening
 attitude. no sound was heard.
 still he listened. no sound. then he turned the key in the door, and came
 elaborately tiptoeing toward me till he was within long reaching distance
 of me, when he stopped and, after scanning my face with intense interest
 for a while, drew a folded copy of our paper from his bosom, and said:
 “there, you wrote that. read it to me—quick! relieve me. i
 suffer.”
 i read as follows; and as the sentences fell from my lips i could see the
 relief come, i could see the drawn muscles relax, and the anxiety go out
 of the face, and rest and peace steal over the features like the merciful
 moonlight over a desolate landscape:
 the guano is a fine bird, but great care is necessary in rearing it. it
 should not be imported earlier than june or later than september. in the
 winter it should be kept in a warm place, where it can hatch out its
 young.
 it is evident that we are to have a backward season for grain. therefore
 it will be well for the farmer to begin setting out his corn-stalks and
 planting his buckwheat cakes in july instead of august. concerning the
 pumpkin. this berry is a favorite with the natives of the interior of
 new england, who prefer it to the gooseberry for the making of
 fruit-cake, and who likewise give it the preference over the raspberry
 for feeding cows, as being more filling and fully as satisfying. the
 pumpkin is the only esculent of the orange family that will thrive in
 the north, except the gourd and one or two varieties of the squash. but
 the custom of planting it in the front yard with the shrubbery is fast
 going out of vogue, for it is now generally conceded that, the pumpkin
 as a shade tree is a failure.
 now, as the warm weather approaches, and the ganders begin to spawn—
 the excited listener sprang toward me to shake hands, and said:
 “there, there—that will do. i know i am all right now, because
 you have read it just as i did, word, for word. but, stranger, when i
 first read it this morning, i said to myself, i never, never believed it
 before, notwithstanding my friends kept me under watch so strict, but now
 i believe i am crazy; and with that i fetched a howl that you might have
 heard two miles, and started out to kill somebody—because, you know,
 i knew it would come to that sooner or later, and so i might as well
 begin. i read one of them paragraphs over again, so as to be certain, and
 then i burned my house down and started. i have crippled several people,
 and have got one fellow up a tree, where i can get him if i want him.
 but i thought i would call in here as i passed along and make the thing
 perfectly certain; and now it is certain, and i tell you it is lucky for
 the chap that is in the tree. i should have killed him sure, as i went
 back. good-by, sir, good-by; you have taken a great load off my mind. my
 reason has stood the strain of one of your agricultural articles, and i
 know that nothing can ever unseat it now. good-by, sir.”
 i felt a little uncomfortable about the cripplings and arsons this person
 had been entertaining himself with, for i could not help feeling remotely
 accessory to them. but these thoughts were quickly banished, for the
 regular editor walked in! [i thought to myself, now if you had gone to
 egypt as i recommended you to, i might have had a chance to get my hand
 in; but you wouldn’t do it, and here you are. i sort of expected
 you.]
 the editor was looking sad and perplexed and dejected.
 he surveyed the wreck which that old rioter and those two young farmers
 had made, and then said “this is a sad business—a very sad
 business. there is the mucilage-bottle broken, and six panes of glass, and
 a spittoon, and two candlesticks. but that is not the worst. the
 reputation of the paper is injured—and permanently, i fear. true,
 there never was such a call for the paper before, and it never sold such a
 large edition or soared to such celebrity;—but does one want to be
 famous for lunacy, and prosper upon the infirmities of his mind? my
 friend, as i am an honest man, the street out here is full of people, and
 others are roosting on the fences, waiting to get a glimpse of you,
 because they think you are crazy. and well they might after reading your
 editorials. they are a disgrace to journalism. why, what put it into your
 head that you could edit a paper of this nature? you do not seem to know
 the first rudiments of agriculture. you speak of a furrow and a harrow as
 being the same thing; you talk of the moulting season for cows; and you
 recommend the domestication of the pole-cat on account of its playfulness
 and its excellence as a ratter! your remark that clams will lie quiet if
 music be played to them was superfluous—entirely superfluous.
 nothing disturbs clams. clams always lie quiet. clams care nothing
 whatever about music. ah, heavens and earth, friend! if you had made the
 acquiring of ignorance the study of your life, you could not have
 graduated with higher honor than you could to-day. i never saw anything
 like it. your observation that the horse-chestnut as an article of
 commerce is steadily gaining in favor is simply calculated to destroy this
 journal. i want you to throw up your situation and go. i want no more
 holiday—i could not enjoy it if i had it. certainly not with you in
 my chair. i would always stand in dread of what you might be going to
 recommend next. it makes me lose all patience every time i think of your
 discussing oyster-beds under the head of ‘landscape gardening.’
 i want you to go. nothing on earth could persuade me to take another
 holiday. oh! why didn’t you tell me you didn’t know anything
 about agriculture?”
 “tell you, you corn-stalk, you cabbage, you son of a cauliflower? it’s
 the first time i ever heard such an unfeeling remark. i tell you i have
 been in the editorial business going on fourteen years, and it is the
 first time i ever heard of a man’s having to know anything in order
 to edit a newspaper. you turnip! who write the dramatic critiques for the
 second-rate papers? why, a parcel of promoted shoemakers and apprentice
 apothecaries, who know just as much about good acting as i do about good
 farming and no more. who review the books? people who never wrote one. who
 do up the heavy leaders on finance? parties who have had the largest
 opportunities for knowing nothing about it. who criticize the indian
 campaigns? gentlemen who do not know a war-whoop from a wigwam, and who
 never have had to run a foot-race with a tomahawk, or pluck arrows out of
 the several members of their families to build the evening camp-fire with.
 who write the temperance appeals, and clamor about the flowing bowl? folks
 who will never draw another sober breath till they do it in the grave. who
 edit the agricultural papers, you—yam? men, as a general thing, who
 fail in the poetry line, yellow-colored novel line, sensation, drama line,
 city-editor line, and finally fall back on agriculture as a temporary
 reprieve from the poorhouse. you try to tell me anything about the
 newspaper business! sir, i have been through it from alpha to omaha, and i
 tell you that the less a man knows the bigger the noise he makes and the
 higher the salary he commands. heaven knows if i had but been ignorant
 instead of cultivated, and impudent instead of diffident, i could have
 made a name for myself in this cold, selfish world. i take my leave, sir.
 since i have been treated as you have treated me, i am perfectly willing
 to go. but i have done my duty. i have fulfilled my contract as far as i
 was permitted to do it. i said i could make your paper of interest to all
 classes—and i have. i said i could run your circulation up to twenty
 thousand copies, and if i had had two more weeks i’d have done it.
 and i’d have given you the best class of readers that ever an
 agricultural paper had—not a farmer in it, nor a solitary individual
 who could tell a watermelon-tree from a peach-vine to save his life. you
 are the loser by this rupture, not me, pie-plant. adios.”
 i then left.
 now, to show how really hard it is to foist a moral or a truth upon an
 unsuspecting public through a burlesque without entirely and absurdly
 missing one’s mark, i will here set down two experiences of my own
 in this thing. in the fall of , in nevada and california, the people
 got to running wild about extraordinary petrifactions and other natural
 marvels. one could scarcely pick up a paper without finding in it one or
 two glorified discoveries of this kind. the mania was becoming a little
 ridiculous. i was a brand-new local editor in virginia city, and i felt
 called upon to destroy this growing evil; we all have our benignant,
 fatherly moods at one time or another, i suppose. i chose to kill the
 petrifaction mania with a delicate, a very delicate satire. but maybe it
 was altogether too delicate, for nobody ever perceived the satire part of
 it at all. i put my scheme in the shape of the discovery of a remarkably
 petrified man.
 i had had a temporary falling out with mr.——, the new coroner
 and justice of the peace of humboldt, and thought i might as well touch
 him up a little at the same time and make him ridiculous, and thus combine
 pleasure with business. so i told, in patient, belief-compelling detail,
 all about the finding of a petrified-man at gravelly ford (exactly a
 hundred and twenty miles, over a breakneck mountain trail from where
 —— lived); how all the savants of the immediate neighborhood
 had been to examine it (it was notorious that there was not a living
 creature within fifty miles of there, except a few starving indians, some
 crippled grasshoppers, and four or five buzzards out of meat and too
 feeble to get away); how those savants all pronounced the petrified man to
 have been in a state of complete petrifaction for over ten generations;
 and then, with a seriousness that i ought to have been ashamed to assume,
 i stated that as soon as mr.——heard the news he summoned a
 jury, mounted his mule, and posted off, with noble reverence for official
 duty, on that awful five days’ journey, through alkali, sage brush,
 peril of body, and imminent starvation, to hold an inquest on this man
 that had been dead and turned to everlasting stone for more than three
 hundred years!
 and then, my hand being “in,” so to speak, i went on, with the
 same unflinching gravity, to state that the jury returned a verdict that
 deceased came to his death from protracted exposure. this only moved me to
 higher flights of imagination, and i said that the jury, with that charity
 so characteristic of pioneers, then dug a grave, and were about to give
 the petrified man christian burial, when they found that for ages a
 limestone sediment had been trickling down the face of the stone against
 which he was sitting, and this stuff had run under him and cemented him
 fast to the “bed-rock”; that the jury (they were all
 silver-miners) canvassed the difficulty a moment, and then got out their
 powder and fuse, and proceeded to drill a hole under him, in order to
 blast him from his position, when mr.——, “with that
 delicacy so characteristic of him, forbade them, observing that it would
 be little less than sacrilege to do such a thing.”
 from beginning to end the “petrified man” squib was a string
 of roaring absurdities, albeit they were told with an unfair pretense of
 truth that even imposed upon me to some extent, and i was in some danger
 of believing in my own fraud. but i really had no desire to deceive
 anybody, and no expectation of doing it. i depended on the way the
 petrified man was sitting to explain to the public that he was a swindle.
 yet i purposely mixed that up with other things, hoping to make it obscure—and
 i did. i would describe the position of one foot, and then say his right
 thumb was against the side of his nose; then talk about his other foot,
 and presently come back and say the fingers of his right hand were spread
 apart; then talk about the back of his head a little, and return and say
 the left thumb was hooked into the right little finger; then ramble off
 about something else, and by and by drift back again and remark that the
 fingers of the left hand were spread like those of the right. but i was
 too ingenious. i mixed it up rather too much; and so all that description
 of the attitude, as a key to the humbuggery of the article, was entirely
 lost, for nobody but me ever discovered and comprehended the peculiar and
 suggestive position of the petrified man’s hands.
 as a satire on the petrifaction mania, or anything else, my petrified man
 was a disheartening failure; for everybody received him in innocent good
 faith, and i was stunned to see the creature i had begotten to pull down
 the wonder-business with, and bring derision upon it, calmly exalted to
 the grand chief place in the list of the genuine marvels our nevada had
 produced. i was so disappointed at the curious miscarriage of my scheme,
 that at first i was angry, and did not like to think about it; but by and
 by, when the exchanges began to come in with the petrified man copied and
 guilelessly glorified, i began to feel a soothing secret satisfaction; and
 as my gentleman’s field of travels broadened, and by the exchanges i
 saw that he steadily and implacably penetrated territory after territory,
 state after state, and land after land, till he swept the great globe and
 culminated in sublime and unimpeached legitimacy in the august london
 lancet, my cup was full, and i said i was glad i had done it. i think that
 for about eleven months, as nearly as i can remember, mr.——’s
 daily mail-bag continued to be swollen by the addition of half a bushel of
 newspapers hailing from many climes with the petrified man in them, marked
 around with a prominent belt of ink. i sent them to him. i did it for
 spite, not for fun.
 he used to shovel them into his back yard and curse. and every day during
 all those months the miners, his constituents (for miners never quit
 joking a person when they get started), would call on him and ask if he
 could tell them where they could get hold of a paper with the petrified
 man in it. he could have accommodated a continent with them. i hated——-in
 those days, and these things pacified me and pleased me. i could not have
 gotten more real comfort out of him without killing him.
 the other burlesque i have referred to was my fine satire upon the
 financial expedients of “cooking dividends,” a thing which
 became shamefully frequent on the pacific coast for a while. once more, in
 my self-complacent simplicity i felt that the time had arrived for me to
 rise up and be a reformer. i put this reformatory satire in the shape of a
 fearful “massacre at empire city.” the san francisco papers
 were making a great outcry about the iniquity of the daney silver-mining
 company, whose directors had declared a “cooked” or false
 dividend, for the purpose of increasing the value of their stock, so that
 they could sell out at a comfortable figure, and then scramble from under
 the tumbling concern. and while abusing the daney, those papers did not
 forget to urge the public to get rid of all their silver stocks and invest
 in sound and safe san francisco stocks, such as the spring valley water
 company, etc. but right at this unfortunate juncture, behold the spring
 valley cooked a dividend too! and so, under the insidious mask of an
 invented “bloody massacre,” i stole upon the public unawares
 with my scathing satire upon the dividend-cooking system. in about half a
 column of imaginary human carnage i told how a citizen had murdered his
 wife and nine children, and then committed suicide. and i said slyly, at
 the bottom, that the sudden madness of which this melancholy massacre was
 the result had been brought about by his having allowed himself to be
 persuaded by the california papers to sell his sound and lucrative nevada
 silver stocks, and buy into spring valley just in time to get cooked along
 with that company’s fancy dividend, and sink every cent he had in
 the world.
 ah, it was a deep, deep satire, and most ingeniously contrived. but i made
 the horrible details so carefully and conscientiously interesting that the
 public devoured them greedily, and wholly overlooked the following
 distinctly stated facts, to wit: the murderer was perfectly well known to
 every creature in the land as a bachelor, and consequently he could not
 murder his wife and nine children; he murdered them “in his splendid
 dressed-stone mansion just in the edge of the great pine forest between
 empire city and dutch nick’s,” when even the very pickled
 oysters that came on our tables knew that there was not a “dressed-stone
 mansion” in all nevada territory; also that, so far from there being
 a “great pine forest between empire city and dutch nick’s,”
 there wasn’t a solitary tree within fifteen miles of either place;
 and, finally, it was patent and notorious that empire city and dutch nick’s
 were one and the same place, and contained only six houses anyhow, and
 consequently there could be no forest between them; and on top of all
 these absurdities i stated that this diabolical murderer, after inflicting
 a wound upon himself that the reader ought to have seen would kill an
 elephant in the twinkling of an eye, jumped on his horse and rode four
 miles, waving his wife’s reeking scalp in the air, and thus
 performing entered carson city with tremendous éclat, and dropped
 dead in front of the chief saloon, the envy and admiration of all
 beholders.
 well, in all my life i never saw anything like the sensation that little
 satire created. it was the talk of the town, it was the talk of the
 territory. most of the citizens dropped gently into it at breakfast, and
 they never finished their meal. there was something about those minutely
 faithful details that was a sufficing substitute for food. few people that
 were able to read took food that morning. dan and i (dan was my
 reportorial associate) took our seats on either side of our customary
 table in the “eagle restaurant,” and, as i unfolded the shred
 they used to call a napkin in that establishment, i saw at the next table
 two stalwart innocents with that sort of vegetable dandruff sprinkled
 about their clothing which was the sign and evidence that they were in
 from the truckee with a load of hay. the one facing me had the morning
 paper folded to a long, narrow strip, and i knew, without any telling,
 that that strip represented the column that contained my pleasant
 financial satire. from the way he was excitedly mumbling, i saw that the
 heedless son of a hay-mow was skipping with all his might, in order to get
 to the bloody details as quickly as possible; and so he was missing the
 guide-boards i had set up to warn him that the whole thing was a fraud.
 presently his eyes spread wide open, just as his jaws swung asunder to
 take in a potato approaching it on a fork; the potato halted, the face lit
 up redly, and the whole man was on fire with excitement. then he broke
 into a disjointed checking off of the particulars—his potato cooling
 in mid-air meantime, and his mouth making a reach for it occasionally, but
 always bringing up suddenly against a new and still more direful
 performance of my hero. at last he looked his stunned and rigid comrade
 impressively in the face, and said, with an expression of concentrated
 awe:
 “jim, he b’iled his baby, and he took the old ’oman’s
 skelp. cuss’d if i want any breakfast!”
 and he laid his lingering potato reverently down, and he and his friend
 departed from the restaurant empty but satisfied.
 he never got down to where the satire part of it began. nobody ever did.
 they found the thrilling particulars sufficient. to drop in with a poor
 little moral at the fag-end of such a gorgeous massacre was like following
 the expiring sun with a candle and hope to attract the world’s
 attention to it.
 the idea that anybody could ever take my massacre for a genuine occurrence
 never once suggested itself to me, hedged about as it was by all those
 telltale absurdities and impossibilities concerning the “great pine
 forest,” the “dressed-stone mansion,” etc. but i found
 out then, and never have forgotten since, that we never read the dull
 explanatory surroundings of marvelously exciting things when we have no
 occasion to suppose that some irresponsible scribbler is trying to defraud
 us; we skip all that, and hasten to revel in the blood-curdling
 particulars and be happy.
 “now that corpse,” said the undertaker, patting the folded
 hands of deceased approvingly, “was a brick—every way you took
 him he was a brick. he was so real accommodating, and so modest-like and
 simple in his last moments. friends wanted metallic burial-case—nothing
 else would do. i couldn’t get it. there warn’t going to be
 time—anybody could see that.
 “corpse said never mind, shake him up some kind of a box he could
 stretch out in comfortable, he warn’t particular ’bout the
 general style of it. said he went more on room than style, anyway in a
 last final container.
 “friends wanted a silver door-plate on the coffin, signifying who he
 was and wher’ he was from. now you know a fellow couldn’t
 roust out such a gaily thing as that in a little country-town like this.
 what did corpse say?
 “corpse said, whitewash his old canoe and dob his address and
 general destination onto it with a blacking-brush and a stencil-plate,
 ’long with a verse from some likely hymn or other, and p’int
 him for the tomb, and mark him c. o. d., and just let him flicker. he warn’t
 distressed any more than you be—on the contrary, just as ca’m
 and collected as a hearse-horse; said he judged that wher’ he was
 going to a body would find it considerable better to attract attention by
 a picturesque moral character than a natty burial-case with a swell
 door-plate on it.
 “splendid man, he was. i’d druther do for a corpse like that
 ’n any i’ve tackled in seven year. there’s some
 satisfaction in buryin’ a man like that. you feel that what you’re
 doing is appreciated. lord bless you, so’s he got planted before he
 sp’iled, he was perfectly satisfied; said his relations meant well,
 perfectly well, but all them preparations was bound to delay the thing
 more or less, and he didn’t wish to be kept layin’ around. you
 never see such a clear head as what he had—and so ca’m and so
 cool. jist a hunk of brains—that is what he was. perfectly awful. it
 was a ripping distance from one end of that man’s head to t’other.
 often and over again he’s had brain-fever a-raging in one place, and
 the rest of the pile didn’t know anything about it—didn’t
 affect it any more than an injun insurrection in arizona affects the
 atlantic states. well, the relations they wanted a big funeral, but corpse
 said he was down on flummery—didn’t want any procession—fill
 the hearse full of mourners, and get out a stern line and tow him behind.
 he was the most down on style of any remains i ever struck. a beautiful,
 simpleminded creature—it was what he was, you can depend on that. he
 was just set on having things the way he wanted them, and he took a solid
 comfort in laying his little plans. he had me measure him and take a whole
 raft of directions; then he had the minister stand up behind a long box
 with a table-cloth over it, to represent the coffin, and read his funeral
 sermon, saying ‘angcore, angcore!’ at the good places, and
 making him scratch out every bit of brag about him, and all the hifalutin;
 and then he made them trot out the choir, so’s he could help them
 pick out the tunes for the occasion, and he got them to sing ‘pop
 goes the weasel,’ because he’d always liked that tune when he
 was downhearted, and solemn music made him sad; and when they sung that
 with tears in their eyes (because they all loved him), and his relations
 grieving around, he just laid there as happy as a bug, and trying to beat
 time and showing all over how much he enjoyed it; and presently he got
 worked up and excited, and tried to join in, for, mind you, he was pretty
 proud of his abilities in the singing line; but the first time he opened
 his mouth and was just going to spread himself his breath took a walk.
 “i never see a man snuffed out so sudden. ah, it was a great loss—a
 powerful loss to this poor little one-horse town. well, well, well, i hain’t
 got time to be palavering along here—got to nail on the lid and
 mosey along with him; and if you’ll just give me a lift we’ll
 skeet him into the hearse and meander along. relations bound to have it so—don’t
 pay no attention to dying injunctions, minute a corpse’s gone; but,
 if i had my way, if i didn’t respect his last wishes and tow him
 behind the hearse i’ll be cuss’d. i consider that whatever a
 corpse wants done for his comfort is little enough matter, and a man hain’t
 got no right to deceive him or take advantage of him; and whatever a
 corpse trusts me to do i’m a-going to do, you know, even if it’s
 to stuff him and paint him yaller and keep him for a keepsake—you
 hear me!”
 he cracked his whip and went lumbering away with his ancient ruin of a
 hearse, and i continued my walk with a valuable lesson learned—that
 a healthy and wholesome cheerfulness is not necessarily impossible to any
 occupation. the lesson is likely to be lasting, for it will take many
 months to obliterate the memory of the remarks and circumstances that
 impressed it.
 against all chambermaids, of whatsoever age or nationality, i launch the
 curse of bachelordom! because:
 they always put the pillows at the opposite end of the bed from the
 gas-burner, so that while you read and smoke before sleeping (as is the
 ancient and honored custom of bachelors), you have to hold your book
 aloft, in an uncomfortable position, to keep the light from dazzling your
 eyes.
 when they find the pillows removed to the other end of the bed in the
 morning, they receive not the suggestion in a friendly spirit; but,
 glorying in their absolute sovereignty, and unpitying your helplessness,
 they make the bed just as it was originally, and gloat in secret over the
 pang their tyranny will cause you.
 always after that, when they find you have transposed the pillows, they
 undo your work, and thus defy and seek to embitter the life that god has
 given you.
 if they cannot get the light in an inconvenient position any other way,
 they move the bed.
 if you pull your trunk out six inches from the wall, so that the lid will
 stay up when you open it, they always shove that trunk back again. they do
 it on purpose.
 if you want the spittoon in a certain spot, where it will be handy, they
 don’t, and so they move it.
 they always put your other boots into inaccessible places. they chiefly
 enjoy depositing them as far under the bed as the wall will permit. it is
 because this compels you to get down in an undignified attitude and make
 wild sweeps for them in the dark with the bootjack, and swear.
 they always put the matchbox in some other place. they hunt up a new place
 for it every day, and put up a bottle, or other perishable glass thing,
 where the box stood before. this is to cause you to break that glass
 thing, groping in the dark, and get yourself into trouble.
 they are for ever and ever moving the furniture. when you come in in the
 night you can calculate on finding the bureau where the wardrobe was in
 the morning. and when you go out in the morning, if you leave the
 slop-bucket by the door and rocking-chair by the window, when you come in
 at midnight or thereabout, you will fall over that rocking-chair, and you
 will proceed toward the window and sit down in that slop-tub. this will
 disgust you. they like that.
 no matter where you put anything, they are not going to let it stay there.
 they will take it and move it the first chance they get. it is their
 nature. and, besides, it gives them pleasure to be mean and contrary this
 way. they would die if they couldn’t be villains.
 they always save up all the old scraps of printed rubbish you throw on the
 floor, and stack them up carefully on the table, and start the fire with
 your valuable manuscripts. if there is any one particular old scrap that
 you are more down on than any other, and which you are gradually wearing
 your life out trying to get rid of, you may take all the pains you
 possibly can in that direction, but it won’t be of any use, because
 they will always fetch that old scrap back and put it in the same old
 place again every time. it does them good.
 and they use up more hair-oil than any six men. if charged with purloining
 the same, they lie about it. what do they care about a hereafter?
 absolutely nothing.
 if you leave the key in the door for convenience’ sake, they will
 carry it down to the office and give it to the clerk. they do this under
 the vile pretense of trying to protect your property from thieves; but
 actually they do it because they want to make you tramp back down-stairs
 after it when you come home tired, or put you to the trouble of sending a
 waiter for it, which waiter will expect you to pay him something. in which
 case i suppose the degraded creatures divide.
 they keep always trying to make your bed before you get up, thus
 destroying your rest and inflicting agony upon you; but after you get up,
 they don’t come any more till next day.
 they do all the mean things they can think of, and they do them just out
 of pure cussedness, and nothing else.
 chambermaids are dead to every human instinct.
 if i can get a bill through the legislature abolishing chambermaids, i
 mean to do it.
 [written about .]
 the facts in the following case came to me by letter from a young lady who
 lives in the beautiful city of san josé; she is perfectly unknown
 to me, and simply signs herself “aurelia maria,” which may
 possibly be a fictitious name. but no matter, the poor girl is almost
 heartbroken by the misfortunes she has undergone, and so confused by the
 conflicting counsels of misguided friends and insidious enemies that she
 does not know what course to pursue in order to extricate herself from the
 web of difficulties in which she seems almost hopelessly involved. in this
 dilemma she turns to me for help, and supplicates for my guidance and
 instruction with a moving eloquence that would touch the heart of a
 statue. hear her sad story:
 she says that when she was sixteen years old she met and loved, with all
 the devotion of a passionate nature, a young man from new jersey, named
 williamson breckinridge caruthers, who was some six years her senior. they
 were engaged, with the free consent of their friends and relatives, and
 for a time it seemed as if their career was destined to be characterized
 by an immunity from sorrow beyond the usual lot of humanity. but at last
 the tide of fortune turned; young caruthers became infected with smallpox
 of the most virulent type, and when he recovered from his illness his face
 was pitted like a waffle-mold, and his comeliness gone forever. aurelia
 thought to break off the engagement at first, but pity for her unfortunate
 lover caused her to postpone the marriage-day for a season, and give him
 another trial.
 the very day before the wedding was to have taken place, breckinridge,
 while absorbed in watching the flight of a balloon, walked into a well and
 fractured one of his legs, and it had to be taken off above the knee.
 again aurelia was moved to break the engagement, but again love triumphed,
 and she set the day forward and gave him another chance to reform.
 and again misfortune overtook the unhappy youth. he lost one arm by the
 premature discharge of a fourth of july cannon, and within three months he
 got the other pulled out by a carding-machine. aurelia’s heart was
 almost crushed by these latter calamities. she could not but be deeply
 grieved to see her lover passing from her by piecemeal, feeling, as she
 did, that he could not last forever under this disastrous process of
 reduction, yet knowing of no way to stop its dreadful career, and in her
 tearful despair she almost regretted, like brokers who hold on and lose,
 that she had not taken him at first, before he had suffered such an
 alarming depreciation. still, her brave soul bore her up, and she resolved
 to bear with her friend’s unnatural disposition yet a little longer.
 again the wedding-day approached, and again disappointment overshadowed
 it; caruthers fell ill with the erysipelas, and lost the use of one of his
 eyes entirely. the friends and relatives of the bride, considering that
 she had already put up with more than could reasonably be expected of her,
 now came forward and insisted that the match should be broken off; but
 after wavering awhile, aurelia, with a generous spirit which did her
 credit, said she had reflected calmly upon the matter, and could not
 discover that breckinridge was to blame.
 so she extended the time once more, and he broke his other leg.
 it was a sad day for the poor girl when she saw the surgeons reverently
 bearing away the sack whose uses she had learned by previous experience,
 and her heart told her the bitter truth that some more of her lover was
 gone. she felt that the field of her affections was growing more and more
 circumscribed every day, but once more she frowned down her relatives and
 renewed her betrothal.
 shortly before the time set for the nuptials another disaster occurred.
 there was but one man scalped by the owens river indians last year. that
 man was williamson breckinridge caruthers of new jersey. he was hurrying
 home with happiness in his heart, when he lost his hair forever, and in
 that hour of bitterness he almost cursed the mistaken mercy that had
 spared his head.
 at last aurelia is in serious perplexity as to what she ought to do. she
 still loves her breckinridge, she writes, with truly womanly feeling—she
 still loves what is left of him—but her parents are bitterly opposed
 to the match, because he has no property and is disabled from working, and
 she has not sufficient means to support both comfortably. “now, what
 should she do?” she asked with painful and anxious solicitude.
 it is a delicate question; it is one which involves the lifelong happiness
 of a woman, and that of nearly two-thirds of a man, and i feel that it
 would be assuming too great a responsibility to do more than make a mere
 suggestion in the case. how would it do to build to him? if aurelia can
 afford the expense, let her furnish her mutilated lover with wooden arms
 and wooden legs, and a glass eye and a wig, and give him another show;
 give him ninety days, without grace, and if he does not break his neck in
 the mean time, marry him and take the chances. it does not seem to me that
 there is much risk, anyway, aurelia, because if he sticks to his singular
 propensity for damaging himself every time he sees a good opportunity, his
 next experiment is bound to finish him, and then you are safe, married or
 single. if married, the wooden legs and such other valuables as he may
 possess revert to the widow, and you see you sustain no actual loss save
 the cherished fragment of a noble but most unfortunate husband, who
 honestly strove to do right, but whose extraordinary instincts were
 against him. try it, maria. i have thought the matter over carefully and
 well, and it is the only chance i see for you. it would have been a happy
 conceit on the part of caruthers if he had started with his neck and
 broken that first; but since he has seen fit to choose a different policy
 and string himself out as long as possible, i do not think we ought to
 upbraid him for it if he has enjoyed it. we must do the best we can under
 the circumstances, and try not to feel exasperated at him.
 a grand affair of a ball—the pioneers’—came off at the
 occidental some time ago. the following notes of the costumes worn by the
 belles of the occasion may not be uninteresting to the general reader, and
 jenkins may get an idea therefrom:
 mrs. w. m. was attired in an elegant ‘pâté de foie
 gras,’ made expressly for her, and was greatly admired. miss s. had
 her hair done up. she was the center of attraction for the gentlemen and
 the envy of all the ladies. mrs. g. w. was tastefully dressed in a ‘tout
 ensemble,’ and was greeted with deafening applause wherever she
 went. mrs. c. n. was superbly arrayed in white kid gloves. her modest and
 engaging manner accorded well with the unpretending simplicity of her
 costume and caused her to be regarded with absorbing interest by every
 one.
 the charming miss m. m. b. appeared in a thrilling waterfall, whose
 exceeding grace and volume compelled the homage of pioneers and emigrants
 alike. how beautiful she was!
 the queenly mrs. l. r. was attractively attired in her new and beautiful
 false teeth, and the ‘bon jour’ effect they naturally produced
 was heightened by her enchanting and well-sustained smile.
 miss r. p., with that repugnance to ostentation in dress which is so
 peculiar to her, was attired in a simple white lace collar, fastened with
 a neat pearl-button solitaire. the fine contrast between the sparkling
 vivacity of her natural optic, and the steadfast attentiveness of her
 placid glass eye, was the subject of general and enthusiastic remark.
 miss c. l. b. had her fine nose elegantly enameled, and the easy grace
 with which she blew it from time to time marked her as a cultivated and
 accomplished woman of the world; its exquisitely modulated tone excited
 the admiration of all who had the happiness to hear it.
 all things change except barbers, the ways of barbers, and the
 surroundings of barbers. these never change. what one experiences in a
 barber’s shop the first time he enters one is what he always
 experiences in barbers’ shops afterward till the end of his days. i
 got shaved this morning as usual. a man approached the door from jones
 street as i approached it from main—a thing that always happens. i
 hurried up, but it was of no use; he entered the door one little step
 ahead of me, and i followed in on his heels and saw him take the only
 vacant chair, the one presided over by the best barber. it always happens
 so. i sat down, hoping that i might fall heir to the chair belonging to
 the better of the remaining two barbers, for he had already begun combing
 his man’s hair, while his comrade was not yet quite done rubbing up
 and oiling his customer’s locks. i watched the probabilities with
 strong interest. when i saw that no.  was gaining on no.  my interest
 grew to solicitude. when no.  stopped a moment to make change on a bath
 ticket for a new-comer, and lost ground in the race, my solicitude rose to
 anxiety. when no.  caught up again, and both he and his comrade were
 pulling the towels away and brushing the powder from their customers’
 cheeks, and it was about an even thing which one would say “next!”
 first, my very breath stood still with the suspense. but when at the
 culminating moment no.  stopped to pass a comb a couple of times through
 his customer’s eyebrows, i saw that he had lost the race by a single
 instant, and i rose indignant and quitted the shop, to keep from falling
 into the hands of no. ; for i have none of that enviable firmness that
 enables a man to look calmly into the eyes of a waiting barber and tell
 him he will wait for his fellow-barber’s chair.
 i stayed out fifteen minutes, and then went back, hoping for better luck.
 of course all the chairs were occupied now, and four men sat waiting,
 silent, unsociable, distraught, and looking bored, as men always do who
 are waiting their turn in a barber’s shop. i sat down in one of the
 iron-armed compartments of an old sofa, and put in the time for a while
 reading the framed advertisements of all sorts of quack nostrums for
 dyeing and coloring the hair. then i read the greasy names on the private
 bayrum bottles; read the names and noted the numbers on the private
 shaving-cups in the pigeonholes; studied the stained and damaged cheap
 prints on the walls, of battles, early presidents, and voluptuous
 recumbent sultanas, and the tiresome and everlasting young girl putting
 her grandfather’s spectacles on; execrated in my heart the cheerful
 canary and the distracting parrot that few barbers’ shops are
 without. finally, i searched out the least dilapidated of last year’s
 illustrated papers that littered the foul center-table, and conned their
 unjustifiable misrepresentations of old forgotten events.
 at last my turn came. a voice said “next!” and i surrendered
 to—no. , of course. it always happens so. i said meekly that i was
 in a hurry, and it affected him as strongly as if he had never heard it.
 he shoved up my head, and put a napkin under it. he plowed his fingers
 into my collar and fixed a towel there. he explored my hair with his claws
 and suggested that it needed trimming. i said i did not want it trimmed.
 he explored again and said it was pretty long for the present style—better
 have a little taken off; it needed it behind especially. i said i had had
 it cut only a week before. he yearned over it reflectively a moment, and
 then asked with a disparaging manner, who cut it? i came back at him
 promptly with a “you did!” i had him there. then he fell to
 stirring up his lather and regarding himself in the glass, stopping now
 and then to get close and examine his chin critically or inspect a pimple.
 then he lathered one side of my face thoroughly, and was about to lather
 the other, when a dog-fight attracted his attention, and he ran to the
 window and stayed and saw it out, losing two shillings on the result in
 bets with the other barbers, a thing which gave me great satisfaction. he
 finished lathering, and then began to rub in the suds with his hand.
 he now began to sharpen his razor on an old suspender, and was delayed a
 good deal on account of a controversy about a cheap masquerade ball he had
 figured at the night before, in red cambric and bogus ermine, as some kind
 of a king. he was so gratified with being chaffed about some damsel whom
 he had smitten with his charms that he used every means to continue the
 controversy by pretending to be annoyed at the chaffings of his fellows.
 this matter begot more surveyings of himself in the glass, and he put down
 his razor and brushed his hair with elaborate care, plastering an inverted
 arch of it down on his forehead, accomplishing an accurate “part”
 behind, and brushing the two wings forward over his ears with nice
 exactness. in the mean time the lather was drying on my face, and
 apparently eating into my vitals.
 now he began to shave, digging his fingers into my countenance to stretch
 the skin and bundling and tumbling my head this way and that as
 convenience in shaving demanded. as long as he was on the tough sides of
 my face i did not suffer; but when he began to rake, and rip, and tug at
 my chin, the tears came. he now made a handle of my nose, to assist him
 shaving the corners of my upper lip, and it was by this bit of
 circumstantial evidence that i discovered that a part of his duties in the
 shop was to clean the kerosene-lamps. i had often wondered in an indolent
 way whether the barbers did that, or whether it was the boss.
 about this time i was amusing myself trying to guess where he would be
 most likely to cut me this time, but he got ahead of me, and sliced me on
 the end of the chin before i had got my mind made up. he immediately
 sharpened his razor—he might have done it before. i do not like a
 close shave, and would not let him go over me a second time. i tried to
 get him to put up his razor, dreading that he would make for the side of
 my chin, my pet tender spot, a place which a razor cannot touch twice
 without making trouble; but he said he only wanted to just smooth off one
 little roughness, and in the same moment he slipped his razor along the
 forbidden ground, and the dreaded pimple-signs of a close shave rose up
 smarting and answered to the call. now he soaked his towel in bay rum, and
 slapped it all over my face nastily; slapped it over as if a human being
 ever yet washed his face in that way. then he dried it by slapping with
 the dry part of the towel, as if a human being ever dried his face in such
 a fashion; but a barber seldom rubs you like a christian. next he poked
 bay rum into the cut place with his towel, then choked the wound with
 powdered starch, then soaked it with bay rum again, and would have gone on
 soaking and powdering it forevermore, no doubt, if i had not rebelled and
 begged off. he powdered my whole face now, straightened me up, and began
 to plow my hair thoughtfully with his hands. then he suggested a shampoo,
 and said my hair needed it badly, very badly. i observed that i shampooed
 it myself very thoroughly in the bath yesterday. i “had him”
 again. he next recommended some of “smith’s hair glorifier,”
 and offered to sell me a bottle. i declined. he praised the new perfume,
 “jones’s delight of the toilet,” and proposed to sell me
 some of that. i declined again. he tendered me a tooth-wash atrocity of
 his own invention, and when i declined offered to trade knives with me.
 he returned to business after the miscarriage of this last enterprise,
 sprinkled me all over, legs and all, greased my hair in defiance of my
 protest against it, rubbed and scrubbed a good deal of it out by the
 roots, and combed and brushed the rest, parting it behind, and plastering
 the eternal inverted arch of hair down on my forehead, and then, while
 combing my scant eyebrows and defiling them with pomade, strung out an
 account of the achievements of a six-ounce black-and-tan terrier of his
 till i heard the whistles blow for noon, and knew i was five minutes too
 late for the train. then he snatched away the towel, brushed it lightly
 about my face, passed his comb through my eyebrows once more, and gaily
 sang out “next!”
 this barber fell down and died of apoplexy two hours later. i am waiting
 over a day for my revenge—i am going to attend his funeral.
 belfast is a peculiarly religious community. this may be said of the whole
 of the north of ireland. about one-half of the people are protestants and
 the other half catholics. each party does all it can to make its own
 doctrines popular and draw the affections of the irreligious toward them.
 one hears constantly of the most touching instances of this zeal. a week
 ago a vast concourse of catholics assembled at armagh to dedicate a new
 cathedral; and when they started home again the roadways were lined with
 groups of meek and lowly protestants who stoned them till all the region
 round about was marked with blood. i thought that only catholics argued in
 that way, but it seems to be a mistake.
 every man in the community is a missionary and carries a brick to admonish
 the erring with. the law has tried to break this up, but not with perfect
 success. it has decreed that irritating “party cries” shall
 not be indulged in, and that persons uttering them shall be fined forty
 shillings and costs. and so, in the police court reports every day, one
 sees these fines recorded. last week a girl of twelve years old was fined
 the usual forty shillings and costs for proclaiming in the public streets
 that she was “a protestant.” the usual cry is, “to hell
 with the pope!” or “to hell with the protestants!”
 according to the utterer’s system of salvation.
 one of belfast’s local jokes was very good. it referred to the
 uniform and inevitable fine of forty shillings and costs for uttering a
 party cry—and it is no economical fine for a poor man, either, by
 the way. they say that a policeman found a drunken man lying on the
 ground, up a dark alley, entertaining himself with shouting, “to
 hell with!” “to hell with!” the officer smelt a fine—informers
 get half.
 “what’s that you say?”
 “to hell with!”
 “to hell with who? to hell with what?”
 “ah, bedad, ye can finish it yourself—it’s too expinsive
 for me!”
 i think the seditious disposition, restrained by the economical instinct,
 is finely put in that.
 resignation [written about ]
 washington, december, .
 i have resigned. the government appears to go on much the same, but there
 is a spoke out of its wheel, nevertheless. i was clerk of the senate
 committee on conchology and i have thrown up the position. i could see the
 plainest disposition on the part of the other members of the government to
 debar me from having any voice in the counsels of the nation, and so i
 could no longer hold office and retain my self-respect. if i were to
 detail all the outrages that were heaped upon me during the six days that
 i was connected with the government in an official capacity, the narrative
 would fill a volume. they appointed me clerk of that committee on
 conchology and then allowed me no amanuensis to play billiards with. i
 would have borne that, lonesome as it was, if i had met with that courtesy
 from the other members of the cabinet which was my due. but i did not.
 whenever i observed that the head of a department was pursuing a wrong
 course, i laid down everything and went and tried to set him right, as it
 was my duty to do; and i never was thanked for it in a single instance. i
 went, with the best intentions in the world, to the secretary of the navy,
 and said:
 “sir, i cannot see that admiral farragut is doing anything but
 skirmishing around there in europe, having a sort of picnic. now, that may
 be all very well, but it does not exhibit itself to me in that light. if
 there is no fighting for him to do, let him come home. there is no use in
 a man having a whole fleet for a pleasure excursion. it is too expensive.
 mind, i do not object to pleasure excursions for the naval officers—pleasure
 excursions that are in reason—pleasure excursions that are
 economical. now, they might go down the mississippi on a raft—”
 you ought to have heard him storm! one would have supposed i had committed
 a crime of some kind. but i didn’t mind. i said it was cheap, and
 full of republican simplicity, and perfectly safe. i said that, for a
 tranquil pleasure excursion, there was nothing equal to a raft.
 then the secretary of the navy asked me who i was; and when i told him i
 was connected with the government, he wanted to know in what capacity. i
 said that, without remarking upon the singularity of such a question,
 coming, as it did, from a member of that same government, i would inform
 him that i was clerk of the senate committee on conchology. then there was
 a fine storm! he finished by ordering me to leave the premises, and give
 my attention strictly to my own business in future. my first impulse was
 to get him removed. however, that would harm others besides himself, and
 do me no real good, and so i let him stay.
 i went next to the secretary of war, who was not inclined to see me at all
 until he learned that i was connected with the government. if i had not
 been on important business, i suppose i could not have got in. i asked him
 for a light (he was smoking at the time), and then i told him i had no
 fault to find with his defending the parole stipulations of general lee
 and his comrades in arms, but that i could not approve of his method of
 fighting the indians on the plains. i said he fought too scattering. he
 ought to get the indians more together—get them together in some
 convenient place, where he could have provisions enough for both parties,
 and then have a general massacre. i said there was nothing so convincing
 to an indian as a general massacre. if he could not approve of the
 massacre, i said the next surest thing for an indian was soap and
 education. soap and education are not as sudden as a massacre, but they
 are more deadly in the long run; because a half-massacred indian may
 recover, but if you educate him and wash him, it is bound to finish him
 some time or other. it undermines his constitution; it strikes at the
 foundation of his being. “sir,” i said, “the time has
 come when blood-curdling cruelty has become necessary. inflict soap and a
 spelling-book on every indian that ravages the plains, and let them die!”
 the secretary of war asked me if i was a member of the cabinet, and i said
 i was. he inquired what position i held, and i said i was clerk of the
 senate committee on conchology. i was then ordered under arrest for
 contempt of court, and restrained of my liberty for the best part of the
 day.
 i almost resolved to be silent thenceforward, and let the government get
 along the best way it could. but duty called, and i obeyed. i called on
 the secretary of the treasury. he said:
 “what will you have?”
 the question threw me off my guard. i said, “rum punch.”
 he said: “if you have got any business here, sir, state it—and
 in as few words as possible.”
 i then said that i was sorry he had seen fit to change the subject so
 abruptly, because such conduct was very offensive to me; but under the
 circumstances i would overlook the matter and come to the point. i now
 went into an earnest expostulation with him upon the extravagant length of
 his report. i said it was expensive, unnecessary, and awkwardly
 constructed; there were no descriptive passages in it, no poetry, no
 sentiment—no heroes, no plot, no pictures—not even wood-cuts.
 nobody would read it, that was a clear case. i urged him not to ruin his
 reputation by getting out a thing like that. if he ever hoped to succeed
 in literature he must throw more variety into his writings. he must beware
 of dry detail. i said that the main popularity of the almanac was derived
 from its poetry and conundrums, and that a few conundrums distributed
 around through his treasury report would help the sale of it more than all
 the internal revenue he could put into it. i said these things in the
 kindest spirit, and yet the secretary of the treasury fell into a violent
 passion. he even said i was an ass. he abused me in the most vindictive
 manner, and said that if i came there again meddling with his business he
 would throw me out of the window. i said i would take my hat and go, if i
 could not be treated with the respect due to my office, and i did go. it
 was just like a new author. they always think they know more than anybody
 else when they are getting out their first book. nobody can tell them
 anything.
 during the whole time that i was connected with the government it seemed
 as if i could not do anything in an official capacity without getting
 myself into trouble. and yet i did nothing, attempted nothing, but what i
 conceived to be for the good of my country. the sting of my wrongs may
 have driven me to unjust and harmful conclusions, but it surely seemed to
 me that the secretary of state, the secretary of war, the secretary of the
 treasury, and others of my confrères had conspired from the very
 beginning to drive me from the administration. i never attended but one
 cabinet meeting while i was connected with the government. that was
 sufficient for me. the servant at the white house door did not seem
 disposed to make way for me until i asked if the other members of the
 cabinet had arrived. he said they had, and i entered. they were all there;
 but nobody offered me a seat. they stared at me as if i had been an
 intruder. the president said:
 “well, sir, who are you?”
 i handed him my card, and he read: “the hon. mark twain, clerk of
 the senate committee on conchology.” then he looked at me from head
 to foot, as if he had never heard of me before. the secretary of the
 treasury said:
 “this is the meddlesome ass that came to recommend me to put poetry
 and conundrums in my report, as if it were an almanac.”
 the secretary of war said: “it is the same visionary that came to me
 yesterday with a scheme to educate a portion of the indians to death, and
 massacre the balance.”
 the secretary of the navy said: “i recognize this youth as the
 person who has been interfering with my business time and again during the
 week. he is distressed about admiral farragut’s using a whole fleet
 for a pleasure excursion, as he terms it. his proposition about some
 insane pleasure excursion on a raft is too absurd to repeat.”
 i said: “gentlemen, i perceive here a disposition to throw discredit
 upon every act of my official career; i perceive, also, a disposition to
 debar me from all voice in the counsels of the nation. no notice whatever
 was sent to me to-day. it was only by the merest chance that i learned
 that there was going to be a cabinet meeting. but let these things pass.
 all i wish to know is, is this a cabinet meeting or is it not?”
 the president said it was.
 “then,” i said, “let us proceed to business at once, and
 not fritter away valuable time in unbecoming fault-findings with each
 other’s official conduct.”
 the secretary of state now spoke up, in his benignant way, and said,
 “young man, you are laboring under a mistake. the clerks of the
 congressional committees are not members of the cabinet. neither are the
 doorkeepers of the capitol, strange as it may seem. therefore, much as we
 could desire your more than human wisdom in our deliberations, we cannot
 lawfully avail ourselves of it. the counsels of the nation must proceed
 without you; if disaster follows, as follow full well it may, be it balm
 to your sorrowing spirit that by deed and voice you did what in you lay to
 avert it. you have my blessing. farewell.”
 these gentle words soothed my troubled breast, and i went away. but the
 servants of a nation can know no peace. i had hardly reached my den in the
 capitol, and disposed my feet on the table like a representative, when one
 of the senators on the conchological committee came in in a passion and
 said:
 “where have you been all day?”
 i observed that, if that was anybody’s affair but my own, i had been
 to a cabinet meeting.
 “to a cabinet meeting? i would like to know what business you had at
 a cabinet meeting?”
 i said i went there to consult—allowing for the sake of argument
 that he was in any wise concerned in the matter. he grew insolent then,
 and ended by saying he had wanted me for three days past to copy a report
 on bomb-shells, egg-shells, clamshells, and i don’t know what all,
 connected with conchology, and nobody had been able to find me.
 this was too much. this was the feather that broke the clerical camel’s
 back. i said, “sir, do you suppose that i am going to work for six
 dollars a day? if that is the idea, let me recommend the senate committee
 on conchology to hire somebody else. i am the slave of no faction! take
 back your degrading commission. give me liberty, or give me death!”
 from that hour i was no longer connected with the government. snubbed by
 the department, snubbed by the cabinet, snubbed at last by the chairman of
 a committee i was endeavoring to adorn, i yielded to persecution, cast far
 from me the perils and seductions of my great office, and forsook my
 bleeding country in the hour of her peril.
 but i had done the state some service, and i sent in my bill:
 the united states of america in account with
 the hon. clerk of the senate committee on conchology,
 dr
 to consultation with secretary of war
 to consultation with secretary of navy
 to consultation with secretary of the treasury
 cabinet consultation
 no charge
 to mileage to and from jerusalem, via egypt,
 algiers, gibraltar, and cadiz,
 , miles, at c. a mile
 to salary as clerk of senate committee
 on conchology, six days, at $ per day
  total
 —[territorial delegates charge mileage both ways, although they
 never go back when they get here once. why my mileage is denied me is
 more than i can understand.]
 not an item of this bill has been paid, except that trifle of thirty-six
 dollars for clerkship salary. the secretary of the treasury, pursuing me
 to the last, drew his pen through all the other items, and simply marked
 in the margin “not allowed.” so, the dread alternative is
 embraced at last. repudiation has begun! the nation is lost.
 i am done with official life for the present. let those clerks who are
 willing to be imposed on remain. i know numbers of them in the departments
 who are never informed when there is to be a cabinet meeting, whose advice
 is never asked about war, or finance, or commerce, by the heads of the
 nation, any more than if they were not connected with the government, and
 who actually stay in their offices day after day and work! they know their
 importance to the nation, and they unconsciously show it in their bearing,
 and the way they order their sustenance at the restaurant—but they
 work. i know one who has to paste all sorts of little scraps from the
 newspapers into a scrapbook—sometimes as many as eight or ten scraps
 a day. he doesn’t do it well, but he does it as well as he can. it
 is very fatiguing. it is exhausting to the intellect. yet he only gets
 eighteen hundred dollars a year. with a brain like his, that young man
 could amass thousands and thousands of dollars in some other pursuit, if
 he chose to do it. but no—his heart is with his country, and he will
 serve her as long as she has got a scrapbook left. and i know clerks that
 don’t know how to write very well, but such knowledge as they
 possess they nobly lay at the feet of their country, and toil on and
 suffer for twenty-five hundred dollars a year. what they write has to be
 written over again by other clerks sometimes; but when a man has done his
 best for his country, should his country complain? then there are clerks
 that have no clerkships, and are waiting, and waiting, and waiting for a
 vacancy—waiting patiently for a chance to help their country out—and
 while they are waiting, they only get barely two thousand dollars a year
 for it. it is sad—it is very, very sad. when a member of congress
 has a friend who is gifted, but has no employment wherein his great powers
 may be brought to bear, he confers him upon his country, and gives him a
 clerkship in a department. and there that man has to slave his life out,
 fighting documents for the benefit of a nation that never thinks of him,
 never sympathizes with him—and all for two thousand or three
 thousand dollars a year. when i shall have completed my list of all the
 clerks in the several departments, with my statement of what they have to
 do, and what they get for it, you will see that there are not half enough
 clerks, and that what there are do not get half enough pay.
 the following i find in a sandwich island paper which some friend has sent
 me from that tranquil far-off retreat. the coincidence between my own
 experience and that here set down by the late mr. benton is so remarkable
 that i cannot forbear publishing and commenting upon the paragraph. the
 sandwich island paper says:
 how touching is this tribute of the late hon. t. h. benton to his mother’s
 influence:—‘my mother asked me never to use tobacco; i have
 never touched it from that time to the present day. she asked me not to
 gamble, and i have never gambled. i cannot tell who is losing in games
 that are being played. she admonished me, too, against liquor-drinking,
 and whatever capacity for endurance i have at present, and whatever
 usefulness i may have attained through life, i attribute to having
 complied with her pious and correct wishes. when i was seven years of age
 she asked me not to drink, and then i made a resolution of total
 abstinence; and that i have adhered to it through all time i owe to my
 mother.’
 i never saw anything so curious. it is almost an exact epitome of my own
 moral career—after simply substituting a grandmother for a mother.
 how well i remember my grandmother’s asking me not to use tobacco,
 good old soul! she said, “you’re at it again, are you, you
 whelp? now don’t ever let me catch you chewing tobacco before
 breakfast again, or i lay i’ll blacksnake you within an inch of your
 life!” i have never touched it at that hour of the morning from that
 time to the present day.
 she asked me not to gamble. she whispered and said, “put up those
 wicked cards this minute!—two pair and a jack, you numskull, and the
 other fellow’s got a flush!”
 i never have gambled from that day to this—never once—without
 a “cold deck” in my pocket. i cannot even tell who is going to
 lose in games that are being played unless i deal myself.
 when i was two years of age she asked me not to drink, and then i made a
 resolution of total abstinence. that i have adhered to it and enjoyed the
 beneficent effects of it through all time, i owe to my grandmother. i have
 never drunk a drop from that day to this of any kind of water.
 if you get into conversation with a stranger in honolulu, and experience
 that natural desire to know what sort of ground you are treading on by
 finding out what manner of man your stranger is, strike out boldly and
 address him as “captain.” watch him narrowly, and if you see
 by his countenance that you are on the wrong track, ask him where he
 preaches. it is a safe bet that he is either a missionary or captain of a
 whaler. i became personally acquainted with seventy-two captains and
 ninety-six missionaries. the captains and ministers form one-half of the
 population; the third fourth is composed of common kanakas and mercantile
 foreigners and their families; and the final fourth is made up of high
 officers of the hawaiian government. and there are just about cats enough
 for three apiece all around.
 a solemn stranger met me in the suburbs one day, and said:
 “good morning, your reverence. preach in the stone church yonder, no
 doubt!”
 “no, i don’t. i’m not a preacher.”
 “really, i beg your pardon, captain. i trust you had a good season.
 how much oil—”
 “oil! why, what do you take me for? i’m not a whaler.”
 “oh! i beg a thousand pardons, your excellency. major-general in the
 household troops, no doubt? minister of the interior, likely? secretary of
 war? first gentleman of the bedchamber? commissioner of the royal—”
 “stuff, man! i’m not connected in any way with the government.”
 “bless my life! then who the mischief are you? what the mischief are
 you? and how the mischief did you get here? and where in thunder did you
 come from?”
 “i’m only a private personage—an unassuming stranger—lately
 arrived from america.”
 “no! not a missionary! not a whaler! not a member of his majesty’s
 government! not even a secretary of the navy! ah! heaven! it is too
 blissful to be true, alas! i do but dream. and yet that noble, honest
 countenance—those oblique, ingenuous eyes—that massive head,
 incapable of—of anything; your hand; give me your hand, bright waif.
 excuse these tears. for sixteen weary years i have yearned for a moment
 like this, and—”
 here his feelings were too much for him, and he swooned away. i pitied
 this poor creature from the bottom of my heart. i was deeply moved. i shed
 a few tears on him, and kissed him for his mother. i then took what small
 change he had, and “shoved.”
 [written about .]
 i had never seen him before. he brought letters of introduction from
 mutual friends in san francisco, and by invitation i breakfasted with him.
 it was almost religion, there in the silver-mines, to precede such a meal
 with whisky cocktails. artemus, with the true cosmopolitan instinct,
 always deferred to the customs of the country he was in, and so he ordered
 three of those abominations. hingston was present. i said i would rather
 not drink a whisky cocktail. i said it would go right to my head, and
 confuse me so that i would be in a helpless tangle in ten minutes. i did
 not want to act like a lunatic before strangers. but artemus gently
 insisted, and i drank the treasonable mixture under protest, and felt all
 the time that i was doing a thing i might be sorry for. in a minute or two
 i began to imagine that my ideas were clouded. i waited in great anxiety
 for the conversation to open, with a sort of vague hope that my
 understanding would prove clear, after all, and my misgivings groundless.
 artemus dropped an unimportant remark or two, and then assumed a look of
 superhuman earnestness, and made the following astounding speech. he said:
 “now there is one thing i ought to ask you about before i forget it.
 you have been here in silver land—here in nevada—two or three
 years, and, of course, your position on the daily press has made it
 necessary for you to go down in the mines and examine them carefully in
 detail, and therefore you know all about the silver-mining business. now
 what i want to get at is—is, well, the way the deposits of ore are
 made, you know. for instance. now, as i understand it, the vein which
 contains the silver is sandwiched in between casings of granite, and runs
 along the ground, and sticks up like a curb stone. well, take a vein forty
 feet thick, for example, or eighty, for that matter, or even a hundred—say
 you go down on it with a shaft, straight down, you know, or with what you
 call ‘incline’ maybe you go down five hundred feet, or maybe
 you don’t go down but two hundred—anyway, you go down, and all
 the time this vein grows narrower, when the casings come nearer or
 approach each other, you may say—that is, when they do approach,
 which, of course, they do not always do, particularly in cases where the
 nature of the formation is such that they stand apart wider than they
 otherwise would, and which geology has failed to account for, although
 everything in that science goes to prove that, all things being equal, it
 would if it did not, or would not certainly if it did, and then, of
 course, they are. do not you think it is?”
 i said to myself:
 “now i just knew how it would be—that whisky cocktail has done
 the business for me; i don’t understand any more than a clam.”
 and then i said aloud:
 “i—i—that is—if you don’t mind, would you—would
 you say that over again? i ought—”
 “oh, certainly, certainly! you see i am very unfamiliar with the
 subject, and perhaps i don’t present my case clearly, but i—”
 “no, no-no, no-you state it plain enough, but that cocktail has
 muddled me a little. but i will—no, i do understand for that matter;
 but i would get the hang of it all the better if you went over it again—and
 i’ll pay better attention this time.”
 he said, “why, what i was after was this.”
 [here he became even more fearfully impressive than ever, and emphasized
 each particular point by checking it off on his finger-ends.]
 “this vein, or lode, or ledge, or whatever you call it, runs along
 between two layers of granite, just the same as if it were a sandwich.
 very well. now suppose you go down on that, say a thousand feet, or maybe
 twelve hundred (it don’t really matter) before you drift, and then
 you start your drifts, some of them across the ledge, and others along the
 length of it, where the sulphurets—i believe they call them
 sulphurets, though why they should, considering that, so far as i can see,
 the main dependence of a miner does not so lie, as some suppose, but in
 which it cannot be successfully maintained, wherein the same should not
 continue, while part and parcel of the same ore not committed to either in
 the sense referred to, whereas, under different circumstances, the most
 inexperienced among us could not detect it if it were, or might overlook
 it if it did, or scorn the very idea of such a thing, even though it were
 palpably demonstrated as such. am i not right?”
 i said, sorrowfully: “i feel ashamed of myself, mr. ward. i know i
 ought to understand you perfectly well, but you see that treacherous
 whisky cocktail has got into my head, and now i cannot understand even the
 simplest proposition. i told you how it would be.”
 “oh, don’t mind it, don’t mind it; the fault was my own,
 no doubt—though i did think it clear enough for—”
 “don’t say a word. clear! why, you stated it as clear as the
 sun to anybody but an abject idiot; but it’s that confounded
 cocktail that has played the mischief.”
 “no; now don’t say that. i’ll begin it all over again,
 and—”
 “don’t now—for goodness’ sake, don’t do
 anything of the kind, because i tell you my head is in such a condition
 that i don’t believe i could understand the most trifling question a
 man could ask me.
 “now don’t you be afraid. i’ll put it so plain this time
 that you can’t help but get the hang of it. we will begin at the
 very beginning.” [leaning far across the table, with determined
 impressiveness wrought upon his every feature, and fingers prepared to
 keep tally of each point enumerated; and i, leaning forward with painful
 interest, resolved to comprehend or perish.] “you know the vein, the
 ledge, the thing that contains the metal, whereby it constitutes the
 medium between all other forces, whether of present or remote agencies, so
 brought to bear in favor of the former against the latter, or the latter
 against the former or all, or both, or compromising the relative
 differences existing within the radius whence culminate the several
 degrees of similarity to which—”
 i said: “oh, hang my wooden head, it ain’t any use!—it
 ain’t any use to try—i can’t understand anything. the
 plainer you get it the more i can’t get the hang of it.”
 i heard a suspicious noise behind me, and turned in time to see hingston
 dodging behind a newspaper, and quaking with a gentle ecstasy of laughter.
 i looked at ward again, and he had thrown off his dread solemnity and was
 laughing also. then i saw that i had been sold—that i had been made
 a victim of a swindle in the way of a string of plausibly worded sentences
 that didn’t mean anything under the sun. artemus ward was one of the
 best fellows in the world, and one of the most companionable. it has been
 said that he was not fluent in conversation, but, with the above
 experience in my mind, i differ.
 [written about .]
 i visited st. louis lately, and on my way west, after changing cars at
 terre haute, indiana, a mild, benevolent-looking gentleman of about
 forty-five, or maybe fifty, came in at one of the way-stations and sat
 down beside me. we talked together pleasantly on various subjects for an
 hour, perhaps, and i found him exceedingly intelligent and entertaining.
 when he learned that i was from washington, he immediately began to ask
 questions about various public men, and about congressional affairs; and i
 saw very shortly that i was conversing with a man who was perfectly
 familiar with the ins and outs of political life at the capital, even to
 the ways and manners, and customs of procedure of senators and
 representatives in the chambers of the national legislature. presently two
 men halted near us for a single moment, and one said to the other:
 “harris, if you’ll do that for me, i’ll never forget
 you, my boy.”
 my new comrade’s eye lighted pleasantly. the words had touched upon
 a happy memory, i thought. then his face settled into thoughtfulness—almost
 into gloom. he turned to me and said,
 “let me tell you a story; let me give you a secret chapter of my
 life—a chapter that has never been referred to by me since its
 events transpired. listen patiently, and promise that you will not
 interrupt me.”
 i said i would not, and he related the following strange adventure,
 speaking sometimes with animation, sometimes with melancholy, but always
 with feeling and earnestness.
 “on the th of december, , i started from st. louis on the
 evening train bound for chicago. there were only twenty-four passengers,
 all told. there were no ladies and no children. we were in excellent
 spirits, and pleasant acquaintanceships were soon formed. the journey bade
 fair to be a happy one; and no individual in the party, i think, had even
 the vaguest presentiment of the horrors we were soon to undergo.
 “at  p.m. it began to snow hard. shortly after leaving the small
 village of welden, we entered upon that tremendous prairie solitude that
 stretches its leagues on leagues of houseless dreariness far away toward
 the jubilee settlements. the winds, unobstructed by trees or hills, or
 even vagrant rocks, whistled fiercely across the level desert, driving the
 falling snow before it like spray from the crested waves of a stormy sea.
 the snow was deepening fast; and we knew, by the diminished speed of the
 train, that the engine was plowing through it with steadily increasing
 difficulty. indeed, it almost came to a dead halt sometimes, in the midst
 of great drifts that piled themselves like colossal graves across the
 track. conversation began to flag. cheerfulness gave place to grave
 concern. the possibility of being imprisoned in the snow, on the bleak
 prairie, fifty miles from any house, presented itself to every mind, and
 extended its depressing influence over every spirit.
 “at two o’clock in the morning i was aroused out of an uneasy
 slumber by the ceasing of all motion about me. the appalling truth flashed
 upon me instantly—we were captives in a snow-drift! ‘all hands
 to the rescue!’ every man sprang to obey. out into the wild night,
 the pitchy darkness, the billowy snow, the driving storm, every soul
 leaped, with the consciousness that a moment lost now might bring
 destruction to us all. shovels, hands, boards—anything, everything
 that could displace snow, was brought into instant requisition. it was a
 weird picture, that small company of frantic men fighting the banking
 snows, half in the blackest shadow and half in the angry light of the
 locomotive’s reflector.
 “one short hour sufficed to prove the utter uselessness of our
 efforts. the storm barricaded the track with a dozen drifts while we dug
 one away. and worse than this, it was discovered that the last grand
 charge the engine had made upon the enemy had broken the fore-and-aft
 shaft of the driving-wheel! with a free track before us we should still
 have been helpless. we entered the car wearied with labor, and very
 sorrowful. we gathered about the stoves, and gravely canvassed our
 situation. we had no provisions whatever—in this lay our chief
 distress. we could not freeze, for there was a good supply of wood in the
 tender. this was our only comfort. the discussion ended at last in
 accepting the disheartening decision of the conductor, viz., that it would
 be death for any man to attempt to travel fifty miles on foot through snow
 like that. we could not send for help, and even if we could it would not
 come. we must submit, and await, as patiently as we might, succor or
 starvation! i think the stoutest heart there felt a momentary chill when
 those words were uttered.
 “within the hour conversation subsided to a low murmur here and
 there about the car, caught fitfully between the rising and falling of the
 blast; the lamps grew dim; and the majority of the castaways settled
 themselves among the flickering shadows to think—to forget the
 present, if they could—to sleep, if they might.
 “the eternal night—it surely seemed eternal to us—wore
 its lagging hours away at last, and the cold gray dawn broke in the east.
 as the light grew stronger the passengers began to stir and give signs of
 life, one after another, and each in turn pushed his slouched hat up from
 his forehead, stretched his stiffened limbs, and glanced out of the
 windows upon the cheerless prospect. it was cheer less, indeed!—not
 a living thing visible anywhere, not a human habitation; nothing but a
 vast white desert; uplifted sheets of snow drifting hither and thither
 before the wind—a world of eddying flakes shutting out the firmament
 above.
 “all day we moped about the cars, saying little, thinking much.
 another lingering dreary night—and hunger.
 “another dawning—another day of silence, sadness, wasting
 hunger, hopeless watching for succor that could not come. a night of
 restless slumber, filled with dreams of feasting—wakings distressed
 with the gnawings of hunger.
 “the fourth day came and went—and the fifth! five days of
 dreadful imprisonment! a savage hunger looked out at every eye. there was
 in it a sign of awful import—the foreshadowing of a something that
 was vaguely shaping itself in every heart—a something which no
 tongue dared yet to frame into words.
 “the sixth day passed—the seventh dawned upon as gaunt and
 haggard and hopeless a company of men as ever stood in the shadow of
 death. it must out now! that thing which had been growing up in every
 heart was ready to leap from every lip at last! nature had been taxed to
 the utmost—she must yield. richard h. gaston of minnesota, tall,
 cadaverous, and pale, rose up. all knew what was coming. all prepared—every
 emotion, every semblance of excitement—was smothered—only a
 calm, thoughtful seriousness appeared in the eyes that were lately so
 wild.
 “‘gentlemen: it cannot be delayed longer! the time is at hand!
 we must determine which of us shall die to furnish food for the rest!’
 “mr. john j. williams of illinois rose and said: ‘gentlemen—i
 nominate the rev. james sawyer of tennessee.’
 “mr. wm. r. adams of indiana said: ‘i nominate mr. daniel
 slote of new york.’
 “mr. charles j. langdon: ‘i nominate mr. samuel a. bowen of
 st. louis.’
 “mr. slote: ‘gentlemen—i desire to decline in favor of
 mr. john a. van nostrand, jun., of new jersey.’
 “mr. gaston: ‘if there be no objection, the gentleman’s
 desire will be acceded to.’
 “mr. van nostrand objecting, the resignation of mr. slote was
 rejected. the resignations of messrs. sawyer and bowen were also offered,
 and refused upon the same grounds.
 “mr. a. l. bascom of ohio: ‘i move that the nominations now
 close, and that the house proceed to an election by ballot.’
 “mr. sawyer: ‘gentlemen—i protest earnestly against
 these proceedings. they are, in every way, irregular and unbecoming. i
 must beg to move that they be dropped at once, and that we elect a
 chairman of the meeting and proper officers to assist him, and then we can
 go on with the business before us understandingly.’
 “mr. bell of iowa: ‘gentlemen—i object. this is no time
 to stand upon forms and ceremonious observances. for more than seven days
 we have been without food. every moment we lose in idle discussion
 increases our distress. i am satisfied with the nominations that have been
 made—every gentleman present is, i believe—and i, for one, do
 not see why we should not proceed at once to elect one or more of them. i
 wish to offer a resolution—’
 “mr. gaston: ‘it would be objected to, and have to lie over
 one day under the rules, thus bringing about the very delay you wish to
 avoid. the gentleman from new jersey—’
 “mr. van nostrand: ‘gentlemen—i am a stranger among you;
 i have not sought the distinction that has been conferred upon me, and i
 feel a delicacy—’
 “mr. morgan of alabama (interrupting): ‘i move the previous
 question.’
 “the motion was carried, and further debate shut off, of course. the
 motion to elect officers was passed, and under it mr. gaston was chosen
 chairman, mr. blake, secretary, messrs. holcomb, dyer, and baldwin a
 committee on nominations, and mr. r. m. howland, purveyor, to assist the
 committee in making selections.
 “a recess of half an hour was then taken, and some little caucusing
 followed. at the sound of the gavel the meeting reassembled, and the
 committee reported in favor of messrs. george ferguson of kentucky, lucien
 herrman of louisiana, and w. messick of colorado as candidates. the report
 was accepted.
 “mr. rogers of missouri: ‘mr. president—the report being
 properly before the house now, i move to amend it by substituting for the
 name of mr. herrman that of mr. lucius harris of st. louis, who is well
 and honorably known to us all. i do not wish to be understood as casting
 the least reflection upon the high character and standing of the gentleman
 from louisiana—far from it. i respect and esteem him as much as any
 gentleman here present possibly can; but none of us can be blind to the
 fact that he has lost more flesh during the week that we have lain here
 than any among us—none of us can be blind to the fact that the
 committee has been derelict in its duty, either through negligence or a
 graver fault, in thus offering for our suffrages a gentleman who, however
 pure his own motives may be, has really less nutriment in him—’
 “the chair: ‘the gentleman from missouri will take his seat.
 the chair cannot allow the integrity of the committee to be questioned
 save by the regular course, under the rules. what action will the house
 take upon the gentleman’s motion?’
 “mr. halliday of virginia: ‘i move to further amend the report
 by substituting mr. harvey davis of oregon for mr. messick. it may be
 urged by gentlemen that the hardships and privations of a frontier life
 have rendered mr. davis tough; but, gentlemen, is this a time to cavil at
 toughness? is this a time to be fastidious concerning trifles? is this a
 time to dispute about matters of paltry significance? no, gentlemen, bulk
 is what we desire—substance, weight, bulk—these are the
 supreme requisites now—not talent, not genius, not education. i
 insist upon my motion.’
 “mr. morgan (excitedly): ‘mr. chairman—i do most
 strenuously object to this amendment. the gentleman from oregon is old,
 and furthermore is bulky only in bone—not in flesh. i ask the
 gentleman from virginia if it is soup we want instead of solid sustenance?
 if he would delude us with shadows? if he would mock our suffering with an
 oregonian specter? i ask him if he can look upon the anxious faces around
 him, if he can gaze into our sad eyes, if he can listen to the beating of
 our expectant hearts, and still thrust this famine-stricken fraud upon us?
 i ask him if he can think of our desolate state, of our past sorrows, of
 our dark future, and still unpityingly foist upon us this wreck, this
 ruin, this tottering swindle, this gnarled and blighted and sapless
 vagabond from oregon’s inhospitable shores? never!’
 [applause.]
 “the amendment was put to vote, after a fiery debate, and lost. mr.
 harris was substituted on the first amendment. the balloting then began.
 five ballots were held without a choice. on the sixth, mr. harris was
 elected, all voting for him but himself. it was then moved that his
 election should be ratified by acclamation, which was lost, in consequence
 of his again voting against himself.
 “mr. radway moved that the house now take up the remaining
 candidates, and go into an election for breakfast. this was carried.
 “on the first ballot there was a tie, half the members favoring one
 candidate on account of his youth, and half favoring the other on account
 of his superior size. the president gave the casting vote for the latter,
 mr. messick. this decision created considerable dissatisfaction among the
 friends of mr. ferguson, the defeated candidate, and there was some talk
 of demanding a new ballot; but in the midst of it a motion to adjourn was
 carried, and the meeting broke up at once.
 “the preparations for supper diverted the attention of the ferguson
 faction from the discussion of their grievance for a long time, and then,
 when they would have taken it up again, the happy announcement that mr.
 harris was ready drove all thought of it to the winds.
 “we improvised tables by propping up the backs of car-seats, and sat
 down with hearts full of gratitude to the finest supper that had blessed
 our vision for seven torturing days. how changed we were from what we had
 been a few short hours before! hopeless, sad-eyed misery, hunger, feverish
 anxiety, desperation, then; thankfulness, serenity, joy too deep for
 utterance now. that i know was the cheeriest hour of my eventful life. the
 winds howled, and blew the snow wildly about our prison house, but they
 were powerless to distress us any more. i liked harris. he might have been
 better done, perhaps, but i am free to say that no man ever agreed with me
 better than harris, or afforded me so large a degree of satisfaction.
 messick was very well, though rather high-flavored, but for genuine
 nutritiousness and delicacy of fiber, give me harris. messick had his good
 points—i will not attempt to deny it, nor do i wish to do it—but
 he was no more fitted for breakfast than a mummy would be, sir—not a
 bit. lean?—why, bless me!—and tough? ah, he was very tough!
 you could not imagine it—you could never imagine anything like it.”
 “do you mean to tell me that—”
 “do not interrupt me, please. after breakfast we elected a man by
 the name of walker, from detroit, for supper. he was very good. i wrote
 his wife so afterward. he was worthy of all praise. i shall always
 remember walker. he was a little rare, but very good. and then the next
 morning we had morgan of alabama for breakfast. he was one of the finest
 men i ever sat down to—handsome, educated, refined, spoke several
 languages fluently—a perfect gentleman—he was a perfect
 gentleman, and singularly juicy. for supper we had that oregon patriarch,
 and he was a fraud, there is no question about it—old, scraggy,
 tough, nobody can picture the reality. i finally said, gentlemen, you can
 do as you like, but i will wait for another election. and grimes of
 illinois said, ‘gentlemen, i will wait also. when you elect a man
 that has something to recommend him, i shall be glad to join you again.’
 it soon became evident that there was general dissatisfaction with davis
 of oregon, and so, to preserve the good will that had prevailed so
 pleasantly since we had had harris, an election was called, and the result
 of it was that baker of georgia was chosen. he was splendid! well, well—after
 that we had doolittle, and hawkins, and mcelroy (there was some complaint
 about mcelroy, because he was uncommonly short and thin), and penrod, and
 two smiths, and bailey (bailey had a wooden leg, which was clear loss, but
 he was otherwise good), and an indian boy, and an organ-grinder, and a
 gentleman by the name of buckminster—a poor stick of a vagabond that
 wasn’t any good for company and no account for breakfast. we were
 glad we got him elected before relief came.”
 “and so the blessed relief did come at last?”
 “yes, it came one bright, sunny morning, just after election. john
 murphy was the choice, and there never was a better, i am willing to
 testify; but john murphy came home with us, in the train that came to
 succor us, and lived to marry the widow harris—”
 “relict of—”
 “relict of our first choice. he married her, and is happy and
 respected and prosperous yet. ah, it was like a novel, sir—it was
 like a romance. this is my stopping-place, sir; i must bid you goodby. any
 time that you can make it convenient to tarry a day or two with me, i
 shall be glad to have you. i like you, sir; i have conceived an affection
 for you. i could like you as well as i liked harris himself, sir. good
 day, sir, and a pleasant journey.”
 he was gone. i never felt so stunned, so distressed, so bewildered in my
 life. but in my soul i was glad he was gone. with all his gentleness of
 manner and his soft voice, i shuddered whenever he turned his hungry eye
 upon me; and when i heard that i had achieved his perilous affection, and
 that i stood almost with the late harris in his esteem, my heart fairly
 stood still!
 i was bewildered beyond description. i did not doubt his word; i could not
 question a single item in a statement so stamped with the earnestness of
 truth as his; but its dreadful details overpowered me, and threw my
 thoughts into hopeless confusion. i saw the conductor looking at me. i
 said, “who is that man?”
 “he was a member of congress once, and a good one. but he got caught
 in a snow-drift in the cars, and like to have been starved to death. he
 got so frost-bitten and frozen up generally, and used up for want of
 something to eat, that he was sick and out of his head two or three months
 afterward. he is all right now, only he is a monomaniac, and when he gets
 on that old subject he never stops till he has eat up that whole car-load
 of people he talks about. he would have finished the crowd by this time,
 only he had to get out here. he has got their names as pat as a b c. when
 he gets them all eat up but himself, he always says: ‘then the hour
 for the usual election for breakfast having arrived, and there being no
 opposition, i was duly elected, after which, there being no objections
 offered, i resigned. thus i am here.’”
 i felt inexpressibly relieved to know that i had only been listening to
 the harmless vagaries of a madman instead of the genuine experiences of a
 bloodthirsty cannibal.
 [written about .]
 being the only true and reliable account ever published; taken from the
 roman “daily evening fasces,” of the date of that tremendous
 occurrence.
 nothing in the world affords a newspaper reporter so much satisfaction as
 gathering up the details of a bloody and mysterious murder and writing
 them up with aggravating circumstantiality. he takes a living delight in
 this labor of love—for such it is to him, especially if he knows
 that all the other papers have gone to press, and his will be the only one
 that will contain the dreadful intelligence. a feeling of regret has often
 come over me that i was not reporting in rome when caesar was killed—reporting
 on an evening paper, and the only one in the city, and getting at least
 twelve hours ahead of the morning-paper boys with this most magnificent
 “item” that ever fell to the lot of the craft. other events
 have happened as startling as this, but none that possessed so peculiarly
 all the characteristics of the favorite “item” of the present
 day, magnified into grandeur and sublimity by the high rank, fame, and
 social and political standing of the actors in it.
 however, as i was not permitted to report caesar’s assassination in
 the regular way, it has at least afforded me rare satisfaction to
 translate the following able account of it from the original latin of the
 roman daily evening fasces of that date—second edition:
 our usually quiet city of rome was thrown into a state of wild
 excitement yesterday by the occurrence of one of those bloody affrays
 which sicken the heart and fill the soul with fear, while they inspire
 all thinking men with forebodings for the future of a city where human
 life is held so cheaply and the gravest laws are so openly set at
 defiance. as the result of that affray, it is our painful duty, as
 public journalists, to record the death of one of our most esteemed
 citizens—a man whose name is known wherever this paper circulates,
 and whose fame it has been our pleasure and our privilege to extend, and
 also to protect from the tongue of slander and falsehood, to the best of
 our poor ability. we refer to mr. j. caesar, the emperor-elect.
 the facts of the case, as nearly as our reporter could determine
 them from the conflicting statements of eye-witnesses, were about as
 follows:—the affair was an election row, of course. nine-tenths of
 the ghastly butcheries that disgrace the city nowadays grow out of the
 bickerings and jealousies and animosities engendered by these accursed
 elections. rome would be the gainer by it if her very constables were
 elected to serve a century; for in our experience we have never even
 been able to choose a dog-pelter without celebrating the event with a
 dozen knockdowns and a general cramming of the station-house with
 drunken vagabonds overnight. it is said that when the immense majority
 for caesar at the polls in the market was declared the other day, and
 the crown was offered to that gentleman, even his amazing unselfishness
 in refusing it three times was not sufficient to save him from the
 whispered insults of such men as casca, of the tenth ward, and other
 hirelings of the disappointed candidate, hailing mostly from the
 eleventh and thirteenth and other outside districts, who were overheard
 speaking ironically and contemptuously of mr. caesar’s conduct
 upon that occasion. we are further informed that there are
 many among us who think they are justified in believing that the
 assassination of julius caesar was a put-up thing—a cut-and-dried
 arrangement, hatched by marcus brutus and a lot of his hired roughs, and
 carried out only too faithfully according to the program. whether there
 be good grounds for this suspicion or not, we leave to the people to
 judge for themselves, only asking that they will read the following
 account of the sad occurrence carefully and dispassionately before they
 render that judgment. the senate was already in session, and
 caesar was coming down the street toward the capitol, conversing with
 some personal friends, and followed, as usual, by a large number of
 citizens. just as he was passing in front of demosthenes and thucydides’
 drug store, he was observing casually to a gentleman, who, our informant
 thinks, is a fortune-teller, that the ides of march were come. the reply
 was, “yes, they are come, but not gone yet.” at this moment
 artexnidorus stepped up and passed the time of day, and asked caesar to
 read a schedule or a tract or something of the kind, which he had
 brought for his perusal. mr. decius brutus also said something about an
 “humble suit” which he wanted read. artexnidorus begged that
 attention might be paid to his first, because it was of personal
 consequence to caesar. the latter replied that what concerned himself
 should be read last, or words to that effect. artemidorus begged and
 beseeched him to read the paper instantly!—[mark that: it is
 hinted by william shakespeare, who saw the beginning and the end of the
 unfortunate affray, that this “schedule” was simply a note
 discovering to caesar that a plot was brewing to take his life.]—however,
 caesar shook him off, and refused to read any petition in the street. he
 then entered the capitol, and the crowd followed him. about
 this time the following conversation was overheard, and we consider
 that, taken in connection with the events which succeeded it, it bears
 an appalling significance: mr. papilius lena remarked to george w.
 cassius (commonly known as the “nobby boy of the third ward”),
 a bruiser in the pay of the opposition, that he hoped his enterprise
 to-day might thrive; and when cassius asked “what enterprise?”
 he only closed his left eye temporarily and said with simulated
 indifference, “fare you well,” and sauntered toward caesar.
 marcus brutus, who is suspected of being the ringleader of the band that
 killed caesar, asked what it was that lena had said. cassius told him,
 and added in a low tone, “i fear our purpose is discovered."
 brutus told his wretched accomplice to keep an eye on lena, and a
 moment after cassius urged that lean and hungry vagrant, casca, whose
 reputation here is none of the best, to be sudden, for he feared
 prevention. he then turned to brutus, apparently much excited, and asked
 what should be done, and swore that either he or caesar would never turn
 back—he would kill himself first. at this time caesar was talking
 to some of the back-country members about the approaching fall
 elections, and paying little attention to what was going on around him.
 billy trebonius got into conversation with the people’s friend and
 caesar’s—mark antony—and under some pretense or other
 got him away, and brutus, decius, casca, cinna, metellus cimber, and
 others of the gang of infamous desperadoes that infest rome at present,
 closed around the doomed caesar. then metellus cimber knelt down and
 begged that his brother might be recalled from banishment, but caesar
 rebuked him for his fawning conduct, and refused to grant his petition.
 immediately, at cimber’s request, first brutus and then cassias
 begged for the return of the banished publius; but caesar still refused.
 he said he could not be moved; that he was as fixed as the north star,
 and proceeded to speak in the most complimentary terms of the firmness
 of that star and its steady character. then he said he was like it, and
 he believed he was the only man in the country that was; therefore,
 since he was “constant” that cimber should be banished, he
 was also “constant” that he should stay banished, and he’d
 be hanged if he didn’t keep him so! 
 instantly seizing upon this shallow
 pretext for a fight, casca sprang at caesar and struck him with a dirk,
 caesar grabbing him by the arm with his right hand, and launching a blow
 straight from the shoulder with his left, that sent the reptile bleeding
 to the earth. he then backed up against pompey’s statue, and
 squared himself to receive his assailants. cassias and cimber and cinna
 rushed upon him with their daggers drawn, and the former succeeded in
 inflicting a wound upon his body; but before he could strike again, and
 before either of the others could strike at all, caesar stretched the
 three miscreants at his feet with as many blows of his powerful fist. by
 this time the senate was in an indescribable uproar; the throng of
 citizens in the lobbies had blockaded the doors in their frantic efforts
 to escape from the building, the sergeant-at-arms and his assistants
 were struggling with the assassins, venerable senators had cast aside
 their encumbering robes, and were leaping over benches and flying down
 the aisles in wild confusion toward the shelter of the committee-rooms,
 and a thousand voices were shouting “po-lice! po-lice!” in
 discordant tones that rose above the frightful din like shrieking winds
 above the roaring of a tempest. and amid it all great caesar stood with
 his back against the statue, like a lion at bay, and fought his
 assailants weaponless and hand to hand, with the defiant bearing and the
 unwavering courage which he had shown before on many a bloody field.
 billy trebonius and caius legarius struck him with their daggers and
 fell, as their brother-conspirators before them had fallen. but at last,
 when caesar saw his old friend brutus step forward armed with a
 murderous knife, it is said he seemed utterly overpowered with grief and
 amazement, and, dropping his invincible left arm by his side, he hid his
 face in the folds of his mantle and received the treacherous blow
 without an effort to stay the hand that gave it. he only said, “et
 tu, brute?” and fell lifeless on the marble pavement. 
 we learn that the coat deceased had on when he was killed was the same
 one he wore in his tent on the afternoon of the day he overcame the
 nervii, and that when it was removed from the corpse it was found to be
 cut and gashed in no less than seven different places. there was nothing
 in the pockets. it will be exhibited at the coroner’s inquest, and
 will be damning proof of the fact of the killing. these latter facts may
 be relied on, as we get them from mark antony, whose position enables
 him to learn every item of news connected with the one subject of
 absorbing interest of-to-day. 
 later:—while the coroner was
 summoning a jury, mark antony and other friends of the late caesar got
 hold of the body, and lugged it off to the forum, and at last accounts
 antony and brutus were making speeches over it and raising such a row
 among the people that, as we go to press, the chief of police is
 satisfied there is going to be a riot, and is taking measures
 accordingly.
 one of the saddest things that ever came under my notice (said the banker’s
 clerk) was there in corning during the war. dan murphy enlisted as a
 private, and fought very bravely. the boys all liked him, and when a wound
 by and by weakened him down till carrying a musket was too heavy work for
 him, they clubbed together and fixed him up as a sutler. he made money
 then, and sent it always to his wife to bank for him. she was a washer and
 ironer, and knew enough by hard experience to keep money when she got it.
 she didn’t waste a penny.
 on the contrary, she began to get miserly as her bank-account grew. she
 grieved to part with a cent, poor creature, for twice in her hard-working
 life she had known what it was to be hungry, cold, friendless, sick, and
 without a dollar in the world, and she had a haunting dread of suffering
 so again. well, at last dan died; and the boys, in testimony of their
 esteem and respect for him, telegraphed to mrs. murphy to know if she
 would like to have him embalmed and sent home, when you know the usual
 custom was to dump a poor devil like him into a shallow hole, and then
 inform his friends what had become of him. mrs. murphy jumped to the
 conclusion that it would only cost two or three dollars to embalm her dead
 husband, and so she telegraphed “yes.” it was at the “wake”
 that the bill for embalming arrived and was presented to the widow.
 she uttered a wild, sad wail that pierced every heart, and said, “sivinty-foive
 dollars for stooffin’ dan, blister their sowls! did thim divils
 suppose i was goin’ to stairt a museim, that i’d be dalin’
 in such expinsive curiassities!”
 the banker’s clerk said there was not a dry eye in the house.
 [written about .]
 “there was a fellow traveling around in that country,” said
 mr. nickerson, “with a moral-religious show—a sort of
 scriptural panorama—and he hired a wooden-headed old slab to play
 the piano for him. after the first night’s performance the showman
 says:
 “‘my friend, you seem to know pretty much all the tunes there
 are, and you worry along first rate. but then, didn’t you notice
 that sometimes last night the piece you happened to be playing was a
 little rough on the proprieties, so to speak—didn’t seem to
 jibe with the general gait of the picture that was passing at the time, as
 it were—was a little foreign to the subject, you know—as if
 you didn’t either trump or follow suit, you understand?’
 “‘well, no,’ the fellow said; ‘he hadn’t
 noticed, but it might be; he had played along just as it came handy.’
 “so they put it up that the simple old dummy was to keep his eye on
 the panorama after that, and as soon as a stunning picture was reeled out
 he was to fit it to a dot with a piece of music that would help the
 audience to get the idea of the subject, and warm them up like a
 camp-meeting revival. that sort of thing would corral their sympathies,
 the showman said.
 “there was a big audience that night—mostly middle-aged and
 old people who belong to the church, and took a strong interest in bible
 matters, and the balance were pretty much young bucks and heifers—they
 always come out strong on panoramas, you know, because it gives them a
 chance to taste one another’s complexions in the dark.
 “well, the showman began to swell himself up for his lecture, and
 the old mud-jobber tackled the piano and ran his fingers up and down once
 or twice to see that she was all right, and the fellows behind the curtain
 commenced to grind out the panorama. the showman balanced his weight on
 his right foot, and propped his hands over his hips, and flung his eyes
 over his shoulder at the scenery, and said:
 “‘ladies and gentlemen, the painting now before you
 illustrates the beautiful and touching parable of the prodigal son.
 observe the happy expression just breaking over the features of the poor,
 suffering youth—so worn and weary with his long march; note also the
 ecstasy beaming from the uplifted countenance of the aged father, and the
 joy that sparkles in the eyes of the excited group of youths and maidens,
 and seems ready to burst into the welcoming chorus from their lips. the
 lesson, my friends, is as solemn and instructive as the story is tender
 and beautiful.’
 “the mud-jobber was all ready, and when the second speech was
 finished, struck up:
 “oh, we’ll all get blind drunk when johnny comes
 marching home!
 “some of the people giggled, and some groaned a little. the showman
 couldn’t say a word; he looked at the pianist sharp, but he was all
 lovely and serene—he didn’t know there was anything out of
 gear.
 “the panorama moved on, and the showman drummed up his grit and
 started in fresh.
 “‘ladies and gentlemen, the fine picture now unfolding itself
 to your gaze exhibits one of the most notable events in bible history—our
 saviour and his disciples upon the sea of galilee. how grand, how
 awe-inspiring are the reflections which the subject invokes! what
 sublimity of faith is revealed to us in this lesson from the sacred
 writings! the saviour rebukes the angry waves, and walks securely upon the
 bosom of the deep!’
 “all around the house they were whispering, ‘oh, how lovely,
 how beautiful!’ and the orchestra let himself out again:
 “a life on the ocean wave, and a home on the rolling deep!
 “there was a good deal of honest snickering turned on this time, and
 considerable groaning, and one or two old deacons got up and went out. the
 showman grated his teeth, and cursed the piano man to himself; but the
 fellow sat there like a knot on a log, and seemed to think he was doing
 first-rate.
 “after things got quiet the showman thought he would make one more
 stagger at it, anyway, though his confidence was beginning to get mighty
 shaky. the supes started the panorama grinding along again, and he says:
 “‘ladies and gentlemen, this exquisite painting represents the
 raising of lazarus from the dead by our saviour. the subject has been
 handled with marvelous skill by the artist, and such touching sweetness
 and tenderness of expression has he thrown into it that i have known
 peculiarly sensitive persons to be even affected to tears by looking at
 it. observe the half-confused, half-inquiring look upon the countenance of
 the awakened lazarus. observe, also, the attitude and expression of the
 saviour, who takes him gently by the sleeve of his shroud with one hand,
 while he points with the other toward the distant city.’
 “before anybody could get off an opinion in the case the innocent
 old ass at the piano struck up:
 “come rise up, william ri-i-ley, and go along with me!
 “whe-ew! all the solemn old flats got up in a huff to go, and
 everybody else laughed till the windows rattled.
 “the showman went down and grabbed the orchestra and shook him up
 and says:
 “‘that lets you out, you know, you chowder-headed old clam. go
 to the doorkeeper and get your money, and cut your stick—vamose the
 ranch! ladies and gentlemen, circumstances over which i have no control
