one or other of these causes preponderates.
in the future pages of this work, then, whenever
i speak of the rent of land, i wish to
be understood as speaking of that compensation,
which is paid to the owner of land for
the use of its original and indestructible
powers.
on the first settling of a country, in which
there is an abundance of rich and fertile land,
a very small proportion of which is required
to be cultivated for the support of the actual
population, or indeed can be cultivated with
the capital which the population can command,
there will be no rent; for no one
would pay for the use of land, when there
was an abundant quantity not yet appropriated,
and therefore at the disposal of
whosoever might choose to cultivate it.
on the common principles of supply and
demand, no rent could be paid for such land,
for the reason stated, why nothing is given
for the use of air and water, or for any other
of the gifts of nature which exist in boundless
quantity. with a given quantity of materials,
and with the assistance of the pressure
of the atmosphere, and the elasticity of steam,
engines may perform work, and abridge
human labour to a very great extent; but no
charge is made for the use of these natural
aids, because they are inexhaustible, and at
every man's disposal. in the same manner
the brewer, the distiller, the dyer, make
incessant use of the air and water for the
production of their commodities; but as the
supply is boundless, it bears no price. if
all land had the same properties, if it were
boundless in quantity, and uniform in quality,
no charge could be made for its use,
unless where it possessed peculiar advantages
of situation. it is only then because land is
of different qualities with respect to its productive
powers, and because in the progress of
population, land of an inferior quality, or less
advantageously situated, is called into cultivation,
that rent is ever paid for the use of it.
when, in the progress of society, land of the
second degree of fertility is taken into cultivation,
rent immediately commences on that
of the first quality, and the amount of that
rent will depend on the difference in the
quality of these two portions of land.
when land of the third quality is taken
into cultivation, rent immediately commences
on the second, and it is regulated as before,
by the difference in their productive powers.
at the same time, the rent of the first quality
will rise, for that must always be above the
rent of the second, by the difference between
the produce which they yield with a given
quantity of capital and labour. with every
step in the progress of population, which
shall oblige a country to have recourse to
land of a worse quality, to enable it to raise
its supply of food, rent, on all the more
fertile land, will rise.
thus suppose land—no. , , ,—to yield,
with an equal employment of capital and
labour, a net produce of , , and 
quarters of corn. in a new country, where
there is an abundance of fertile land compared
with the population, and where therefore
it is only necessary to cultivate no. ,
the whole net produce will belong to the cultivator,
and will be the profits of the stock
which he advances. as soon as population
had so far increased as to make it necessary to
cultivate no. , from which ninety quarters
only can be obtained after supporting the
labourers, rent would commence on no.
; for either there must be two rates of profit
on agricultural capital, or ten quarters, or the
value of ten quarters must be withdrawn from
the produce of no. , for some other purpose.
whether the proprietor of the land, or any
other person, cultivated no. , these ten
quarters would equally constitute rent; for
the cultivator of no.  would get the same
result with his capital, whether he cultivated
no. , paying ten quarters for rent, or continued
to cultivate no. , paying no rent.
in the same manner it might be shewn that
when no.  is brought into cultivation, the
rent of no.  must be ten quarters, or the
value of ten quarters, whilst the rent of no.
 would rise to twenty quarters; for the cultivator
of no.  would have the same profits
whether he paid twenty quarters for the rent
of no. , ten quarters for the rent of no. , or
cultivated no.  free of all rent.
it often, and indeed commonly happens
that before no. , , , or , or the inferior
lands are cultivated, capital can be employed
more productively on those lands which are
already in cultivation. it may perhaps be
found, that by doubling the original capital
employed on no. , though the produce will
not be doubled, will not be increased by 
quarters, it may be increased by eighty-five
quarters, and that this quantity exceeds what
could be obtained by employing the same
capital on land, no. .
in such case, capital will be preferably employed
on the old land, and will equally
create a rent; for rent is always the difference
between the produce obtained by the
employment of two equal quantities of capital
and labour. if with a capital of l. a
tenant obtain  quarters of wheat from his
land, and by the employment of a second
capital of l., he obtain a further return of
eighty-five, his landlord would have the power
at the expiration of his lease, of obliging
him to pay fifteen quarters, or an equivalent
value, for additional rent; for there cannot
be two rates of profit. if he is satisfied with
a diminution of fifteen quarters in the return
for his second l., it is because no employment
more profitable can be found for
it. the common rate of profit would be in
that proportion, and if the original tenant
refused, some other person would be found
willing to give all which exceeded that rate
of profit to the owner of the land from
which he derived it.
in this case, as well as in the other, the
capital last employed pays no rent. for the
greater productive powers of the first l.,
fifteen quarters is paid for rent, for the employment
of the second l. no rent
whatever is paid. if a third l. be employed
on the same land, with a return of
seventy-five quarters, rent will then be paid
for the second l. and will be equal to the
difference between the produce of these two,
or ten quarters; and at the same time the
rent of the first l. will rise from fifteen to
twenty-five quarters; while the last l.
will pay no rent whatever.
if then good land existed in a quantity
much more abundant than the production of
food for an increasing population required, or
if capital could be indefinitely employed without
a diminished return on the old land,
there could be no rise of rent; for rent invariably
proceeds from the employment of an
additional quantity of labour with a proportionally
less return.
the most fertile, and most favourably situated
land will be first cultivated, and the
exchangeable value of its produce will be
adjusted in the same manner as the exchangeable
value of all other commodities, by the
total quantity of labour necessary in various
forms, from first to last, to produce it, and
bring it to market. when land of an inferior
quality is taken into cultivation, the exchangeable
value of raw produce will rise,
because more labour is required to produce it.
the exchangeable value of all commodities,
whether they be manufactured, or the produce
of the mines, or the produce of land, is always
regulated, not by the less quantity of
labour that will suffice for their production
under circumstances highly favourable, and
exclusively enjoyed by those who have peculiar
facilities of production; but by the greater
quantity of labour necessarily bestowed on
their production by those who have no such
facilities; by those who continue to produce
them under the most unfavourable circumstances;
meaning—by the most unfavourable
circumstances, the most unfavourable under
which the quantity of produce required renders
it necessary to carry on the production.
thus, in a charitable institution, where the
poor are set to work with the funds of benefactors,
the general prices of the commodities,
which are the produce of such work, will
not be governed by the peculiar facilities afforded
to these workmen, but by the common,
usual, and natural difficulties, which every
other manufacturer will have to encounter.
the manufacturer enjoying none of these
facilities might indeed be driven altogether
from the market, if the supply afforded by
these favoured workmen were equal to all the
wants of the community; but if he continued
the trade, it would be only on condition that
he should derive from it the usual and general
rate of profits on stock; and that could
only happen when his commodity sold for a
price proportioned to the quantity of labour
bestowed on its production.
it is true, that on the best land, the same
produce would still be obtained with the
same labour as before, but its value would
be enhanced in consequence of the diminished
returns obtained by those who employed
fresh labour and stock on the less fertile land.
notwithstanding then, that the advantages of
fertile over inferior lands are in no case lost,
but only transferred from the cultivator, or
consumer, to the landlord, yet since more
labour is required on the inferior lands, and
since it is from such land only that we are
enabled to furnish ourselves with the additional
supply of raw produce, the comparative
value of that produce will continue permanently
above its former level, and make
it exchange for more hats, cloth, shoes, &c.
&c. in the production of which no such additional
quantity of labour is required.
the reason then, why raw produce rises
in comparative value, is because more labour
is employed in the production of the last
portion obtained, and not because a rent is
paid to the landlord. the value of corn is
regulated by the quantity of labour bestowed
on its production on that quality of land,
or with that portion of capital, which pays no
rent. corn is not high because a rent is
paid, but a rent is paid because corn is high;
and it has been justly observed, that no reduction
would take place in the price of corn,
although landlords should forego the whole
of their rent. such a measure would only
enable some farmers to live like gentlemen,
but would not diminish the quantity of labour
necessary to raise raw produce on the
least productive land in cultivation.
nothing is more common than to hear of
the advantages which the land possesses over
every other source of useful produce, on account
of the surplus which it yields in the form
of rent. yet when land is most abundant,
when most productive, and most fertile, it
yields no rent; and it is only when its powers
decay, and less is yielded in return for labour,
that a share of the original produce of the
more fertile portions is set apart for rent. it
is singular that this quality in the land, which
should have been noticed as an imperfection,
compared with the natural agents by which
manufacturers are assisted, should have been
pointed out as constituting its peculiar pre-eminence.
if air, water, the elasticity of
steam, and the pressure of the atmosphere,
were of various qualities; if they could be
appropriated, and each quality existed only in
moderate abundance, they as well as the land
would afford a rent, as the successive qualities
were brought into use. with every worse
quality employed, the value of the commodities
in the manufacture of which they were
used would rise, because equal quantities of
labour would be less productive. man would
do more by the sweat of his brow, and nature
perform less; and the land would be no longer
pre-eminent for its limited powers.
if the surplus produce which land affords
in the form of rent be an advantage, it is desirable
that, every year, the machinery newly
constructed should be less efficient than the
old, as that would undoubtedly give a greater
exchangeable value to the goods manufactured,
not only by that machinery, but by all
the other machinery in the kingdom; and a
rent would be paid to all those who possessed
the most productive machinery.
the rise of rent is always the effect of the
increasing wealth of the country, and of the
difficulty of providing food for its augmented
population. it is a symptom, but it is never
a cause of wealth; for wealth often increases
most rapidly while rent is either stationary,
or even falling. rent increases most rapidly,
as the disposable land decreases in its productive
powers. wealth increases most rapidly
in those countries where the disposable
land is most fertile, where importation is
least restricted, and where through agricultural
improvements, productions can be multiplied
without any increase in the proportional
quantity of labour, and where consequently
the progress of rent is slow.
if the high price of corn were the effect, and
not the cause of rent, price would be proportionally
influenced as rents were high or low,
and rent would be a component part of price.
but that corn which is produced with the
greatest quantity of labour is the regulator
of the price of corn, and rent does not and
cannot enter in the least degree as a component
part of its price. adam smith, therefore,
cannot be correct in supposing that the original
rule which regulated the exchangeable
value of commodities, namely the comparative
quantity of labour by which they were
produced, can be at all altered by the appropriation
of land and the payment of rent.
raw material enters into the composition of
most commodities, but the value of that raw
material as well as corn, is regulated by the
productiveness of the portion of capital last
employed on the land, and paying no rent;
and therefore rent is not a component part
of the price of commodities.
we have been hitherto considering the
effects of the natural progress of wealth and
population on rent, in a country in which the
land is of variously productive powers; and
we have seen, that with every portion of additional
capital which it becomes necessary to
employ on the land with a less productive
return, rent would rise. it follows from the
same principles, that any circumstances in
the society which should make it unnecessary
to employ the same amount of capital on the
land, and which should therefore make the
portion last employed more productive, would
lower rent. any great reduction in the capital
of a country, which should materially
diminish the funds destined for the maintenance
of labour, would naturally have this
effect. population regulates itself by the
funds which are to employ it, and therefore
always increases or diminishes with the increase
or diminution of capital. every reduction
of capital is therefore necessarily followed
by a less effective demand for corn, by
a fall of price, and by diminished cultivation.
in the reverse order to that in which the accumulation
of capital raises rent, will the diminution
of it lower rent. land of a less unproductive
quality will be in succession
relinquished, the exchangeable value of produce
will fall, and land of a superior quality
will be the land last cultivated, and that
which will then pay no rent.
the same effects may however be produced
when the wealth and population of a country
are increased, if that increase is accompanied
by such marked improvements in agriculture,
as shall have the same effect of diminishing
the necessity of cultivating the poorer lands,
or of expending the same amount of capital
on the cultivation of the more fertile portions.
if a million of quarters of corn be necessary
for the support of a given population, and it
be raised on land of the qualities of no. , ,
; and if an improvement be afterwards
discovered by which it can be raised on no. 
and , without employing no. , it is evident
that the immediate effect must be a fall of
rent; for no. , instead of no. , will then be
cultivated without paying any rent; and the
rent of no. , instead of being the difference
between the produce of no.  and no. , will
be the difference only between no.  and .
with the same population, and no more, there
can be no demand for any additional quantity
of corn; the capital and labour employed on
no. , will be devoted to the production of
other commodities desirable to the community,
and can have no effect in raising rent
unless the raw material from which they
are made cannot be obtained without employing
capital less advantageously on the
land, in which case no.  must again be cultivated.
it is undoubtedly true, that the fall in the
relative price of raw produce, in consequence
of the improvement in agriculture, or rather
in consequence of less labour being bestowed
on its production, would naturally lead to
increased accumulation; for the profits of
stock would be greatly augmented. this
accumulation would lead to an increased demand
for labour, to higher wages, to an increased
population, to a further demand for
raw produce, and to an increased cultivation.
it is only, however, after the increase in the
population, that rent would be as high as before;
that is to say, after no.  was taken
into cultivation. a considerable period would
have elapsed, attended with a positive diminution
of rent.
but improvements in agriculture are of two
kinds: those which increase the productive
powers of the land, and those which enable
us to obtain its produce with less labour.
they both lead to a fall in the price of raw
produce; they both affect rent, but they do
not affect it equally. if they did not occasion
a fall in the price of raw produce, they
would not be improvements; for it is the
essential quality of an improvement to diminish
the quantity of labour before required
to produce a commodity; and this diminution
cannot take place without a fall of its
price or relative value.
the improvements which increase the productive
powers of the land, are such as the
more skilful rotation of crops, or the better
choice of manure. these improvements absolutely
enable us to obtain the same produce
from a smaller quantity of land. if, by the
introduction of a course of turnips, i can
feed my sheep besides raising my corn, the
land on which the sheep were fed becomes
unnecessary, and the same quantity
of raw produce is raised by the employment
of a less quantity of land. if i discover a
manure which will enable me to make a
piece of land produce  per cent. more
corn, i may withdraw at least a portion of
my capital from the most unproductive part
of my farm. but, as i have before observed,
it is not necessary that land should be thrown
out of cultivation, in order to reduce rent:
to produce this effect, it is sufficient that successive
portions of capital are employed on
the same land with different results, and that
the portion which gives the least result should
be withdrawn. if, by the introduction of the
turnip husbandry, or by the use of a more
invigorating manure, i can obtain the same
produce with less capital, and without disturbing
the difference between the productive
powers of the successive portions of capital,
i shall lower rent; for a different and more
productive portion will be that which will
form the standard from which every other
will be reckoned. if, for example, the successive
portions of capital yielded , , ,
; whilst i employed these four portions,
my rent would be , or the difference between
 and  = 
whilst the produce would be 
 and  = 
 and  = 
and while i employed these portions, the
rent would remain the same, although the
produce of each should have an equal augmentation.
if, instead of , , , , the
produce should be increased to , , ,
, the rent would still be , or the difference
between
 and  = 
whilst the produce would be increased to 
 and  = 
 and  = 
but with such an increase of produce, without
an increase of demand, there could be
no motive for employing so much capital on
the land; one portion would be withdrawn,
and consequently the last portion of capital
would yield  instead of , and rent
would fall to , or the difference between
 and  = 
whilst the produce would be still
adequate to the wants of the population, for it would be  quarters, or
 and  = 
the demand being only for  quarters.—but
there are improvements which may
lower the relative value of produce without
lowering the corn rent, though they will
lower the money rent of land. such improvements
do not increase the productive
powers of the land, but they enable us to
obtain its produce with less labour. they
are rather directed to the formation of the
capital applied to the land, than to the cultivation
of the land itself. improvements in
agricultural implements, such as the plough
and the threshing machine, economy in the
use of horses employed in husbandry, and a
better knowledge of the veterinary art, are of
this nature. less capital, which is the same
thing as less labour, will be employed on the
land; but to obtain the same produce, less
land cannot be cultivated. whether improvements
of this kind, however, affect corn
rent, must depend on the question, whether
the difference between the produce obtained
by the employment of different portions of
capital be increased, stationary, or diminished.
if four portions of capital, , , ,
, be employed on the land, giving each the
same results, and any improvement in the
formation of such capital should enable me
to withdraw  from each, so that they should
be , , , and , no alteration would
take place in the corn rent; but if the improvements
were such as to enable me to
make the whole saving on the largest portion
of capital, that portion which is least
productively employed, corn rent would immediately
fall, because the difference between
the capital most productive and the
capital least productive would be diminished;
and it is this difference which constitutes
rent.
without multiplying instances, i hope
enough has been said to shew, that whatever
diminishes the inequality in the produce obtained
from successive portions of capital
employed on the same or on new land, tends
to lower rent; and that whatever increases
that inequality, necessarily produces an opposite
effect, and tends to raise it.
in speaking of the rent of the landlord,
we have rather considered it as the proportion
of the whole produce, without any reference
to its exchangeable value; but since
the same cause, the difficulty of production,
raises the exchangeable value of raw produce,
and raises also the proportion of raw
produce paid to the landlord for rent, it is
obvious that the landlord is doubly benefited
by difficulty of production. first he obtains
a greater share, and secondly the commodity
in which he is paid is of greater value.
the metals, like other things, are obtained
by labour. nature, indeed, produces them;
but it is the labour of man which extracts
them from the bowels of the earth, and prepares
them for our service.
mines, as well as land, generally pay a
rent to their owner; and this rent, as well as
the rent of land, is the effect, and never the
cause of the high value of their produce.
if there were abundance of equally fertile
mines, which any one might appropriate,
they could yield no rent; the value of their
produce would depend on the quantity of
labour necessary to extract the metal from
the mine and bring it to market.
but there are mines of various qualities,
affording very different results, with equal
quantities of labour. the metal produced
from the poorest mine that is worked, must
at least have an exchangeable value, not
only sufficient to procure all the clothes, food,
and other necessaries consumed by those employed
in working it, and bringing the produce
to market, but also to afford the common
and ordinary profits to him who advances
the stock necessary to carry on the
undertaking. the return for capital from
the poorest mine paying no rent, would regulate
the rent of all the other more productive
mines. this mine is supposed to yield
the usual profits of stock. all that the other
mines produce more than this, will necessarily
be paid to the owners for rent. since
this principle is precisely the same as that
which we have already laid down respecting
land, it will not be necessary further to enlarge
on it.
it will be sufficient to remark, that the
same general rule which regulates the value
of raw produce and manufactured commodities,
is applicable also to the metals; their
value depending not on the rate of profits,
nor on the rate of wages, nor on the rent
paid for mines, but on the total quantity of
labour necessary to obtain the metal, and to
bring it to market.
like every other commodity, the value of the
metals is subject to variation. improvements
may be made in the implements and machinery
used in mining, which may considerably
abridge labour; new and more productive
mines may be discovered, in which, with the
same labour, more metal may be obtained;
or the facilities of bringing it to market may
be increased. in either of these cases the
metals would fall in value, and would therefore
exchange for a less quantity of other
things. on the other hand, from the increasing
difficulty of obtaining the metal, occasioned
by the greater depth at which the
mine must be worked, and the accumulation
of water, or any other contingency, its value,
compared with that of other things, might be
considerably increased.
it has therefore been justly observed, that
however honestly the coin of a country may
conform to its standard, money made of gold
and silver is still liable to fluctuations in
value, not only to accidental and temporary,
but to permanent and natural variations, in
the same manner as other commodities.
by the discovery of america and the rich
mines in which it abounds, a very great
effect was produced on the natural price of
the precious metals. this effect is by many
supposed not yet to have terminated. it is
probable however that all the effects on the
value of the metals, resulting from the discovery
of america have long ceased, and if
any fall has of late years taken place in their
value, it is to be attributed to improvements
in the mode of working the mines.
from whatever cause it may have proceeded,
the effect has been so slow and
gradual, that little practical inconvenience
has been felt from gold and silver being the
general medium in which the value of all
other things is estimated. though undoubtedly
a variable measure of value, there is
probably no commodity subject to fewer
variations. this and the other advantages
which these metals possess, such as their
hardness, their malleability, their divisibility,
and many more, have justly secured the preference
every where given to them, as a
standard for the money of civilized countries.
having acknowledged the imperfections to
which money made of gold and silver is
liable as a measure of value, from the greater
or less quantity of labour which may, under
varying circumstances, be necessary for the
production of those metals, we may be permitted
to make the supposition that all these
imperfections were removed, and that equal
quantities of labour could at all times obtain,
from that mine which paid no rent, equal
quantities of gold. gold would then be an
invariable measure of value. the quantity
indeed would enlarge with the demand, but
its value would be invariable, and it would be
eminently well calculated to measure the
varying value of all other things. i have
already in a former part of this work considered
gold as endowed with this uniformity,
and in the following chapter i shall continue
the supposition. in speaking therefore of
varying price, the variation will be always
considered as being in the commodity, and
never in the medium in which it is estimated.
in making labour the foundation of the
value of commodities, and the comparative
quantity of labour which is necessary to their
production, the rule which determines the
respective quantities of goods which shall be
given in exchange for each other, we must
not be supposed to deny the accidental and
temporary deviations of the actual or market
price of commodities from this, their primary
and natural price.
in the ordinary course of events, there is no
commodity which continues for any length
of time to be supplied precisely in that
decree of abundance, which the wants and
wishes of mankind require, and therefore
there is none which is not subject to accidental
and temporary variations of price.
it is only in consequence of such variations,
that capital is apportioned precisely, in the
requisite abundance and no more, to the
production of the different commodities which
happen to be in demand. with the rise or
fall of price, profits are elevated above, or
depressed below their general level, and capital
is either encouraged to enter into, or is
warned to depart from the particular employment
in which the variation has taken
place.
whilst every man is free to employ his
capital where he pleases, he will naturally
seek for it that employment which is most
advantageous; he will naturally be dissatisfied
with a profit of  per cent., if by
removing his capital he can obtain a profit of
 per cent. this restless desire on the part
of all the employers of stock, to quit a less
profitable for a more advantageous business,
has a strong tendency to equalize the rate of
profits of all, or to fix them in such proportions,
as may in the estimation of the parties,
compensate for any advantage which one
may have, or may appear to have over the
other. it is perhaps very difficult to trace
the steps by which this change is effected:
it is probably effected, by a manufacturer not
absolutely changing his employment, but
only lessening the quantity of capital he has
in that employment. in all rich countries,
there is a number of men forming what is called
the monied class; these men are engaged in no
trade, but live on the interest of their money,
which is employed in discounting bills, or in
loans to the more industrious part of the community.
the bankers too employ a large capital
on the same objects. the capital so employed
forms a circulating capital of a large
amount, and is employed, in larger or smaller
proportions, by all the different trades of a
country. there is perhaps no manufacturer,
however rich, who limits his business to the
extent that his own funds alone will allow:
he has always some portion of this floating
capital, increasing or diminishing according to
the activity of the demand for his commodities.
when the demand for silks increases, and that
for cloth diminishes, the clothier does not
remove with his capital to the silk trade, but
he dismisses some of his workmen, he discontinues
his demand for the loan from bankers
and monied men; while the case of the silk
manufacturer is the reverse: he wishes to
employ more workmen, and thus his motive
for borrowing is increased: he borrows more,
and thus capital is transferred from one employment
to another, without the necessity of
a manufacturer discontinuing his usual occupation.
when we look to the markets of a
large town, and observe how regularly they
are supplied both with home and foreign
commodities, in the quantity in which they
are required, under all the circumstances of
varying demand, arising from the caprice of
taste, or a change in the amount of population,
without often producing either the effects
of a glut from a too abundant supply, or an
enormously high price from the supply being
unequal to the demand, we must confess that
the principle which apportions capital to each
trade in the precise amount that it is required,
is more active than is generally supposed.
a capitalist, in seeking profitable employment
for his funds, will naturally take into
consideration all the advantages which one
occupation possesses over another. he may
therefore be willing to forego a part of his
money profit, in consideration of the security,
cleanliness, ease, or any other real or fancied
advantage which one employment may possess
over another.
if from a consideration of these circumstances,
the profits of stock should be so adjusted
that in one trade they were , in
another , and in another  per cent., they
would probably continue permanently with
that relative difference, and with that difference
only; for if any cause should elevate
the profits of one of these trades  per cent.
either these profits would be temporary, and
would soon again fall back to their usual station,
or the profits of the others would be elevated
in the same proportion.
let us suppose that all commodities are at
their natural price, and consequently that
the profits of capital in all employments are
exactly at the same rate, or differ only so
much as, in the estimation of the parties, is
equivalent to any real or fancied advantage
which they possess or forego. suppose now,
that a change of fashion should increase the
demand for silks, and lessen that for woollens;
their natural price, the quantity of labour
necessary to their production, would continue
unaltered, but the market price of silks would
rise, and that of woollens would fall; and consequently
the profits of the silk manufacturer
would be above, whilst those of the woollen
manufacturer would be below, the general
and adjusted rate of profits. not only the profits,
but the wages of the workmen would be
affected in these employments. this increased
demand for silks would however soon be supplied,
by the transference of capital and labour
from the woollen to the silk manufacture;
when the market prices of silks and woollens
would again approach their natural prices,
and then the usual profits would be obtained
by the respective manufacturers of those commodities.
it is then the desire, which every capitalist
has, of diverting his funds from a less to a
more profitable employment, that prevents the
market price of commodities from continuing
for any length of time either much above, or
much below their natural price. it is this
competition which so adjusts the exchangeable
value of commodities, that after paying
the wages for the labour necessary to their
production, and all other expenses required
to put the capital employed in its original
state of efficiency, the remaining value or
overplus will in each trade be in proportion
to the value of the capital employed.
in the th chap. of the wealth of nations,
all that concerns this question is most ably
treated. having fully acknowledged the temporary
effects which, in particular employments
of capital, may be produced on the
prices of commodities, as well as on the
wages of labour, and the profits of stock, by
accidental causes, without influencing the
general price of commodities, wages, or profits,
since these effects are equally operative
in all stages of society, we may be permitted
to leave them entirely out of our consideration,
whilst we are treating of the laws
which regulate natural prices, natural wages,
and natural profits, effects totally independent
of these accidental causes. in speaking
then of the exchangeable value of commodities,
or the power of purchasing possessed
by any one commodity, i mean always that
power which it would possess, if not disturbed
by any temporary or accidental cause, and
which is its natural price.
labour, like all other things which are purchased
and sold, and which may be increased
or diminished in quantity, has its natural and
its market price. the natural price of labour
is that price which is necessary to enable
the labourers, one with another, to subsist
and to perpetuate their race, without either
increase or diminution.
the power of the labourer to support himself,
and the family which may be necessary
to keep up the number of labourers, does not
depend on the quantity of money, which he
may receive for wages; but on the quantity
of food, necessaries, and conveniences become
essential to him from habit, which that
money will purchase. the natural price of
labour, therefore, depends on the price of the
food, necessaries, and conveniences required
for the support of the labourer and his family.
with a rise in the price of food and necessaries,
the natural price of labour will rise;
with the fall in their price, the natural price
of labour will fall.
with the progress of society, the natural
price of labour has always a tendency to rise,
because one of the principal commodities by
which its natural price is regulated, has a
tendency to become dearer, from the greater
difficulty of producing it. as, however, the
improvements in agriculture, the discovery
of new markets, whence provisions may be
imported, may for a time counteract the tendency
to a rise in the price of necessaries, and
may even occasion their natural price to fall,
so will the same causes produce the correspondent
effects on the natural price of labour.
the natural price of all commodities excepting
raw produce and labour has a tendency
to fall, in the progress of wealth and population;
for though, on one hand, they are enhanced
in real value, from the rise in the natural
price of the raw material of which they
are made, this is more than counterbalanced
by the improvements in machinery, by the
better division and distribution of labour, and
by the increasing skill, both in science and
art, of the producers.
the market price of labour is the price
which is really paid for it, from the natural
operation of the proportion of the supply to
the demand; labour is dear when it is scarce,
and cheap when it is plentiful. however
much the market price of labour may deviate
from its natural price, it has, like commodities,
a tendency to conform to it.
it is when the market price of labour
exceeds its natural price, that the condition
of the labourer is flourishing and happy, that
he has it in his power to command a greater
proportion of the necessaries and enjoyments
of life, and therefore to rear a healthy and
numerous family. when however, by the
encouragement which high wages give to the
increase of population, the number of labourers
is increased, wages again fall to their
natural price, and indeed from a re-action
sometimes fall below it.
when the market price of labour is below its
natural price, the condition of the labourers is
most wretched: then poverty deprives them of
those comforts which custom renders absolute
necessaries. it is only after their privations
have reduced their number, or the demand
for labour has increased, that the market
price of labour will rise to its natural price,
and that the labourer will have the moderate
comforts, which the natural price of wages
will afford.
notwithstanding the tendency of wages
to conform to their natural rate, their market
rate may, in an improving society, for
an indefinite period, be constantly above it;
for no sooner may the impulse, which an increased
capital gives to a new demand for
labour be obeyed, than another increase of
capital may produce the same effect; and
thus if the increase of capital be gradual and
constant, the demand for labour may give a
continued stimulus to an increase of people.
capital is that part of the wealth of a
country, which is employed in production,
and consists of food, clothing, tools, raw
material, machinery, &c. necessary to give
effect to labour.
capital may increase in quantity at the same
time that its value rises. an addition may
be made to the food and clothing of a country,
at the same time that more labour may
be required to produce the additional quantity
than before; in that case not only the
quantity, but the value of capital will rise.
or capital may increase without its value
increasing, and even while its value is actually
diminishing; not only may an addition
be made to the food and clothing of a country,
but the addition may be made by the aid of
machinery, without any increase, and even
with an absolute diminution in the proportional
quantity of labour required to produce
them. the quantity of capital may increase,
while neither the whole together, nor any
part of it singly, will have a greater value
than before.
in the first case, the natural price of
wages, which always depends on the price of
food, clothing, and other necessaries, will
rise; in the second, it will remain stationary,
or fall; but in both cases the market rate of
wages will rise, for in proportion to the increase
of capital will be the increase in the
demand for labour; in proportion to the
work to be done will be the demand for those
who are to do it.
in both cases too the market price of labour
will rise above its natural price; and in
both cases it will have a tendency to conform
to its natural price, but in the first case this
agreement will be most speedily effected.
the situation of the labourer will be improved,
but not much improved; for the increased
price of food and necessaries will absorb
a large portion of his increased wages;
consequently a small supply of labour, or a
trifling increase in the population, will soon
reduce the market price to the then increased
natural price of labour.
in the second case, the condition of the
labourer will be very greatly improved; he
will receive increased money wages, without
having to pay any increased price, and perhaps,
even a diminished price for the commodities
which he and his family consume;
and it will not be till after a great addition
has been made to the population, that the
market price of wages will again sink to their
then low and reduced natural price.
thus, then, with every improvement of society,
with every increase in its capital, the
market wages of labour will rise; but the
permanence of their rise will depend on the
question, whether the natural price of wages
has also risen; and this again will depend on
the rise in the natural price of those necessaries,
on which the wages of labour are expended.
it is not to be understood that the natural
price of wages, estimated even in food and
necessaries, is absolutely fixed and constant.
it varies at different times in the same country,
and very materially differs in different
countries. it essentially depends on the habits
and customs of the people. an english
labourer would consider his wages under
their natural rate, and too scanty to support
a family, if they enabled him to purchase
no other food than potatoes, and to live
in no better habitation than a mud cabin; yet
these moderate demands of nature are often
deemed sufficient in countries where "man's
life is cheap," and his wants easily satisfied.
many of the conveniences now enjoyed in
an english cottage, would have been thought
luxuries at an early period of our history.
from manufactured commodities always
falling, and raw produce always rising, with
the progress of society, such a disproportion in
their relative value is at length created, that
in rich countries a labourer, by the sacrifice of
a very small quantity only of his food, is able
to provide liberally for all his other wants.
independently of the variations in the
value of money, which necessarily affect
wages, but which we have here supposed to
have no operation, as we have considered money
to be uniformly of the same value, wages
are subject to a rise or fall from two causes:
st. the supply and demand of labourers.
dly. the price of the commodities on
which the wages of labour are expended.
in different stages of society, the accumulation
of capital, or of the means of employing
labour, is more or less rapid, and must
in all cases depend on the productive powers
of labour. the productive powers of labour
are generally greatest when there is an abundance
of fertile land: at such periods accumulation
is often so rapid, that labourers
cannot be supplied with the same rapidity as
capital.
it has been calculated, that under favourable
circumstances population may be doubled
in twenty-five years; but under the
same favourable circumstances, the whole
capital of a country might possibly be
doubled in a shorter period. in that case,
wages during the whole period would have a
tendency to rise, because the demand for labour
would increase still faster than the
supply.
in new settlements, where the arts and
knowledge of countries far advanced in refinement
are introduced, it is probable that
capital has a tendency to increase faster than
mankind: and if the deficiency of labourers
were not supplied by more populous countries,
this tendency would very much raise
the price of labour. in proportion as these
countries become populous, and land of a
worse quality is taken into cultivation, the
tendency to an increase of capital diminishes;
for the surplus produce remaining, after satisfying
the wants of the existing population,
must necessarily be in proportion to the facility
of production, viz. to the smaller number
of persons employed in production. although,
then, it is probable, that under the
most favourable circumstances, the power of
production is still greater than that of population,
it will not long continue so; for the
land being limited in quantity, and differing
in quality; with every increased portion of
capital employed on it, there will be a decreased
rate of production, whilst the power
of population continues always the same.
in those countries where there is abundance
of fertile land, but where, from the
ignorance, indolence, and barbarism of the
inhabitants, they are exposed to all the evils
of want and famine, and where it has been
said that population presses against the
means of subsistence, a very different remedy
should be applied from that which is
necessary in long settled countries, where,
from the diminishing rate of the supply of
raw produce, all the evils of a crowded population
are experienced. in the one case,
the misery proceeds from the inactivity of
the people. to be made happier, they need
only to be stimulated to exertion; with such
exertion, no increase in the population can
be too great, as the powers of production are
still greater. in the other case, the population
increases faster than the funds required
for its support. every exertion of industry,
unless accompanied by a diminished rate of
increase in the population, will add to the
evil, for production cannot keep pace with it.
in some countries of europe, and many of
asia, as well as in the islands in the south
seas, the people are miserable, either from a
vicious government or from habits of indolence,
which make them prefer present ease
and inactivity, though without security
against want, to a moderate degree of exertion,
with plenty of food and necessaries.
by diminishing their population, no relief
would be afforded, for productions would diminish
in as great, or even in a greater, proportion.
the remedy for the evils under
which poland and ireland suffer, which are
similar to those experienced in the south
seas, is to stimulate exertion, to create new
wants, and to implant new tastes; for those
countries must accumulate a much larger
amount of capital, before the diminished rate
of production will render the progress of capital
necessarily less rapid than the progress of
population. the facility with which the wants
of the irish are supplied, permits that people
to pass a great part of their time in idleness:
if the population were diminished, this evil
would increase, because wages would rise,
and therefore the labourer would be enabled,
in exchange for a still less portion of his labour,
to obtain all that his moderate wants
require.
give to the irish labourer a taste for the
comforts and enjoyments which habit has
made essential to the english labourer, and
he would be then content to devote a further
portion of his time to industry, that he might
be enabled to obtain them. not only would
all the food now produced be obtained, but
a vast additional value in those other commodities,
to the production of which the now
unemployed labour of the country might be
directed. in those countries, where the labouring
classes have the fewest wants, and
are contented with the cheapest food, the
people are exposed to the greatest vicissitudes
and miseries. they have no place of
refuge from calamity; they cannot seek
safety in a lower station; they are already
so low, that they can fall no lower. on any
deficiency of the chief article of their subsistence,
there are few substitutes of which
they can avail themselves, and dearth to
them is attended with almost all the evils of
famine.
in the natural advance of society, the
wages of labour will have a tendency to fall,
as far as they are regulated by supply and
demand; for the supply of labourers will
continue to increase at the same rate, whilst
the demand for them will increase at a slower
rate. if, for instance, wages were regulated
by a yearly increase of capital, at the rate of
 per cent., they would fall when it accumulated
only at the rate of ½ per cent. they
would fall still lower when it increased only
at the rate of , or ½ per cent., and would
continue to do so until the capital became
stationary, when wages also would become
stationary, and be only sufficient to keep up
the numbers of the actual population. i say
that, under these circumstances, wages would
fall, if they were regulated only by the supply
and demand of labourers; but we must
not forget, that wages are also regulated by
the prices of the commodities on which they
are expended.
as population increases, these necessaries
will be constantly rising in price, because
more labour will be necessary to produce
them. if, then, the money wages of labour
should fall, whilst every commodity on which
the wages of labour were expended rose, the
labourer would be doubly affected, and would
be soon totally deprived of subsistence. instead,
therefore, of the money wages of labour
falling, they would rise; but they
would not rise sufficiently to enable the labourer
to purchase as many comforts and
necessaries as he did before the rise in the
price of those commodities. if his annual
wages were before l., or six quarters of
corn when the price was l. per quarter, he
would probably receive only the value of
five quarters when corn rose to l. per quarter.
but five quarters would cost l.; he
would therefore receive an addition in his
money wages, though with that addition he
would be unable to furnish himself with the
same quantity of corn and other commodities,
which he had before consumed in his
family.
notwithstanding, then, that the labourer
would be really worse paid, yet this increase
in his wages would necessarily diminish the
profits of the manufacturer; for his goods
would sell at no higher price, and yet the
expense of producing them would be increased.
this, however, will be considered
in our examination into the principles which
regulate profits.
it appears, then, that the same cause which
raises rent, namely, the increasing difficulty
of providing an additional quantity of food
with the same proportional quantity of labour,
will also raise wages; and therefore if
money be of an unvarying value, both rent
and wages will have a tendency to rise with
the progress of wealth and population.
but there is this essential difference between
the rise of rent and the rise of wages.
the rise in the money value of rent is accompanied
by an increased share of the produce;
not only is the landlord's money rent greater,
but his corn rent also; he will have more
corn, and each defined measure of that corn
will exchange for a greater quantity of all
other goods which have not been raised in
value. the fate of the labourer will be less
happy: he will receive more money wages,
it is true, but his corn wages will be reduced;
and not only his command of corn,
but his general condition will be deteriorated,
by his finding it more difficult to maintain
the market rate of wages above their natural
rate. while the price of corn rises  per
cent., wages will always rise less than  per
cent., but rent will always rise more; the
condition of the labourer will generally decline,
and that of the landlord will always be
improved.
when wheat was at l. per quarter, suppose
the labourer's wages to be l. per annum,
or the value of six quarters of wheat,
and suppose half his wages to be expended
on wheat, and the other half, or l., on
other things. he would receive
when wheat was at
or the value of
. qrs.
. qrs.
. qrs.
. qrs.
he would receive these wages to enable
him to live just as well, and no better, than
before; for when corn was at l. per quarter,
he would expend for three quarters of corn,
at l. per qr.
and on other things
when wheat was l. s. d., three quarters,
which he and his family consumed, would cost him
other things not altered in price
when at l. s., three quarters of wheat would cost
and other things
when at l. s., three qrs. of wheat
other things
when at ..l. three quarters of wheat
would cost
other things
in proportion as corn became dear, he would
receive less corn wages, but his money wages
would always increase, whilst his enjoyments
on the above supposition, would be precisely
the same. but as other commodities would be
raised in price in proportion as raw produce entered
into their composition, he would have
more to pay for some of them. although his
tea, sugar, soap, candles, and house rent, would
probably be no dearer, he would pay more for
his bacon, cheese, butter, linen, shoes, and
cloth; and therefore, even with the above increase
of wages, his situation would be comparatively
worse. but it may be said that i have
been considering the effect of wages on price,
on the supposition that gold, or the metal
from which money is made, is the produce
of the country in which wages varied; and
that the consequences which i have deduced
agree little with the actual state of things,
because gold is a metal of foreign production.
the circumstance however, of gold being a
foreign production, will not invalidate the
truth of the argument, because it may be
shewn, that whether it were found at home,
or were imported from abroad, the effects
ultimately and indeed immediately would be
the same.
when wages rise, it is generally because
the increase of wealth and capital have occasioned
a new demand for labour, which will
infallibly be attended with an increased production
of commodities. to circulate these
additional commodities, even at the same
prices as before, more money is required,
more of this foreign commodity from which
money is made, and which can only be obtained
by importation. whenever a commodity
is required in greater abundance than
before, its relative value rises comparatively
with those commodities with which its purchase
is made. if more hats were wanted,
their price would rise, and more gold would
be given for them. if more gold were required,
gold would rise, and hats would fall
in price, as a greater quantity of hats and of
all other things would then be necessary to
purchase the same quantity of gold. but in the
case supposed, to say that commodities will
rise, because wages rise, is to affirm a positive
contradiction; for we first say that gold will
rise in relative value in consequence of demand,
and secondly, that it will fall in relative
value because prices will rise, two effects
which are totally incompatible with each
other. to say that commodities are raised
in price, is the same thing as to say that money
is lowered in relative value; for it is by commodities
that the relative value of gold is estimated.
if then all commodities rose in price,
gold could not come from abroad to purchase
those dear commodities, but it would go from
home to be employed with advantage in purchasing
the comparatively cheaper foreign
commodities. it appears then, that the rise
of wages will not raise the prices of commodities,
whether the metal from which money
is made be produced at home or in a foreign
country. all commodities cannot rise at the
same time without an addition to the quantity
of money. this addition could not be obtained
at home, as we have already shewn;
nor could it be imported from abroad. to
purchase any additional quantity of gold from
abroad, commodities at home must be cheap,
not dear. the importation of gold, and a
rise in the price of all home-made commodities
with which gold is purchased or paid
for, are effects absolutely incompatible.
the extensive use of paper money does not
alter this question, for paper money conforms,
or ought to conform to the value of
gold, and therefore its value is influenced by
such causes only as influence the value of
that metal.
these then are the laws by which wages
are regulated, and by which the happiness
of far the greatest part of every community
is governed. like all other contracts, wages
should be left to the fair and free competition
of the market, and should never be controlled
by the interference of the legislature.
the clear and direct tendency of the poor
laws, is in direct opposition to these obvious
principles: it is not, as the legislature benevolently
intended, to amend the condition of
the poor, but to deteriorate the condition of
both poor and rich; instead of making the
poor rich, they are calculated to make the
rich poor; and whilst the present laws are in
force, it is quite in the natural order of things
that the fund for the maintenance of the poor
should progressively increase, till it has absorbed
all the neat revenue of the country, or
at least so much of it as the state shall leave
to us, after satisfying its own never failing
demands for the public expenditure.
this pernicious tendency of these laws is
no longer a mystery, since it has been fully
developed by the able hand of mr. malthus;
and every friend to the poor must ardently
wish for their abolition. unfortunately however
they have been so long established, and
the habits of the poor have been so formed
upon their operation, that to eradicate them
with safety from our political system requires
the most cautious and skilful management.
it is agreed by all who are most friendly to a
repeal of these laws, that if it be desirable to
prevent the most overwhelming distress to
those for whose benefit they were erroneously
enacted, their abolition should be effected by
the most gradual steps.
it is a truth which admits not a doubt,
that the comforts and well being of the poor
cannot be permanently secured without some
regard on their part, or some effort on the
part of the legislature, to regulate the increase
of their numbers, and to render less frequent
among them early and improvident marriages.
the operation of the system of poor laws has
been directly contrary to this. they have
rendered restraint superfluous, and have invited
imprudence by offering it a portion of
the wages of prudence and industry.
the nature of the evil points out the
remedy. by gradually contracting the sphere
of the poor laws; by impressing on the poor
the value of independence, by teaching them
that they must look not to systematic or
casual charity, but to their own exertions for
support, that prudence and forethought are
neither unnecessary nor unprofitable virtues,
we shall by degrees approach a sounder and
more healthful state.
no scheme for the amendment of the poor
laws merits the least attention, which has not
their abolition for its ultimate object; and he is
the best friend to the poor, and to the cause
of humanity, who can point out how this end
can be attained with the most security, and at
the same time with the least violence. it is not
by raising in any manner different from the
present, the fund from which the poor are
supported, that the evil can be mitigated. it
would not only be no improvement, but it
would be an aggravation of the distress which
we wish to see removed, if the fund were increased
in amount, or were levied according
to some late proposals, as a general fund
from the country at large. the present
mode of its collection and application has
served to mitigate its pernicious effects. each
parish raises a separate fund for the support
of its own poor. hence it becomes an object
of more interest and more practicability
to keep the rates low, than if one general
fund were raised for the relief of the poor of
the whole kingdom. a parish is much more
interested in an economical collection of the
rate, and a sparing distribution of relief, when
the whole saving will be for its own benefit,
than if hundreds of other parishes were to
partake of it.
it is to this cause, that we must ascribe the
fact of the poor laws not having yet absorbed
all the net revenue of the country; it is to
the rigour with which they are applied, that
we are indebted for their not having become
overwhelmingly oppressive. if by law every
human being wanting support could be sure
to obtain it, and obtain it in such a degree as
to make life tolerably comfortable, theory
would lead us to expect that all other taxes
together would be light compared with the
single one of poor rates. the principle of gravitation
is not more certain than the tendency
of such laws to change wealth and power
into misery and weakness; to call away the
exertions of labour from every object, except
that of providing mere subsistence; to confound
all intellectual distinction; to busy the
mind continually in supplying the body's
wants; until at last all classes should be
infected with the plague of universal poverty.
happily these laws have been in operation
during a period of progressive prosperity,
when the funds for the maintenance of labour
have regularly increased, and when an increase
of population would be naturally
called for. but if our progress should become
more slow; if we should attain the stationary
state, from which i trust we are yet far
distant, then will the pernicious nature of
these laws become more manifest and
alarming; and then too will their removal be
obstructed by many additional difficulties.
the profits of stock in different employments,
having been shewn to bear a proportion to
each other, and to have a tendency to vary
all in the same degree and in the same direction,
it remains for us to consider what is
the cause of the permanent variations in the
rate of profit, and the consequent permanent
alterations in the rate of interest.
we have seen that the price of corn is
regulated by the quantity of labour necessary
to produce it, with that portion of capital
which pays no rent. we have seen too that
all manufactured commodities rise and fall
in price, in proportion as more or less labour
becomes necessary to their production. neither
the farmer who cultivates that quality of
land, which regulates price, nor the manufacturer,
who manufactures goods, sacrifice
any portion of the produce for rent. the
whole value of their commodities is divided
into two portions only: one constitutes the
profits of stock, the other the wages of labour.
supposing corn and manufactured goods
always to sell at the same price, profits would
be high or low in proportion as wages were
low or high. but suppose corn to rise in
price because more labour is necessary to
produce it; that cause will not raise the price
of manufactured goods in the production of
which no additional quantity of labour is required.
if then wages continued the same,
profits would remain the same; but if, as is
absolutely certain, wages should rise with the
rise of corn, then profits would necessarily
fall.
if a manufacturer always sold his goods
for the same money, for l. for example,
his profits would depend on the price of the
labour necessary to manufacture those goods.
his profits would be less when wages amounted
to l. than when he paid only
l. in proportion then as wages rose,
would profits fall. but if the price of raw
produce would increase, it may be asked,
whether the farmer at least would not have
the same rate of profits, although he should
pay an additional price for wages? certainly
not: for he will not only have to pay, in common
with the manufacturer, an increase of
wages to each labourer he employs, but he
will be obliged either to pay rent, or to employ
an additional number of labourers to
obtain the same produce; and the rise in the
price of raw produce will be proportioned only
to that rent, or that additional number, and
will not compensate him for the rise of wages.
if both the manufacturer and farmer employed
ten men, on wages rising from l. to
l. per annum. per man, the whole sum
paid by each would be l. instead of l.
this is, however, the whole addition that
would be paid by the manufacturer to obtain
the same quantity of commodities; but the farmer
on new land would probably be obliged
to employ an additional man, and therefore to
pay an additional sum of l. for wages; and
the farmer on the old land would be obliged
to pay precisely the same additional sum of
l. for rent; without which additional labour,
corn would not have risen. one will therefore
have to pay l. for wages alone, the other,
for wages and rent together; each l. more
than the manufacturer: for this latter l. they
are compensated by the addition to the price
of raw produce, and therefore their profits
still conform to the profits of the manufacturer.
as this proposition is important, i will
endeavour still further to elucidate it.
we have shewn that in early stages of
society, both the landlord's and the labourer's
share of the value of the produce of the earth,
would be but small; and that it would increase
in proportion to the progress of wealth,
and the difficulty of procuring food. we
have shewn too, that although the value of
the labourer's portion will be increased by the
high value of food, his real share will be diminished;
whilst that of the landlord will not
only be raised in value, but will also be increased
in quantity.
the remaining quantity of the produce of
the land, after the landlord and labourer are
paid, necessarily belongs to the farmer, and
constitutes the profits of his stock. but it
may be alleged, that though as society advances,
his proportion of the whole produce
will be diminished, yet as it will rise in
value, he, as well as the landlord and labourer,
may, notwithstanding, receive a
greater value.
it may be said for example, that when
corn rose from l. to l., the  quarters
obtained from the best land would sell for
l. instead of l.; and therefore, though
the landlord and labourer be proved to have
a greater value for rent and wages, still the
value of the farmer's profit might also be
augmented. this however is impossible, as
i shall now endeavour to shew.
in the first place, the price of corn would
rise only in proportion to the increased difficulty
of growing it on land of a worse quality.
it has been already remarked, that if the
labour of ten men will, on land of a certain
quality, obtain  quarters of wheat, and its
value be l. per quarter, or l.; and if the
labour of ten additional men, will on the
same or any other land, produce only 
quarters in addition, wheat would rise from
l. to l. s. d.; for : :: l.: l. s. d.
in other words, as for the production of 
quarters, the labour of ten men is necessary, in
the one case, and only that of . in the other,
the rise would be as . to , or as l. to
l. s. d. in the same manner it might be
shewn, that if the labour of ten additional men
would only produce  quarters, the price
would further rise to l. s.; if , to l. s.,
&c. &c.
but when  quarters were produced
on the land paying no rent, and its
price was l. per quarter, it sold for
and when  quarters were produced
on the land paying no rent, and the
price rose to l. s. d. it still sold for
so,  quarters at l. s. produce
and  quarters at l. s. produce the same sum of
now it is evident, that if out of these equal
values, the farmer is at one time obliged to
pay wages regulated by the price of wheat
at l., and at other times at higher prices,
the rate of his profits will diminish in proportion
to the rise in the price of corn.
in this case, therefore, i think it is clearly
demonstrated that a rise in the price of corn,
which increases the money wages of the labourer,
diminishes the money value of the
farmer's profits.
but the case of the farmer of the old and
better land will be in no way different; he
also will have increased wages to pay, and
will never retain more of the value of the
produce, however high may be its price, than
l. to be divided between himself and his
always equal number of labourers; in proportion
therefore as they get more, he must
retain less.
when the price of corn was at l., the
whole  quarters belonged to the cultivator,
and he sold it for l. when corn rose to
l. s. d. he was obliged to pay the value of
ten quarters out of his  for rent, consequently
the remaining  yielded him no
more than l.: when it rose further to l.
s. he paid twenty quarters, or their value,
for rent, and consequently only retained 
quarters, which yielded the same sum of
l.
it will be seen then, that whatever rise may
take place in the price of corn, in consequence
of the necessity of employing more
labour and capital to obtain a given additional
quantity of produce, such rise will always
be equalled in value by the additional
rent, or additional labour employed; so that
whether corn sells for l., l. s., or l. s. d.,
the farmer will obtain for that which remains
to him, after paying rent, the same real value.
thus we see, that whether the produce belonging
to the farmer be , , , or
 quarters, he always obtains the same
sum of l. for it; the price increasing in
an inverse proportion to the quantity.
rent then, it appears, always falls on the
consumer, and never on the farmer; for if
the produce of his farm should uniformly be
 quarters, with the rise of price, he would
retain the value of a less quantity for himself,
and give the value of a larger quantity
to his landlord; but the deduction would be
such as to leave him always the same sum of
l.
it will be seen too that, in all cases, the
same sum of l. must be divided between
wages and profits. if the value of
the raw produce from the land exceed this
value, it belongs to rent, whatever may be
its amount. if there be no excess, there will
be no rent. whether wages or profits rise
or fall, it is this sum of l. from which
they must both be provided. on the one
hand, profits can never rise so high as to
absorb so much of this l., that enough
will not be left to furnish the labourers with
absolute necessaries; on the other hand, wages
can never rise so high as to leave no portion
of this sum for profits.
thus in every case, agricultural, as well as
manufacturing profits are lowered by a rise
in the price of raw produce, if it be accompanied
by a rise of wages. if the farmer
gets no additional value for the corn which
remains to him after paying rent, if the manufacturer
gets no additional value for the
goods which he manufactures, and if both
are obliged to pay a greater value in wages,
can any point be more clearly established
than that profits must fall, with a rise of
wages?
the farmer then, although he pays no part
of his landlord's rent, that being always regulated
by the price of produce, and invariably
falling on the consumers, has however
a very decided interest in keeping rent low,
or rather in keeping the natural price of produce
low. as a consumer of raw produce,
and of those things into which raw produce
enters as a component part, he will in
common with all other consumers, be interested
in keeping the price low. but he is
most materially concerned with the high price
of corn as it affects wages. with every rise
in the price of corn, he will have to pay out
of an equal and unvarying sum of l., an
additional sum for wages to the ten men
whom he is supposed constantly to employ.
we have seen in treating on wages, that they
invariably rise with the rise in the price of
raw produce. on a basis assumed for the
purpose of calculation, page , it will be
seen that if when wheat is at l. per quarter,
wages should be l. per annum.
£s.d.
£s.d.
when wheat is at
wages would be
now, of the unvarying fund of l. to be
distributed between labourers and farmers,
£s.d.
£s.
£s.d.
when the price of wheat at
the labourer will receive
the former will receive
and supposing that the original capital of the
farmer was l., the profits of his stock
being in the first instance l., would be at
the rate of  per cent. when his profits fell to
l., they would be at the rate of . per cent.
but the rate of profits will fall still more,
because the capital of the farmer, it must be
recollected, consists in a great measure of
raw produce, such as his corn and hay-ricks,
his unthreshed wheat and barley, his horses
and cows, which would all rise in price in
consequence of the rise of produce. his
absolute profits would fall from l. to l.
s.; but if from the cause which i have just
stated, his capital should rise from l. to
l. the rate of his profits would, when corn
was at l. s. d., be under  per cent.
if a manufacturer had also employed l.
in his business, he would be obliged in consequence
of the rise of wages, to increase his capital,
in order to be enabled to carry on the same
business. if his commodities sold before for
l., they would continue to sell at the same
price; but the wages of labour, which were
before l., would rise when corn was at
l. s. d. to l. s. in the first case he
would have a balance of l. as profit on
l., in the second he would have a profit
only of l. s., on an increased capital, and
therefore his profits would conform to the
altered rate of those of the farmer.
there are few commodities which are not
more or less affected in their price by the rise
of raw produce, because some raw material
from the land enters into the composition of
most commodities. cotton goods, linen, and
cloth, will all rise in price with the rise of
wheat; but they rise on account of the greater
quantity of labour expended on the raw
material from which they are made, and not
because more was paid by the manufacturer
to the labourers whom he employed on those
commodities.
in all cases, commodities rise because more
labour is expended on them, and not because
the labour which is expended on them is at a
higher value. articles of jewellery, of iron,
of plate, and of copper, would not rise, because
none of the raw produce from the surface of
the earth enters into their composition.
it may be said that i have taken it for
granted, that money wages would rise with a
rise in the price of raw produce, but that this
is by no means a necessary consequence, as
the labourer may be contented with fewer
enjoyments. it is true that the wages of
labour may previously have been at a high
level, and that they may bear some reduction.
if so, the fall of profits will be checked; but
it is impossible to conceive that the money
price of wages should fall, or remain stationary
with a gradually increasing price of
necessaries; and therefore it may be taken
for granted that, under ordinary circumstances,
no permanent rise takes place in the
price of necessaries, without occasioning, or
having been preceded by a rise in wages.
the effects produced on profits, would
have been the same, or nearly the same, if
there had been any rise in the price of those
other necessaries, besides food, on which the
wages of labour are expended. the necessity
which the labourer would be under of paying
an increased price for such necessaries,
would oblige him to demand more wages;
and whatever increases wages, necessarily
reduces profits. but suppose the price of
silks, velvets, furniture, and any other commodities,
not required by the labourer, to
rise in consequence of more labour being
expended on them, would not that affect
profits? certainly not: for nothing can affect
profits but a rise in wages; silks and velvets
are not consumed by the labourer, and therefore
cannot raise wages.
it is to be understood that i am speaking
of profits generally. i have already remarked
that the market price of a commodity may
exceed its natural or necessary price, as it
may be produced in less abundance than
the new demand for it requires. this however
is but a temporary effect. the high
profits on capital employed in producing that
commodity will naturally attract capital to
that trade; and as soon as the requisite funds
are supplied, and the quantity of the commodity
is duly increased, its price will fall,
and the profits of the trade will conform to
the general level. a fall in the general rate
of profits is by no means incompatible with a
partial rise of profits in particular employments.
it is through the inequality of profits,
that capital is moved from one employment
to another. whilst then general profits are
falling, and gradually settling at a lower
level in consequence of the rise of wages, and
the increasing difficulty of supplying the
increasing population with necessaries, the
profits of the farmer, may, for an interval of
some little duration, be above the former
level. an extraordinary stimulus may be
also given for a certain time, to a particular
branch of foreign and colonial trade; but the
admission of this fact by no means invalidates
the theory, that profits depend on high or low
wages, wages on the price of necessaries, and
the price of necessaries chiefly on the price of
food, because all other requisites may be
increased almost without limit.
it should be recollected that prices always
vary in the market, and in the first instance,
through the comparative state of demand and
supply. although cloth could be furnished
at s. per yard, and give the usual profits of
stock, it may rise to  or s. from a general
change of fashion, or from any other cause
which should suddenly and unexpectedly
increase the demand, or diminish the supply
of it. the makers of cloth will for a time
have unusual profits, but capital will naturally
flow to that manufacture, till the supply and
demand are again at their fair level, when the
price of cloth will again sink to s., its natural
or necessary price. in the same manner, with
every increased demand for corn, it may rise so
high as to afford more than the general profits
to the farmer. if there be plenty of fertile
land, the price of corn will again fall to its
former standard, after the requisite quantity
of capital has been employed in producing it,
and profits will be as before; but if there be
not plenty of fertile land, if, to produce this
additional quantity, more than the usual
quantity of capital and labour be required,
corn will not fall to its former level. its
natural price will be raised, and the farmer,
instead of obtaining permanently larger
profits, will find himself obliged to be satisfied
with the diminished rate which is the inevitable
consequence of the rise of wages, produced
by the rise of necessaries.
the natural tendency of profits then is to
fall; for, in the progress of society and wealth,
the additional quantity of food required is obtained
by the sacrifice of more and more labour.
this tendency, this gravitation as it were of
profits, is happily checked at repeated intervals
by the improvements in machinery, connected
with the production of necessaries, as well as
by discoveries in the science of agriculture
which enable us to relinquish a portion of
labour before required, and therefore to lower
the price of the prime necessary of the labourer.
the rise in the price of necessaries and in the
wages of labour is however limited; for as soon
as wages should be equal (as in the case formerly
stated) to l., the whole receipts of the
farmer, there must be an end of accumulation;
for no capital can then yield any profit whatever,
and no additional labour can be demanded,
and consequently population will have
reached its highest point. long indeed before
this period, the very low rate of profits will
have arrested all accumulation, and almost the
whole produce of the country, after paying the
labourers, will be the property of the owners
of land and the receivers of tithes and taxes.
thus, taking the former very imperfect basis
as the grounds of my calculation, it would
appear that when corn was at l. per quarter,
the whole net income of the country would
belong to the landlords, for then the same
quantity of labour that was originally necessary
to produce  quarters, would be necessary
to produce ; since l. : l. ::  : .
the farmer then, who originally produced
 quarters, (if any such there were, for the
old and new capital employed on the land
would be so blended, that it could in no
way be distinguished,) would sell the
 qrs. at l. per qr. or
the value of
grs.
to landlord for rent, being the
difference between  and  qrs.
 grs.
the value of
 grs.
to labourers ten in number
leaving nothing whatever for profit.
at this price of l. the labourers would continue to consume
three quarters each per annum or
and on other commodities they would expend
 for each labourer
and therefore ten labourers would cost
l. per annum.
in all these calculations i have been desirous
only to elucidate the principle, and it is
scarcely necessary to observe, that my whole
basis is assumed at random, and merely for the
purpose of exemplification. the results though
different in degree, would have been the same
in principle, however accurately i might have
set out in stating the difference in the number
of labourers necessary to obtain the successive
quantities of corn required by an increasing
population, the quantity consumed
by the labourer's family, &c. &c. my object
has been to simplify the subject, and i have
therefore made no allowance for the increasing
price of the other necessaries, besides food,
of the labourer; an increase which would be
the consequence of the increased value of
the raw material from which they are made,
and which would of course further increase
wages, and lower profits.
i have already said, that long before this
state of prices was become permanent, there
would be no motive for accumulation; for no
one accumulates but with a view to make
his accumulation productive, and it is only
when so employed that it operates on profits.
without a motive there could be no
accumulation, and consequently such a state
of prices never could take place. the farmer
and manufacturer can no more live without
profit, than the labourer without wages.
their motive for accumulation will diminish
with every diminution of profit, and will
cease altogether when their profits are so low
as not to afford them an adequate compensation
for their trouble, and the risk which
they must necessarily encounter in employing
their capital productively.
i must again observe, that the rate of profits
would fall much more rapidly than i
have estimated in my calculation: for the
value of the produce being what i have stated
it under the circumstances supposed, the value
of the farmer's stock would be greatly increased
from its necessarily consisting of many
of the commodities which had risen in value.
before corn could rise from l. to l. his
capital would probably be doubled in exchangeable
value, and be worth l. instead
of l. if then his profit were l., or 
per cent. on his original capital, profits would
not at that time be really at a higher rate
than  per cent.; for l. at  per cent. gives
l.; and on those terms only could a new
farmer with l. money in his pocket enter
into the farming business.
many trades would derive some advantage,
more or less, from the same source. the
brewer, the distiller, the clothier, the linen
manufacturer, would be partly compensated
for the diminution of their profits, by the rise
in the value of their stock of raw and finished
materials; but a manufacturer of hardware,
of jewellery, and of many other commodities,
as well as those whose capitals uniformly consisted
of money, would be subject to the
whole fall in the rate of profits, without any
compensation whatever.
we should also expect that, however the
rate of the profits of stock might diminish in
consequence of the accumulation of capital on
the land, and the rise of wages, yet the aggregate
amount of profits would increase. thus
supposing that, with repeated accumulations of
,l., the rate of profit should fall from
 to , to , to  per cent., a constantly
diminishing rate, we should expect that the
whole amount of profits received by those
successive owners of capital would be always
progressive; that it would be greater
when the capital was ,l., than when
,l.; still greater when ,l.; and
so on, increasing, though at a diminishing rate,
with every increase of capital. this progression
however is only true for a certain time:
thus  per cent. on ,l. is more than 
on ,l.; again  per cent. on ,l. is
more than  per cent. on ,l.; but
after capital has accumulated to a large
amount, and profits have fallen, the further
accumulation diminishes the aggregate of
profits. thus suppose the accumulation
should be ,,l., and the profits  per
cent. the whole amount of profits will be
,l.; now if an addition of ,l. capital
be made to the million, and profits should
fall to  per cent., ,l. or a diminution
of l. will be received by the owners of
stock, although the whole amount of stock
will be increased from ,,l. to ,,l.
there can, however, be no accumulation
of capital, so long as stock yields any profit
at all, without its yielding not only an increase
of produce, but an increase of value.
by employing ,l. additional capital, no
part of the former capital will be rendered
less productive. the produce of the land and
labour of the country must increase, and its
value will be raised, not only by the value of
the addition which is made to the former
quantity of productions, but by the new value
which is given to the whole produce of
the land, by the increased difficulty of producing
the last portion of it, which new value
always goes to rent. when the accumulation
of capital, however, becomes very great,
notwithstanding this increased value, it will
be so distributed that a less value than before
will be appropriated to profits, while that
which is devoted to rent and wages will
be increased. thus with successive additions
of ,l. to capital, with a fall in
the rate of profits, from  to , to , to
 per cent. &c. the productions annually
obtained will increase in quantity, and be of
more than the whole additional value, which
the additional capital is calculated to produce.
from ,l. it will rise to more
than ,l. and then to more than ,l.,
and when the capital employed is a million,
as we before supposed, if ,l. more be
added to it, and the aggregate of profits is
actually lower than before, more than l.
will nevertheless be added to the revenue of
the country, but it will be to the revenue of
the landlords; they will obtain more than
the additional produce, and will from their
situation be enabled to encroach even on the
former gains of the capitalist. thus, suppose
the price of corn to be l. per quarter, and that
therefore, as we before calculated, of every
l. remaining to the farmer after payment
of his rent, l. were retained by him, and
l. were paid to his labourers; when the
price rose to l. per quarter, he would be
obliged to pay his labourers l. and retain
only l. for profits. now if the capital
employed were so large as to yield a hundred
thousand times l. or ,,l. the aggregate
of profits would be ,,l. when
wheat was at l. per quarter; and if by employing
a larger capital, , times l. were
obtained when wheat was at l., or ,,l.,
profits would actually fall from ,,l. to
,,l. or , times l., and wages
would rise from ,,l. to ,,l.
wages would rise because more labourers
would be employed, in proportion to capital;
and each labourer would receive more money
wages; but the condition of the labourer, as
we have already shewn, would be worse, inasmuch
as he would be able to command a
less quantity of the produce of the country.
the only real gainers would be the landlords;
they would receive higher rents, first, because
produce would be of a higher value, and
secondly, because they would have a greatly
increased proportion.
although a greater value is produced, a
greater proportion of what remains of that
value, after paying rent, is consumed by the
producers, and it is this, and this alone, which
regulates profits. whilst the land yields abundantly,
wages may temporarily rise, and
the producers may consume more than their
accustomed proportion; but the stimulus
which will thus be given to population, will
speedily reduce the labourers to their usual
consumption. but when poor lands are taken
into cultivation, or when more capital
and labour are expended on the old land,
with a less return of produce, the effect must
be permanent. a greater proportion of that
part of the produce which remains to be divided,
after paying rent, between the owners
of stock and the labourers, will be apportioned
to the latter. each man may, and probably
will, have a less absolute quantity; but as
more labourers are employed in proportion
to the whole produce retained by the farmer,
the value of a greater proportion of the whole
produce will be absorbed by wages, and consequently
the value of a smaller proportion
will be devoted to profits. this will necessarily
be rendered permanent by the laws of
nature, which have limited the productive
powers of the land.
thus we again arrive at the same conclusion
which we have before attempted to establish:—that
in all countries, and at all times,
profits depend on the quantity of labour requisite
to provide necessaries for the labourers,
on that land or with that capital which
yields no rent. the effects then of accumulation
will be different in different countries,
and will depend chiefly on the fertility of the
land. however extensive a country may be
where the land is of a poor quality, and where
the importation of food is prohibited, the
most moderate accumulations of capital will
be attended with great reductions in the rate
of profit, and a rapid rise in rent; and on the
contrary a small but fertile country, particularly
if it freely permits the importation of
food, may accumulate a large stock of capital
without any great diminution in the rate
of profits, or any great increase in the rent of
land. in the chapter on wages, we have
endeavoured to shew that the money price
of commodities would not be raised by a
rise of wages, either on the supposition that
gold, the standard of money, was the produce
of this country, or that it was imported from
abroad. but if it were otherwise, if the prices
of commodities were permanently raised by
high wages, the proposition would not be
less true, which asserts that high wages invariably
affect the employers of labour, by depriving
them of a portion of their real profits.
supposing the hatter, the hosier, and the
shoemaker, each paid l. more wages in the
manufacture of a particular quantity of their
commodities, and that the price of hats,
stockings, and shoes, rose by a sum sufficient
to repay the manufacturer the l.; their
situation would be no better than if no such
rise took place. if the hosier sold his stockings
for l. instead of l., his profits
would be precisely the same money amount
as before; but as he would obtain in exchange
for this equal sum, one tenth less of hats, shoes,
and every other commodity, and as he could
with his former amount of savings employ
fewer labourers at the increased wages, and
purchase fewer raw materials at the increased
prices, he would be in no better situation
than if his money profits had been really diminished
in amount, and every thing had
remained at its former price. thus then i
have endeavoured to shew, first, that a rise of
wages would not raise the price of commodities,
but would invariably lower profits;
and secondly, that if the prices of commodities
could be raised, still the effect on profits
would be the same; and that in fact the
value of the medium only in which prices
and profits are estimated would be lowered.
no extension of foreign trade will immediately
increase the amount of value in a
country, although it will very powerfully
contribute to increase the mass of commodities,
and therefore the sum of enjoyments.
as the value of all foreign goods is measured
by the quantity of the produce of our land
and labour, which is given in exchange for
them, we should have no greater value, if by
the discovery of new markets, we obtained
double the quantity of foreign goods in exchange
for a given quantity of ours. if by
the purchase of english goods to the amount
of l. a merchant can obtain a quantity of
foreign goods, which he can sell in the english
market for ,l., he will obtain  per
cent. profit by such an employment of his
capital; but neither his gains, nor the value
of the commodities imported, will be increased
or diminished by the greater or smaller
quantity of foreign goods obtained. whether,
for example, he imports twenty-five or
fifty pipes of wine, his interest can be no way
affected, if at one time the twenty-five pipes,
and at another the fifty pipes, equally sell
for ,l. in either case his profit will be
limited to l., or  per cent. on his capital;
and in either case the same value will be imported
into england. if the fifty pipes sold
for more than ,l., the profits of this individual
merchant would exceed the general
rate of profits, and capital would naturally
flow into this advantageous trade, till the fall
of the price of wine had brought every thing
to the former level.
it has indeed been contended, that the
great profits which are sometimes made by
particular merchants in foreign trade, will
elevate the general rate of profits in the country,
and that the abstraction of capital from
other employments, to partake of the new
and beneficial foreign commerce, will raise
prices generally, and thereby increase profits.
it has been said, by high authority, that
less capital being necessarily devoted to the
growth of corn, to the manufacture of cloth,
hats, shoes, &c. while the demand continues
the same, the price of these commodities will
be so increased, that the farmer, hatter, clothier,
and shoemaker, will have an increase
of profits, as well as the foreign merchant.
they who hold this argument agree with
me, that the profits of different employments
have a tendency to conform to one another;
to advance and recede together. our variance
consists in this: they contend, that
the equality of profits will be brought about
by the general rise of profits; and i am of
opinion, that the profits of the favoured
trade will speedily subside to the general
level.
for, first, i deny that less capital will necessarily
be devoted to the growth of corn,
to the manufacture of cloth, hats, shoes, &c.,
unless the demand for these commodities be
diminished; and if so, their price will not
rise. in the purchase of foreign commodities,
either the same, a larger, or a less portion
of the produce of the land and labour
of england will be employed. if the same portion
be so employed, then will the same demand
exist for cloth, shoes, corn, and hats, as
before, and the same portion of capital will
be devoted to their production. if, in consequence
of the price of foreign commodities
being cheaper, a less portion of the
annual produce of the land and labour of
england is employed in the purchase of foreign
commodities, more will remain for the
purchase of other things. if there be a
greater demand for hats, shoes, corn, &c.
than before, which there may be, the consumers
of foreign commodities having an additional
portion of their revenue disposable,
the capital is also disposable with which the
greater value of foreign commodities was before
purchased; so that with the increased
demand for corn, shoes, &c. there exists also
the means of procuring an increased supply,
and therefore neither prices nor profits can
permanently rise. if more of the produce of
the land and labour of england be employed
in the purchase of foreign commodities, less
can be employed in the purchase of other
things, and therefore fewer hats, shoes, &c.
will be required. at the same time that capital
is liberated from the production of shoes,
hats, &c. more must be employed in manufacturing
those commodities with which foreign
commodities are purchased; and consequently
in all cases the demand for foreign
and home commodities together, as far as regards
value, is limited by the revenue and
capital of the country. if one increases, the
other must diminish. if the importation of
wine, given in exchange for the same quantity
of english commodities be doubled, the people
of england can either consume double the
quantity of wine that they did before, or the
same quantity of wine and a greater quantity
of english commodities. if my revenue had
been l., with which i purchased annually
one pipe of wine for l. and a certain quantity
of english commodities for l.; when
wine fell to l. per pipe, i might lay out the
l. saved, either in the purchase of an additional
pipe of wine, or in the purchase of
more english commodities. if i bought
more wine, and every wine-drinker did the
same, the foreign trade would not be in the
least disturbed; the same quantity of english
commodities would be exported in exchange
for wine, and we should receive double the
quantity, though not double the value of
wine. but if i, and others contented ourselves
with the same quantity of wine as before,
fewer english commodities would be
exported, and the wine-drinkers might either
consume the commodities which were before
exported, or any others for which they had
an inclination. the capital required for their
production would be supplied by the capital
liberated from the foreign trade.
there are two ways in which capital may be
accumulated: it may be saved either in consequence
of increased revenue, or of diminished
consumption. if my profits are raised
from l. to l. while my expenditure
continues the same, i accumulate annually
l. more than i did before. if i save l.
out of my expenditure while my profits continue
the same, the same effect will be produced;
l. per annum will be added to my
capital. the merchant who imported wine
after profits had been raised from  per cent.
to  per cent., instead of purchasing his english
goods for l., must purchase them for
l. s. d., still selling the wine which he
imports in return for those goods for l.;
or, if he continued to purchase his english
goods for l., must raise the price of his
wine to l.; he would thus obtain  instead
of  per cent. profit on his capital;
but if, in consequence of the cheapness of all
the commodities on which his revenue was
expended, he and all other consumers could
save the value of l. out of every l.
they before expended, they would more effectually
add to the real wealth of the country;
in one case, the savings would be made
in consequence of an increase of revenue,
in the other in consequence of diminished
expenditure.
if, by the introduction of machinery, the
generality of the commodities on which revenue
was expended fell  per cent. in value,
i should be enabled to save as effectually as
if my revenue had been raised  per cent.;
but in one case the rate of profits is stationary,
in the other it is raised  per cent.—if,
by the introduction of cheap foreign
goods, i can save  per cent. from my expenditure,
the effect will be precisely the
same as if machinery had lowered the expense
of their production, but profits would
not be raised.
it is not, therefore, in consequence of the
extension of the market that the rate of profits
is raised, although such extension may be
equally efficacious in increasing the mass of
commodities, and may thereby enable us to
augment the funds destined for the maintenance
of labour, and the materials on which
labour may be employed. it is quite as important
to the happiness of mankind, that our
enjoyments should be increased by the better
distribution of labour, by each country producing
those commodities for which by its
situation, its climate, and its other natural or
artificial advantages it is adapted, and by their
exchanging them for the commodities of other
countries, as that they should be augmented
by a rise in the rate of profits.
it has been my endeavour to shew throughout
this work, that the rate of profits can
never be increased but by a fall in wages,
and that there can be no permanent fall of
wages but in consequence of a fall of the necessaries
on which wages are expended. if,
therefore, by the extension of foreign trade,
or by improvements in machinery, the food
and necessaries of the labourer can be brought
to market at a reduced price, profits will rise.
if, instead of growing our own corn, or manufacturing
the clothing and other necessaries
of the labourer, we discover a new market
from which we can supply ourselves with
these commodities at a cheaper price, wages
will fall and profits rise; but if the commodities
obtained at a cheaper rate, by the extension
of foreign commerce, or by the improvement
of machinery, be exclusively the commodities
consumed by the rich, no alteration
will take place in the rate of profits. the
rate of wages would not be affected, although
wine, velvets, silks, and other expensive commodities,
should fall  per cent., and consequently
profits would continue unaltered.
foreign trade, then, though highly beneficial
to a country, as it increases the amount
and variety of the objects on which revenue
may be expended, and affords, by the abundance
and cheapness of commodities, incentives
to saving, and to the accumulation of
capital, has no tendency to raise the profits
of stock, unless the commodities imported
be of that description on which the wages of
labour are expended.
the remarks which have been made respecting
foreign trade, apply equally to home
trade. the rate of profits is never increased
by a better distribution of labour, by the invention
of machinery, by the establishment
of roads and canals, or by any means of
abridging labour either in the manufacture
or in the conveyance of goods. these are
causes which operate on price, and never fail
to be highly beneficial to consumers; since
they enable them with the same labour, or
with the value of the produce of the same
labour, to obtain in exchange a greater quantity
of the commodity to which the improvement
is applied; but they have no effect
whatever on profit. on the other hand,
every diminution in the wages of labour raises
profits, but produces no effect on the price of
commodities. one is advantageous to all
classes, for all classes are consumers; the
other is beneficial only to producers; they
gain more, but every thing remains at its
former price. in the first case, they get the
same as before; but every thing on which
their gains are expended, is diminished in exchangeable
value.
the same rule which regulates the relative
value of commodities in one country, does
not regulate the relative value of the commodities
exchanged between two or more countries.
under a system of perfectly free commerce,
each country naturally devotes its capital
and labour to such employments as are most
beneficial to each. this pursuit of individual
advantage is admirably connected with the
universal good of the whole. by stimulating
industry, by rewarding ingenuity, and by
using most efficaciously the peculiar powers
bestowed by nature, it distributes labour
most effectively and most economically:
while, by increasing the general mass of
productions, it diffuses general benefit, and
binds together by one common tie of interest
and intercourse, the universal society of
nations throughout the civilized world. it is
this principle which determines that wine
shall be made in france and portugal, that
corn shall be grown in america and poland,
and that hardware and other goods shall be
manufactured in england.
in one and the same country, profits are,
generally speaking, always on the same level;
or differ only as the employment of capital
may be more or less secure and agreeable.
it is not so between different countries. if
the profits of capital employed in yorkshire,
should exceed those of capital employed in
london, capital would speedily move from
london to yorkshire, and an equality of
profits would be effected; but if in consequence
of the diminished rate of production
in the lands of england, from the increase of
capital and population, wages should rise,
and profits fall, it would not follow that capital
and population would necessarily move
from england to holland, or spain, or russia,
where profits might be higher.
if portugal had no commercial connexion
with other countries, instead of employing a
great part of her capital and industry in the
production of wines, with which she purchases
for her own use the cloth and hardware
of other countries, she would be obliged
to devote a part of that capital to the manufacture
of those commodities, which she
would thus obtain probably inferior in quality
as well as quantity.
the quantity of wine which she shall give
in exchange for the cloth of england, is not
determined by the respective quantities of
labour devoted to the production of each, as
it would be, if both commodities were manufactured
in england, or both in portugal.
england may be so circumstanced, that to
produce the cloth may require the labour of
 men for one year; and if she attempted
to make the wine, it might require the labour
of  men for the same time. england
would therefore find it her interest to import
wine, and to purchase it by the exportation
of cloth.
to produce the wine in portugal, might
require only the labour of eighty men for one
year, and to produce the cloth in the same
country, might require the labour of ninety
men for the same time. it would therefore
be advantageous for her to export wine in
exchange for cloth. this exchange might
even take place, notwithstanding that the
commodity imported by portugal could be
produced there with less labour than in england.
though she could make the cloth
with the labour of ninety men, she would import
it from a country where it required the
labour of  men to produce it, because it
would be advantageous to her rather to employ
her capital in the production of wine,
for which she would obtain more cloth from
england, than she could produce by diverting
a portion of her capital from the cultivation
of vines to the manufacture of cloth.
thus, england would give the produce of
the labour of  men for the produce of the
labour of . such an exchange could not
take place between the individuals of the
same country. the labour of  englishmen
cannot be given for that of  englishmen,
but the produce of the labour of 
englishmen may be given for the produce of
the labour of  portuguese,  russians, or
 east indians. the difference in this
respect, between a single country and many,
is easily accounted for, by considering the
difficulty with which capital moves from one
country to another, to seek a more profitable
employment, and the activity with which it
invariably passes from one province to another
in the same country.
it would undoubtedly be advantageous to
the capitalists of england, and to the consumers
in both countries, that under such circumstances,
the wine and the cloth should
both be made in portugal, and therefore that
the capital and labour of england employed
in making cloth, should be removed to portugal
for that purpose. in that case, the
relative value of these commodities would be
regulated by the same principle, as if one were
the produce of yorkshire, and the other of
london; and in every other case, if capital
freely flowed towards those countries where
it could be most profitably employed, there
could be no difference in the rate of profit,
and no other difference in the real or labour
price of commodities, than the additional
quantity of labour required to convey them
to the various markets where they were to be
sold.
experience however shews, that the fancied
or real insecurity of capital, when not under
the immediate control of its owner, together
with the natural disinclination which every
man has to quit the country of his birth and
connexions, and intrust himself with all his
habits fixed, to a strange government and new
laws, check the emigration of capital. these
feelings, which i should be sorry to see weakened,
induce most men of property to be
satisfied with a low rate of profits in their
own country, rather than seek a more advantageous
employment for their wealth in foreign
nations.
gold and silver having been chosen for the
general medium of circulation, they are, by
the competition of commerce, distributed in
such proportions amongst the different countries
of the world, as to accommodate themselves
to the natural traffic which would
take place if no such metals existed, and the
trade between countries were purely a trade of
barter.
thus, cloth cannot be imported into portugal,
unless it sell there for more gold than
it cost in the country from which it was
imported; and wine cannot be imported into
england, unless it will sell for more there than
it cost in portugal. if the trade were purely
a trade of barter, it could only continue
whilst england could make cloth so cheap as
to obtain a greater quantity of wine with a
given quantity of labour, by manufacturing
cloth than by growing vines; and also whilst
the industry of portugal were attended by
the reverse effects. now suppose england
to discover a process for making wine, so that
it should become her interest rather to grow
it than import it: she would naturally divert
a portion of her capital from the foreign trade
to the home trade; she would cease to manufacture
cloth for exportation, and would grow
wine for herself. the money price of these
commodities would be regulated accordingly;
wine would fall here while cloth continued
at its former price, and in portugal no alteration
would take place in the price of either
commodity. cloth would continue for some
time to be exported from this country, because
its price would continue to be higher in
portugal than here; but money instead of
wine would be given in exchange for it, till
the accumulation of money here, and its
diminution abroad, should so operate on the
relative value of cloth in the two countries,
that it would cease to be profitable to export
it. if the improvement in making wine
were of a very important description, it might
become profitable for the two countries to
exchange employments; for england to make
all the wine, and portugal all the cloth, consumed
by them: but this could be effected
only by a new distribution of the precious
metals, which should raise the price of cloth
in england, and lower it in portugal. the
relative price of wine would fall in england
in consequence of the real advantage from
the improvement of its manufacture; that is to
say, its natural price would fall: the relative
price of cloth would rise there from the
accumulation of money.
thus, suppose before the improvement in
making wine in england, the price of wine
here were l. per pipe, and the price of a
certain quantity of cloth were l., whilst in
portugal the price of the same quantity of
wine was l., and that of the same quantity
of cloth l.; wine would be exported from
portugal with a profit of l., and cloth from
england with a profit of the same amount.
suppose that, after the improvement, wine
falls to l. in england, the cloth continuing
at the same price. every transaction in
commerce is an independent transaction.
whilst a merchant can buy cloth in england
for l., and sell it with the usual profit in
portugal, he will continue to export it from
england. his business is simply to purchase
english cloth, and to pay for it by a bill of
exchange, which he purchases with portuguese
money. it is to him of no importance what
becomes of this money; he has discharged his
debt by the remittance of the bill. his
transaction is undoubtedly regulated by the
terms on which he can obtain this bill, but
they are known to him at the time; and the
causes which may influence the market price
of bills, or the rate of exchange, is no consideration
of his.
if the markets be favourable for the exportation
of wine from portugal to england,
the exporter of the wine will be a seller of a
bill, which will be purchased either by the
importer of the cloth, or by the person who
sold him his bill; and thus without the necessity
of money passing from either country,
the exporters in each country will be paid for
their goods. without having any direct
transaction with each other, the money paid
in portugal by the importer of cloth will be
paid to the portuguese exporter of wine; and
in england by the negociation of the same
bill, the exporter of the cloth will be authorized
to receive its value from the importer of
wine.
but if the prices of wine were such that no
wine could be exported to england, the
importer of cloth would equally purchase a
bill; but the price of that bill would be higher,
from the knowledge which the seller of it
would possess, that there was no counter bill
in the market by which he could ultimately
settle the transactions between the two
countries: he might know that the gold or
silver money which he received in exchange
for his bill, must be actually exported to his
correspondent in england, to enable him to
pay the demand which he had authorized to
be made upon him, and he might therefore
charge in the price of his bill all the expenses
to be incurred, together with his fair and
usual profit.
if then this premium for a bill on england
should be equal to the profit on importing
cloth, the importation would of course cease;
but if the premium on the bill were only  per
cent., if to be enabled to pay a debt in
england of l., l. should be paid in
portugal, whilst cloth which cost l. would
sell for l., cloth would be imported, bills
would be bought, and money would be exported,
till the diminution of money in portugal,
and its accumulation in england, had
produced such a state of prices, as would
make it no longer profitable to continue these
transactions.
but the diminution of money in one country,
and its increase in another, do not operate on
the price of one commodity only, but on the
prices of all, and therefore the price of wine
and cloth will be both raised in england, and
both lowered in portugal. the price of cloth
from being l. in one country, and l. in
the other, would probably fall to l. or l.
in portugal, and rise to l. or l. in england,
and not afford a sufficient profit after paying
a premium for a bill, to induce any merchant
to import that commodity.
it is thus that the money of each country
is apportioned to it in such quantities only as
may be necessary to regulate a profitable trade
of barter. england exported cloth in exchange
for wine, because by so doing, her industry
was rendered more productive to her; she
had more cloth and wine than if she had
manufactured both for herself; and portugal
imported cloth, and exported wine, because
the industry of portugal could be more beneficially
employed for both countries in producing
wine. let there be more difficulty in
england in producing cloth, or in portugal
in producing wine, or let there be more
facility in england in producing wine, or in
portugal in producing cloth, and the trade
must immediately cease.
no change whatever takes place in the
circumstances of portugal; but england finds
that she can employ her labour more productively
in the manufacture of wine, and
instantly the trade of barter between the two
countries changes. not only is the exportation
of wine from portugal stopped, but a
new distribution of the precious metals takes
place, and her importation of cloth is also
prevented.
both countries would probably find it their
interest to make their own wine and their
own cloth; but this singular result would
take place: in england, though wine would be
cheaper, cloth would be elevated in price,
more would be paid for it by the consumer;
while in portugal the consumers, both of cloth
and of wine, would be able to purchase those
commodities cheaper. in the country where
the improvement was made, prices would be
enhanced; in that where no change had
taken place, but where they had been deprived
of a profitable branch of foreign trade,
prices would fall.
this, however, is only a seeming advantage
to portugal, for the quantity of cloth and
wine together produced in that country
would be diminished, while the quantity
produced in england would be increased.
money would in some degree have changed
its value in the two countries—it would be
lowered in england, and raised in portugal.
estimated in money, the whole revenue of
portugal would be diminished; estimated in
the same medium, the whole revenue of
england would be increased.
thus then it appears, that the improvement
of a manufacture in any country tends to
alter the distribution of the precious metals
amongst the nations of the world: it tends
to increase the quantity of commodities, at
the same time that it raises general prices in
the country where the improvement takes
place.
to simplify the question, i have been supposing
the trade between two countries to be
confined to two commodities, to wine and
cloth, but it is well known that many and
various articles enter into the list of exports
and imports. by the abstraction of money
from one country, and the accumulation of
it in another, all commodities are affected in
price, and consequently encouragement is
given to the exportation of many more commodities
besides money, which will therefore
prevent so great an effect from taking place
on the value of money in the two countries,
as might otherwise be expected.
beside the improvements in arts and machinery,
there are various other causes which
are constantly operating on the natural course
of trade, and which interfere with the equilibrium,
and the relative value of money.
bounties on exportation or importation, new
taxes on commodities, sometimes by their direct,
and at other times by their indirect operation,
disturb the natural trade of barter, and
produce a consequent necessity of importing
or exporting money, in order that prices may
be accommodated to the natural course of
commerce; and this effect is produced not
only in the country where the disturbing
cause takes place, but, in a greater or less degree,
in every country of the commercial
world.
this will in some measure account for the
different value of money in different countries;
it will explain to us why the prices of home
commodities, and those of great bulk, are,
independently of other causes, higher in those
countries where manufactures flourish. of
two countries having precisely the same population,
and the same quantity of land of equal
fertility in cultivation, with the same knowledge
too of agriculture, the prices of raw
produce will be highest in that where the
greater skill, and the better machinery is
used in the manufacture of exportable commodities.
the rate of profits will probably
differ but little; for wages, or the real reward
of the labourer, may be the same in both;
but those wages, as well as raw produce, will
be rated higher in money in that country, into
which, from the advantages attending their
skill and machinery, an abundance of money
is imported in exchange for their goods.
of these two countries, if one had the advantage
in the manufacture of goods of one
quality, and the other in the manufacture of
goods of another quality, there would be no
decided influx of the precious metals into
either; but if the advantage very heavily preponderated
in favour of either, that effect
would be inevitable.
in the former part of this work, we have
assumed for the purpose of argument, that
money always continued of the same value;
we are now endeavouring to shew that besides
the ordinary variations in the value of
money, and those which are common to the
whole commercial world, there are also partial
variations to which money is subject in
particular countries; and in fact, that the
value of money is never the same in any two
countries, depending as it does on relative
taxation, on manufacturing skill, on the advantages
of climate, natural productions, and
many other causes.
although, however, money is subject to
such perpetual variations, and consequently
the prices of the commodities which are common
to most countries, are also subject to
considerable difference, yet no effect will be
produced on the rate of profits, either from
the influx or efflux of money. capital will
not be increased, because the circulating medium
is augmented. if the rent paid by the
farmer to his landlord, and the wages to his
labourers, be  per cent. higher in one country
than another, and if at the same time the
nominal value of the farmer's capital be 
per cent. more, he will receive precisely the
same rate of profits, although he should sell
his raw produce  per cent. higher.
profits, it cannot be too often repeated,
depend on wages; not on nominal, but real
wages; not on the number of pounds that may
be annually paid to the labourer, but on the
number of days' work necessary to obtain
those pounds. wages may therefore be precisely
the same in two countries: they may
bear too the same proportion to rent, and to
the whole produce obtained from the land,
although in one of those countries the labourer
should receive ten shillings per week,
and in the other twelve.
in the early states of society, when manufactures
have made little progress, and the
produce of all countries is nearly similar, consisting
of the bulky and most useful commodities,
the value of money in different
countries will be chiefly regulated by their
distance from the mines which supply the
precious metals; but as the arts and improvements
of society advance, and different nations
excel in particular manufactures, although
distance will still enter into the calculation,
the value of the precious metals will
be chiefly regulated by the superiority of
those manufactures.
suppose all nations to produce corn, cattle,
and coarse clothing only, and that it was by
the exportation of such commodities that gold
could be obtained from the countries which
produced them, or from those who held them
in subjection; gold would naturally be of
greater exchangeable value in poland than
in england, on account of the greater expense
of sending such a bulky commodity as
corn the more distant voyage, and also the
greater expense attending the conveying of
gold to poland.
this difference in the value of gold, or
which is the same thing, this difference in the
price of corn in the two countries, would
exist although the facilities of producing corn
in england should far exceed those of poland,
from the greater fertility of the land, and the
superiority in the skill and implements of the
labourer.
if however poland should be the first to
improve her manufactures, if she should succeed
in making a commodity which was generally
desirable, including great value in little
bulk, or if she should be exclusively blessed
with some natural production, generally
desirable, and not possessed by other countries,
she would obtain an additional quantity
of gold in exchange for this commodity, which
would operate on the price of her corn,
cattle, and coarse clothing. the disadvantage
of distance would probably be more than
compensated by the advantage of having an
exportable commodity of great value, and
money would be permanently of lower value
in poland than in england. if on the contrary,
the advantage of skill and machinery
were possessed by england, another reason
would be added to that which before existed,
why gold should be less valuable in england
than in poland, and why corn, cattle, and
clothing, should be at a higher price in the
former country.
these i believe to be the only two causes
which regulate the comparative value of
money in the different countries of the world;
for although taxation occasions a disturbance
of the equilibrium of money, it does so by
depriving the country in which it is imposed
of some of the advantages attending skill, industry,
and climate.
it has been my endeavour carefully to distinguish
between a low value of money, and
a high value of corn, or any other commodity
with which money may be compared.
these have been generally considered as
meaning the same thing; but it is evident,
that when corn rises from five to ten shillings
a bushel, it may be owing either to a fall in
the value of money, or to a rise in the value
of corn. thus we have seen, that from the
necessity of having recourse successively to
land of a worse and worse quality, in order
to feed an increasing population, corn must
rise in relative value to other things. if
therefore money continue permanently of the
same value, corn will exchange for more of
such money, that is to say, it will rise in
price. the same rise in the price of corn
will be produced by such improvement of
machinery in manufactures, as shall enable
us to manufacture commodities with peculiar
advantages: for the influx of money
will be the consequence; it will fall in value,
and therefore exchange for less corn. but
the effects resulting from a high price of
corn when produced by the rise in the value
of corn, and when caused by a fall in the
value of money, are totally different. in both
cases the money price of wages will rise,
but if it be in consequence of the fall in
the value of money, not only wages and
corn, but all other commodities will rise.
if the manufacturer has more to pay for
wages, he will receive more for his manufactured
goods, and the rate of profits will remain
unaffected. but when the rise in the
price of corn is the effect of the difficulty of
production, profits will fall; for the manufacturer
will be obliged to pay more wages, and
will not be enabled to remunerate himself by
raising the price of his manufactured commodity.
any improvement in the facility of working
the mines, by which the precious metals may
be produced with a less quantity of labour,
will sink the value of money generally. it will
then exchange for fewer commodities in all
countries; but when any particular country
excels in manufactures, so as to occasion an
influx of money towards it, the value of
money will be lower, and the prices of corn
and labour will be relatively higher in that
country, than in any other.
this higher value of money will not be
indicated by the exchange; bills may continue
to be negotiated at par, although the
prices of corn and labour should be , , or
 per cent. higher in one country than another.
under the circumstances supposed,
such a difference of prices is the natural order
of things, and the exchange can only be at
par when a sufficient quantity of money is
introduced into the country excelling in manufactures,
so as to raise the price of its corn
and labour. if foreign countries should prohibit
the exportation of money, and could successfully
enforce obedience to such a law, they
might indeed prevent the rise in the prices of
the corn and labour of the manufacturing
country; for such rise can only take place
after the influx of the precious metals, supposing
paper money not to be used; but they
could not prevent the exchange from being
very unfavourable to them. if england were
the manufacturing country, and it were possible
to prevent the importation of money, the
exchange with france, holland, and spain,
might be , , or  per cent. against those
countries.
whenever the current of money is forcibly
stopped, and when money is prevented from
settling at its just level, there are no limits
to the possible variations of the exchange.
the effects are similar to those which follow,
when a paper money, not exchangeable for
specie at the will of the holder, is forced into
circulation. such a currency is necessarily
confined to the country where it is issued:
it cannot, when too abundant, diffuse itself
generally amongst other countries. the
level of circulation is destroyed, and the exchange
will inevitably be unfavourable to
the country where it is excessive in quantity:
just so would be the effects of a metallic circulation,
if by forcible means, by laws which
could not be evaded, money should be detained
in a country, when the stream of trade
gave it an impetus towards other countries.
when each country has precisely the quantity
of money which it ought to have, money
will not indeed be of the same value in each,
for with respect to many commodities it may
differ , , or even  per cent., but the exchange
will be at par. one hundred pounds
in england, or the silver which is in l.,
will purchase a bill of l., or an equal quantity
of silver in france, spain, or holland.
in speaking of the exchange and the comparative
value of money in different countries,
we must not in the least refer to the value of
money estimated in commodities, in either
country. the exchange is never ascertained
by estimating the comparative value of money
in corn, cloth, or any commodity whatever,
but by estimating the value of the currency
of one country, in the currency of another.
it may also be ascertained by comparing
it with some standard common to both countries.
if a bill on england for l. will
purchase the same quantity of goods in france
or spain, that a bill on hamburgh for the
same sum will do, the exchange between
hamburgh and england is at par; but if a
bill on england for l., will purchase no
more than a bill on hamburgh for l., the
exchange is  per cent. against england.
in england l. may purchase a bill, or
the right of receiving l. in holland, l.
in france, and l. in spain. the exchange
with england is, in that case, said to be  per
cent. against holland,  per cent. against
france, and  per cent. against spain. it indicates
that the level of currency is higher
than it should be in those countries, and the
comparative value of their currencies, and
that of england, would be immediately restored
to par, by abstracting from theirs, or
by adding to that of england.
those who maintained that our currency
was depreciated during the last ten years,
when the exchange varied from  to 
per cent. against this country, have never
contended, as they have been accused of
doing, that money could not be more valuable
in one country than another, as compared
with various commodities; but they did
contend, that l. could not be detained in
england, when it was of no more value, estimated
in the money of hamburgh, or of
holland, than l.
by sending l. good english pounds
sterling to hamburgh, even at an expense
of l., i should be possessed there of l.;
what then could make me consent to give
l. for a bill which would give me l. in
hamburgh, but that my pounds were not good
pounds sterling?—they were deteriorated,
were degraded in intrinsic value below the
pounds sterling of hamburgh, and if actually
sent there, at an expense of l., would sell
only for l. with metallic pounds sterling,
it is not denied that my l. would
procure me l. in hamburgh, but with
paper pounds sterling i can only obtain
l.; and yet it is maintained that l. in
paper, is of equal value with l. in silver
or gold.
some indeed more reasonably maintained,
that l. in paper was not of equal value
with l. in metallic money; but they said
that it was the metallic money which had
changed its value, and not the paper money.
they wished to confine the meaning
of the word depreciation to an actual fall
of value, and not to a comparative difference
between the value of money, and the
standard by which by law it is regulated.
one hundred pounds of english money was
formerly of equal value with, and could
purchase l. of hamburgh money: in any
other country a bill of l. on england, or
on hamburgh, could purchase precisely the
same quantity of commodities. to obtain
the same things, i was lately obliged to give
l. english money, when hamburgh could
obtain them for l. hamburgh money. if
english money was of the same value then as
before, hamburgh money must have risen in
value. but where is the proof of this? how
is it to be ascertained whether english money
has fallen, or hamburgh money has risen?
there is no standard by which this can be determined.
it is a plea which admits of no
proof, and can neither be positively affirmed,
nor positively contradicted. the nations of
the world must have been early convinced,
that there was no standard of value in nature,
to which we might unerringly refer, and
therefore chose a medium, which, on the
whole appeared to them less variable than
any other commodity.
to this standard we must conform till the
law is changed, and till some other commodity
is discovered, by the use of which we
shall obtain a more perfect standard, than
that which we have established. while gold
is exclusively the standard in this country,
money will be depreciated, when a pound
sterling is not of equal value with  dwts.
and  grs. of standard gold, and that, whether
gold rises or falls in general value.
taxes are a portion of the produce of the
land and labour of a country, placed at the
disposal of the government; and are always
ultimately paid, either from the capital, or
from the revenue of the country.
we have already shewn how the capital of
a country is either fixed or circulating, according
as it is of a more or of a less durable
nature. it is difficult to define strictly, where
the distinction between circulating and fixed
capital begins; for there are almost infinite
degrees in the durability of capital. the food
of a country is consumed and reproduced, at
least once in every year; the clothing of the
labourer is probably not consumed and reproduced
in less than two years; whilst his
house and furniture are calculated to endure
for a period of ten or twenty years.
when the annual productions of a country
exceed its annual consumption, it is said to
increase its capital; when its annual consumption
at least is not replaced by its annual
production, it is said to diminish its capital.
capital may therefore be increased by an increased
production, or by a diminished consumption.
if the consumption of the government,
when increased by the levy of additional
taxes, be met either by an increased production,
or by a diminished consumption on the
part of the people, the taxes will fall upon
revenue, and the national capital will remain
unimpaired; but if there be no increased
production or diminished consumption on the
part of the people, the taxes will necessarily
fall on capital.
in proportion as the capital of a country is
diminished, its productions will be necessarily
diminished; and therefore, if the same expenditure
on the part of the people and of
the government continue, with a constantly
diminishing annual reproduction, the resources
of the people and the state will fall
away with increasing rapidity, and distress
and ruin will follow.
notwithstanding the immense expenditure
of the english government during the last
twenty years, there can be little doubt but
that the increased production on the part of
the people has more than compensated for it.
the national capital has not merely been unimpaired,
it has been greatly increased, and
the annual revenue of the people, even after
the payment of their taxes, is probably
greater at the present time than at any former
period of our history.
for the proof of this we might refer to the
increase of population—to the extension of
agriculture—to the increase of shipping and
manufactures—to the building of docks—to
the opening of numerous canals, as well as to
many other expensive undertakings; all denoting
an increase both of capital and of
annual production.
there are no taxes which have not a tendency
to impede accumulation, because there
are none which may not be considered as
checking production, and as causing the same
effects as a bad soil or climate, a diminution
of skill or industry, a worse distribution of
labour, or the loss of some useful machinery;
and although some taxes will produce these
effects in a much greater degree than others,
it must be confessed that the great evil of
taxation is to be found, not so much in any
selection of its objects, as in the general
amount of its effects taken collectively.
taxes are not necessarily taxes on capital,
because they are laid on capital; nor on income,
because they are laid on income. if
from my income of l. per annum, i
am required to pay l., it will really be a
tax on my income, should i be content with
the expenditure of the remaining l.; but
it will be a tax on capital, if i continue to
spend l.
the capital from which my income of
l. is derived may be of the value of
,l.; a tax of one per cent. on such capital
would be l.; but my capital would
be unaffected, if after paying this tax, i in like
manner contented myself with the expenditure
of l.
the desire which every man has to keep
his station in life, and to maintain his wealth
at the height which it has once attained, occasions
most taxes, whether laid on capital or
on income, to be paid from income; and
therefore as taxation proceeds, or as government
increases its expenditure, the annual
expenditure of the people must be diminished,
unless they are enabled proportionally to increase
their capitals and income. it should
be the policy of governments to encourage a
disposition to do this in the people, and never
to lay such taxes as will inevitably fall on
capital; since by so doing, they impair the
funds for the maintenance of labour, and
thereby diminish the future production of the
country.
in england this policy has been neglected,
in taxing the probates of wills, in the legacy
duty, and in all taxes affecting the transference
of property from the dead to the
living. if a legacy of l. be subject to a
tax of l., the legatee considers his legacy
as only l., and feels no particular motive
to save the l. duty from his expenditure,
and thus the capital of the country is diminished;
but if he had really received l.
and had been required to pay l. as a tax
on income, on wine, on horses, or on servants,
he would probably have diminished, or rather
not increased his expenditure by that sum,
and the capital of the country would have
been unimpaired.
"taxes upon the transference of property
from the dead to the living," says adam smith,
"fall finally, as well as immediately, upon the
persons to whom the property is transferred.
taxes on the sale of land fall altogether upon
the seller. the seller is almost always under
the necessity of selling, and must therefore
take such a price as he can get. the
buyer is scarce ever under the necessity of
buying, and will therefore only give such a
price as he likes. he considers what the
land will cost him in tax and price together.
the more he is obliged to pay in the way of
tax, the less he will be disposed to give in the
way of price. such taxes, therefore, fall
almost always upon a necessitous person, and
must therefore be very cruel and oppressive."
"stamp duties, and duties upon the registration
of bonds and contracts for borrowed
money, fall altogether upon the borrower,
and in fact are always paid by him. duties
of the same kind upon law proceedings fall
upon the suitors. they reduce to both the
capital value of the subject in dispute. the
more it costs to acquire any property, the less
must be the neat value of it when acquired.
all taxes upon the transference of property of
every kind, so far as they diminish the capital
value of that property, tend to diminish the
funds destined for the maintenance of labour.
they are all more or less unthrifty taxes, that
increase the revenue of the sovereign, which
seldom maintains any but unproductive
labourers, at the expense of the capital of
the people, which maintains none but productive."
but this is not the only objection to taxes
on the transference of property; they prevent
the national capital from being distributed in
the way most beneficial to the community.
for the general prosperity, there cannot be
too much facility given to the conveyance
and exchange of all kinds of property, as it is
by such means that capital of every species is
likely to find its way into the hands of those
who will best employ it in increasing the productions
of the country. "why," asks m.
say, "does an individual wish to sell his land?
it is because he has another employment in
view in which his funds will be more productive.
why does another wish to purchase this
same land? it is to employ a capital which
brings him in too little, which was unemployed,
or the use of which he thinks susceptible
of improvement. this exchange will
increase the general income, since it increases
the income of these parties. but if the charges
are so exorbitant as to prevent the exchange,
they are an obstacle to this increase of the
general income." those taxes however are
easily collected; and this by many may be
thought to afford some compensation for
their injurious effects.
having in a former part of this work established,
i hope satisfactorily, the principle,
that the price of corn is regulated by the cost
of its production on that land exclusively, or
rather with that capital exclusively, which
pays no rent, it will follow that whatever may
increase the cost of production will increase
the price; whatever may reduce it, will lower
the price. the necessity of cultivating poorer
land, or of obtaining a less return with a
given additional capital on land already in
cultivation, will inevitably raise the exchangeable
value of raw produce. the discovery
of machinery, which will enable the
cultivator to obtain his corn at a less cost of
production, will necessarily lower its exchangeable
value. any tax which may be
imposed on the cultivator, whether in the
shape of land-tax, tithes, or a tax on the produce
when obtained, will increase the cost
of production, and will therefore raise the
price of raw produce.
if the price of raw produce did not rise so
as to compensate the cultivator for the tax,
he would naturally quit a trade where his
profits were reduced below the general level
of profits: this would occasion a diminution
of supply, until the unabated demand should
have produced such a rise in the price of raw
produce, as to make the cultivation of it
equally profitable with the investment of capital
in any other trade.
a rise of price is the only means by which
he could pay the tax, and continue to derive
the usual and general profits from this employment
of his capital. he could not deduct
the tax from his rent, and oblige his
landlord to pay it, for he pays no rent. he
would not deduct it from his profits, for there
is no reason why he should continue in an
employment which yields small profits, when
all other employments are yielding greater.
there can then be no question, but that he
will have the power of raising the price of
raw produce by a sum equal to the tax.
a tax on raw produce would not be paid
by the landlord; it would not be paid by
the farmer; but it would be paid, in an increased
price, by the consumer.
rent, it should be remembered, is the difference
between the produce obtained by
equal portions of labour and capital employed
on land of the same or different qualities.
it should be remembered too, that the money
rent of land, and the corn rent of land, do not
vary in the same proportion.
in the case of a tax on raw produce, of a
land tax, or tithes, the corn rent of land will vary,
while the money rent will remain as before.
if, as we have before supposed, the land in
cultivation were of three qualities, and that
with an equal amount of capital,
 qrs. of corn were obtained from land
no. .
from
from
the rent of no.  would be  quarters, the
difference between that of no.  and no. ;
and of no. ,  quarters, the difference between
that of no.  and no. ; while no. 
would pay no rent whatever.
now if the price of corn were l. per quarter,
the money rent of no.  would be l.,
and that of no. , l.
suppose a tax of s. per quarter to be imposed
on corn; then the price would rise to
l. s.; and if the landlords obtained the same
corn rent as before, the rent of no.  would
be l., and that of no. , l. but they
would not obtain the same corn rent; the
tax would fall heavier on no.  than on
no. , and on no.  than on no. , because
it would be levied on a greater quantity of
corn. it is the difficulty of production on
no.  which regulates price; and corn rises
to l. s., that the profits of the capital employed
on no.  may be on a level with the
general profits of stock.
the produce and tax on the three qualities
of land will be as follows:
no. , yielding
qrs. at l. s. per qr.
deduct the value of
or s. per qr. on  qrs.
net corn produce
net money produce
no. , yielding
qrs. at l. s. per qr.
deduct the value of
qrs. at l. s. or s. per qr. on  qrs.
net corn produce
net money produce
no. ,
qrs. at l. s.
deduct the value of
qrs. at l. s. or s. per qr. on 
net corn produce
net money produce
the money rent of no.  would continue
to be l., or the difference between  and
l.; and that of no. , l., or the difference
between l. and l., precisely the same
as before; but the corn rent will be reduced
from  quarters on no.  to . quarters,
and that on no.  from  to . quarters.
a tax on corn, then, would fall on the
consumers of corn, and would raise its
value as compared with all other commodities,
in a degree proportioned to the tax.
in proportion as raw produce entered into
the composition of other commodities, would
their value also be raised, unless the tax were
countervailed by other causes. they would
in fact be indirectly taxed, and their value
would rise in proportion to the tax.
a tax, however, on raw produce, and on
the necessaries of the labourer, would have
another effect—it would raise wages. from
the effect of the principle of population on
the increase of mankind, wages of the lowest
kind never continue much above that rate
which nature and habit demand for the support
of the labourers. this class is never
able to bear any considerable portion of taxation;
and, consequently, if they had to pay
s. per quarter in addition for wheat, and in
some smaller proportion for other necessaries,
they would not be able to subsist on the
same wages as before, and to keep up the
race of labourers. wages would inevitably
and necessarily rise; and in proportion as
they rose, profits would fall. government
would receive a tax of s. per quarter on all
the corn consumed in the country, a part of
which would be paid directly by the consumers
of corn; the other part would be paid
indirectly by those who employed labour,
and would affect profits in the same manner
as if wages had been raised from the increased
demand for labour compared with the supply,
or from an increasing difficulty of obtaining the
food and necessaries required by the labourer.
in as far as the tax might affect consumers,
it would be an equal tax, but in as far as it
would affect profits, it would be a partial tax;
for it would neither operate on the landlord
nor on the stockholder, since they would
continue to receive, the one the same money
rent, the other the same money dividends as
before. a tax on the produce of the land
then would operate as follows:
st. it would raise the price of raw produce
by a sum equal to the tax, and would
therefore fall on each consumer in proportion
to his consumption.
dly. it would raise the wages of labour,
and lower profits.
it may then be objected against such a tax,
st. that by raising the wages of labour, and
lowering profits, it is an unequal tax, as
it affects the income of the farmer, trader,
and manufacturer, and leaves untaxed
the income of the landlord, stockholder,
and others enjoying fixed incomes.
dly. that there would be a considerable
interval between the rise in the price of
corn and the rise of wages, during which
much distress would be experienced by
the labourer.
rdly. that raising wages and lowering
profits is a discouragement to accumulation,
and acts in the same way as a
natural poverty of soil.
thly. that by raising the price of raw
produce, the prices of all commodities
into which raw produce enters, would be
raised, and that therefore we should not
meet the foreign manufacture on equal
terms in the general market.
with respect to the first objection, that by
raising the wages of labour and lowering profits
it acts unequally, as it affects the income
of the farmer, trader, and manufacturer, and
leaves untaxed the income of the landlord,
stockholder, and others enjoying fixed incomes,—it
may be answered, that if the operation
of the tax be unequal, it is for the
legislature to make it equal, by taxing directly
the rent of land, and the dividends
from stock. by so doing, all the objects of
an income tax would be obtained, without the
inconvenience of having recourse to the obnoxious
measure of prying into every man's
concerns, and arming commissioners with
powers repugnant to the habits and feelings
of a free country.
with respect to the second objection, that
there would be a considerable interval between
the rise of the price of corn and the
rise of wages, during which much distress
would be experienced by the lower classes,—i
answer, that under different circumstances,
wages follow the price of raw produce with
very different degrees of celerity; that in
some cases no effect whatever is produced on
wages by a rise of corn; in others, the rise of
wages precedes the rise in the price of corn;
again, in some the effect is slow, and in others
the interval must be very short.
those who maintain that it is the price of
necessaries which regulates the price of labour,
always allowing for the particular state
of progression in which the society, may be
seem to have conceded too readily, that a rise
or fall in the price of necessaries will be very
slowly succeeded by a rise or fall of wages.
a high price of provisions may arise from
very different causes, and may accordingly
produce very different effects. it may arise
from
st. a deficient supply.
nd. from a gradually increasing demand,
which may be ultimately attended with
an increased cost of production.
dly. from a fall in the value of money.
thly. from taxes on necessaries.
these four causes have not been sufficiently
distinguished and separated by those who
have inquired into the influence of a high
price of necessaries on wages. we will examine
them severally.
a bad harvest will produce a high price of
provisions, and the high price is the only
means by which the consumption is compelled
to conform to the state of the supply.
if all the purchasers of corn were rich, the
price might rise to any degree, but the result
would remain unaltered; the price would
at last be so high, that the least rich would
be obliged to forego the use of a part of the
quantity which they usually consumed, as by
diminished consumption alone, the demand
could be brought down to the limits of the
supply. under such circumstances no policy
can be more absurd, than that of forcibly
regulating money wages by the price of
food, as is frequently done, by misapplication
of the poor laws. such a measure affords
no real relief to the labourer, because its
effect is to raise still higher the price of corn,
and at last he must be obliged to limit his
consumption in proportion to the limited supply.
in the natural course of affairs a deficient
supply from bad seasons, without any
pernicious and unwise interference, would not
be followed by a rise of wages. the raising
of wages is merely nominal to those who
receive them; it increases the competition in
the corn market, and its ultimate effect is to
raise the profits of the growers and dealers in
corn. the wages of labour are really regulated
by the proportion between the supply
and demand of necessaries, and the supply
and demand of labour; and money is
merely the medium, or measure, in which
wages are expressed. in this case then the
distress of the labourer is unavoidable, and
no legislation can afford a remedy, except by
the importation of additional food.
when a high price of corn is the effect of
an increasing demand, it is always preceded
by an increase of wages, for demand cannot
increase, without an increase of means in the
people to pay for that which they desire.
an accumulation of capital naturally produces
an increased competition among the
employers of labour, and a consequent rise
in its price. the increased wages are not
immediately expended on food, but are first
made to contribute to the other enjoyments
of the labourer. his improved condition
however induces, and enables him to marry,
and then the demand for food for the support
of his family naturally supersedes that of
those other enjoyments on which his wages
were temporarily expended. corn rises then
because the demand for it increases, because
there are those in the society who have improved
means of paying for it; and the profits
of the farmer will be raised above the
general level of profits, till the requisite quantity
of capital has been employed on its production.
whether, after this has taken place,
corn shall again fall to its former price, or
shall continue permanently higher, will depend
on the quality of the land from which
the increased quantity of corn has been supplied.
if it be obtained from land of the
same fertility, as that which was last in cultivation,
and with no greater cost of labour,
the price will fall to its former state; if from
poorer land, it will continue permanently
higher. the high wages in the first instance
proceeded from an increase in the demand
for labour: inasmuch as it encouraged marriage,
and supported children, it produced
the effect of increasing the supply of labour.
but when the supply is obtained, wages will
again fall to their former price, if corn has
fallen to its former price: to a higher than the
former price, if the increased supply of corn
has been produced from land of an inferior
quality. a high price is by no means incompatible
with an abundant supply: the price is
permanently high, not because the quantity is
deficient, but because there has been an increased
cost in producing it. it generally happens
indeed, that when a stimulus has been
given to population, an effect is produced beyond
what the case requires; the population
may be, and generally is so much increased as,
notwithstanding the increased demand for labour,
to bear a greater proportion to the funds
for maintaining labourers than before the increase
of capital. in this case a re-action will
take place, wages will be below their natural
level, and will continue so, till the usual proportion
between the supply and demand has
been restored. in this case then, the rise in the
price of corn is preceded by a rise of wages,
and therefore entails no distress on the labourer.
a fall in the value of money, in consequence
of an influx of the precious metals
from the mines, or from the abuse of the
privileges of banking, is another cause for
the rise of the price of food; but it will make
no alteration in the quantity produced. it
leaves undisturbed too the number of labourers,
as well as the demand for them; for
there will be neither an increase nor a diminution
of capital. the quantity of necessaries
to be allotted to the labourer, depends on the
comparative demand and supply of necessaries,
with the comparative demand and
supply of labour; money being only the
medium in which the quantity is expressed;
and as neither of these is altered, the real reward
of the labourer will not alter. money
wages will rise, but they will only enable him
to furnish himself with the same quantity of
necessaries as before. those who dispute this
principle, are bound to shew why an increase
of money should not have the same effect in
raising the price of labour, the quantity of
which has not been increased, as they acknowledge
it would have on the price of shoes, of
hats, and of corn, if the quantity of those
commodities were not increased. the relative
market value of hats and shoes is regulated
by the demand and supply of hats, compared
with the demand and supply of shoes, and
money is but the medium in which their
value is expressed. if shoes be doubled in
price, hats will also be doubled in price, and
they will retain the same comparative value.
so if corn and all the necessaries of the labourer
be doubled in price, labour will be
doubled in price also, and while there is no
interruption to the usual demand and supply
of necessaries and of labour, there can be
no reason why they should not preserve their
relative value.
neither a fall in the value of money, nor
a tax on raw produce, though each will raise
the price, will necessarily interfere with the
quantity of raw produce; or with the number
of people, who are both able to purchase,
and willing to consume it. it is very easy
to perceive why, when the capital of a country
increases irregularly, wages should rise,
whilst the price of corn remains stationary,
or rises in a less proportion; and why, when
the capital of a country diminishes, wages
should fall whilst corn remains stationary, or
falls in a much less proportion, and this too
for a considerable time; the reason is, because
labour is a commodity which cannot
be increased and diminished at pleasure. if
there are too few hats in the market for the
demand, the price will rise, but only for a
short time; for in the course of one year, by
employing more capital in that trade, any
reasonable addition may be made to the quantity
of hats, and therefore their market price
cannot long very much exceed their natural
price; but it is not so with men; you cannot
increase their number in one or two years
when there is an increase of capital, nor can
you rapidly diminish their number when
capital is in a retrograde state; and therefore,
the number of hands increasing or diminishing
slowly, whilst the funds for the maintenance
of labour increase or diminish rapidly,
there must be a considerable interval before
the price of labour is exactly regulated by the
price of corn and necessaries; but in the case
of a fall in the value of money, or of a tax on
corn, there is not necessarily any excess in
the supply of labour, nor any abatement of
demand, and therefore there can be no reason
why the labourer should sustain a real diminution
of wages.
a tax on corn does not necessarily diminish
the quantity of corn, it only raises its money
price; it does not necessarily diminish the
demand compared with the supply of labour;
why then should it diminish the portion paid
to the labourer? suppose it true that it did
diminish the quantity given to the labourer,
in other words, that it did not raise his money
wages in the same proportion as the tax
raised the price of the corn which he consumed;
would not the supply of corn exceed
the demand?—would it not fall in price? and
would not the labourer thus obtain his usual
portion? in such case indeed capital would
be withdrawn from agriculture; for if the
price were not increased by the whole amount
of the tax, agricultural profits would be
lower than the general level of profits, and
capital would seek more advantageous employment.
in regard then to a tax on raw
produce, which is the point under discussion,
it appears to me that no interval which could
bear oppressively on the labourer, would
elapse between the rise in the price of raw
produce, and the rise in the wages of the
labourer; and that therefore no other inconvenience
would be suffered by this class,
than that which they would suffer from any
other mode of taxation, namely, the risk that
the tax might infringe on the funds destined
for the maintenance of labour, and might
therefore check or abate the demand for it.
with respect to the third objection against
taxes on raw produce, namely, that the
raising wages, and lowering profits, is a discouragement
to accumulation, and acts in the
same way as a natural poverty of soil; i
have endeavoured to shew in another part of
this work that savings may be as effectually
made from expenditure as from production;
from a reduction in the value of commodities,
as from a rise in the rate of profits. by
increasing my profits from l. to l.,
whilst prices continue the same, my power
of increasing my capital by savings is increased
but it is not increased so much as it would
be if my profits continued as before, whilst
commodities were so lowered in price, that
l. would procure me as much as l.
purchased before.
taxation under every form presents but a
choice of evils; if it does not act on profit, it
must act on expenditure; and provided the
burden be equally borne, and do not repress
reproduction, it is indifferent on which it is
laid. taxes on production, or on the profits
of stock, whether applied immediately to
profits, or indirectly, by taxing the land or
its produce, have this advantage over other
taxes; no class of the community can escape
them, and each contributes according to his
means.
from taxes on expenditure a miser may
escape; he may have an income of , per
annum, and expend only l.; but from
taxes on profits, whether direct or indirect,
he cannot escape; he will contribute to them
either by giving up a part or the value of a
part of his produce; or by the advanced prices
of the necessaries essential to production, he
will be unable to continue to accumulate at
the same rate. he may indeed have an
income of the same value, but he will not
have the same command of labour, nor of an
equal quantity of materials on which such
labour can be exercised.
if a country is insulated from all others,
having no commerce with any of its neighbours,
it can in no way shift any portion of
its taxes from itself. a portion of the produce
of its land and labour will be devoted to the
service of the state; and i cannot but think
that, unless it presses unequally on that class
which accumulates and saves, it will be of
little importance whether the taxes be levied
on profits, on agricultural, or on manufactured
commodities. if my revenue be l. per
annum, and i must pay taxes to the amount
of l., it is of little importance whether i
pay it from my revenue, leaving myself only
l., or pay l. in addition for my agricultural
commodities, or for my manufactured
goods. if l. is my fair proportion of the
expenses of the country, the virtue of taxation
consists in making sure that i shall pay
that l., neither more nor less; and that
cannot be effected in any manner so securely
as by taxes on wages, profits, or raw produce.
the fourth and last objection which remains
to be noticed is: that by raising the
price of raw produce, the prices of all commodities
into which raw produce enters, will
be raised, and that therefore we shall not
meet the foreign manufacturer on equal terms
in the general market.
in the first place, corn and all home commodities
could not be materially raised in
price without an influx of the precious metals;
for the same quantity of money could not
circulate the same quantity of commodities,
at high as at low prices, and the precious
metals never could be purchased with dear
commodities. when more gold is required,
it must be obtained by giving more, and not
fewer commodities in exchange for it. neither
could the want of money be supplied by
paper, for it is not paper that regulates the
value of gold as a commodity, but gold that
regulates the value of paper. unless then
the value of gold could be lowered, no paper
could be added to the circulation without
being depreciated. and that the value of
gold could not be lowered appears clear, when
we consider that the value of gold as a
commodity must be regulated by the quantity
of goods which must be given to foreigners in
exchange for it. when gold is cheap, commodities
are dear; and when gold is dear,
commodities are cheap, and fall in price.
now as no cause is shewn why foreigners
should sell their gold cheaper than usual, it
does not appear probable that there would be
any influx of gold. without such an influx
there can be no increase of quantity, no fall
in its value, no rise in the general price of
goods.
the probable effect of a tax on raw produce
would be to raise the price of all commodities
in which raw produce entered, but not in
any degree proportioned to the tax; while
other commodities in which no raw produce
entered, such as articles made of the metals
and the earths, would fall in price: so that the
same quantity of money as before would be
adequate to the whole circulation.
a tax which should have the effect of
raising the price of all home productions,
would not discourage exportation, except
during a very limited time. if they were
raised in price at home, they could not indeed
immediately be profitably exported, because
they would be subject to a burthen here
from which abroad they were free. the tax
would produce the same effect as an alteration
in the value of money, which was not general
and common to all countries, but confined to
a single one. if england were that country,
she might not be able to sell, but she would
be able to buy, because importable commodities
would not be raised in price. under
these circumstances nothing but money
could be exported in return for foreign commodities,
but this is a trade which could not
long continue; a nation cannot be exhausted
of its money, for after a certain quantity has
left it, the value of the remainder will rise, and
such a price of commodities will be the consequence,
that they will again be capable of
being profitably exported. when money
had risen, therefore, we should no longer
export it in return for goods imported, but we
should export those manufactures which had
first been raised in price, by the rise in the
price of the raw produce from which they
were made, and then again lowered by the exportation
of money.
but it may be objected, that when money
so rose in value, it would rise with respect to
foreign as well as home commodities, and
therefore that all encouragement to import
foreign goods would cease. thus, suppose we
imported goods which cost l. abroad, and
which sold for l. here, we should cease to
import them, when the value of money had so
risen in england, that they would only sell for
l. here: this however could never happen.
the motive which determines us to import
a commodity, is the discovery of its relative
cheapness abroad: it is the comparison of its
natural price abroad, with its natural price
at home. if a country exports hats, and imports
cloth, it does so because it can obtain
more cloth by making hats, and exchanging
them for cloth, than if it made the cloth itself.
if the rise of raw produce occasions any increased
cost of production in making hats, it
would occasion also an increased cost in
making cloth. if therefore both commodities
were made at home, they would both rise.
one, however, being a commodity which we
import, would not rise, neither would it fall,
when the value of money rose; for by not
falling, it would regain its natural relation to
the exported commodity. the rise of raw
produce makes a hat rise from  to  shillings,
or  per cent.: the same cause if we
manufactured cloth, would make it rise from
s. to s. per yard. this rise does not destroy
the relation between cloth and hats; a
hat was, and continues to be, worth one yard
and a half of cloth. but if we import cloth,
its price will continue uniformly at s. per
yard, unaffected first by the fall, and then by
the rise in the value of money; whilst hats,
which had risen from s. to s., will again
fall from s. to s., at which point the
relation between cloth and hats will be restored.
to simplify the consideration of this subject,
i have been supposing that a rise in the
value of raw materials would affect, in an
equal proportion, all home commodities; that
if the effect on one were to raise it  per
cent., it would raise all  per cent.; but as
the value of commodities is very differently
made up of raw material and labour; as
some commodities, for instance all those
made from the metals, would be unaffected
by the rise of raw produce from the
surface of the earth, it is evident that there
would be the greatest variety in the effects
produced on the value of commodities, by a
tax on raw produce. as far as this effect
was produced, it would stimulate or retard
the exportation of particular commodities,
and would undoubtedly be attended with the
same inconvenience that attends the taxing of
commodities; it would destroy the natural
relation between the value of each. thus,
the natural price of a hat, instead of being
the same as a yard and a half of cloth, might
only be of the value of a yard and a quarter,
or it might be of the value of a yard and three
quarters, and therefore rather a different direction
might be given to foreign trade. all
these inconveniences would not interfere with
the value of the exports and imports; they
would only prevent the very best distribution
of the capital of the whole world, which is
never so well regulated, as when every commodity
is freely allowed to settle at its natural
price.
although then the rise in the price of
most of our own commodities, would for a
time check exportation generally, and might
permanently prevent the exportation of a few
commodities, it could not materially interfere
with foreign trade, and would not place us
under any comparative disadvantage as far as
regarded competition in foreign markets.
a tax on rent would affect rent only; it
would fall wholly on landlords, and could
not be shifted to any class of consumers.
the landlord could not raise his rent, because
he would leave unaltered the difference between
the produce obtained from the least
productive land in cultivation, and that obtained
from land of every other quality.
three sorts of land, no. , , and , are in
cultivation, and yield respectively with the
same labour , , and  quarters of
wheat; but no.  pays no rent, and is therefore
untaxed: the rent then of no.  cannot
be made to exceed the value of ten, nor no.
, of twenty quarters. such a tax could not
raise the price of raw produce, because as the
cultivator of no.  pays neither rent nor tax,
he would in no way be enabled to raise the
price of the commodity produced. a tax on
rent would not discourage the cultivation of
fresh land, for such land pays no rent, and
would be untaxed. if no.  were taken into
cultivation, and yielded  quarters, no tax
would be paid for such land; but it would
create a rent of ten quarters on no. , which
would then commence paying the tax.
a tax on rent, as rent is constituted, would
discourage cultivation, because it would be a
tax on the profits of the landlord. the term
rent of land, as i have elsewhere observed, is
applied to the whole amount of the value
paid by the farmer to his landlord, a part
only of which is strictly rent. the buildings
and fixtures, and other expenses paid
for by the landlord, form strictly a part of
the stock of the farm, and must have been
furnished by the tenant, if not provided by
the landlord. rent is the sum paid to the
landlord for the use of the land, and for the
use of the land only. the further sum that
is paid to him under the name of rent, is for
the use of the buildings, &c., and is really the
profits of the landlord's stock. in taxing
rent, as no distinction would be made between
that part paid for the use of the land,
and that paid for the use of the landlord's
stock, a portion of the tax would fall on the
landlord's profits, and would therefore discourage
cultivation, unless the price of raw
produce rose. on that land, for the use of
which no rent was paid, a compensation
under that name might be given to the landlord
for the use of his buildings. these
buildings would not be erected, nor would
raw produce be grown on such land, till the
price at which it sold would not only pay for
all the usual outgoings, but also for this additional
one of the tax. this part of the tax
does not fall on the landlord, nor on the
farmer, but on the consumer of raw produce.
there can be little doubt, but that if a tax
were laid on rent, landlords would soon find
a way to discriminate between that which
was paid to them for the use of the land, and
that which was paid for the use of the buildings,
and the improvements which were made
by the landlord's stock. the latter would
either be called the rent of house and buildings,
or in all new land taken into cultivation
such buildings and improvements would be
made by the tenant, and not by the landlord.
the landlord's capital might indeed be really
employed for that purpose; it might be nominally
expended by the tenant, the landlord
furnishing him with the means, either in the
shape of a loan, or in the purchase of an
annuity for the duration of the lease. whether
distinguished or not, there is a real difference
between the nature of the compensations
which the landlord receives for these
different objects; and it is quite certain, that
a tax on the real rent of land falls wholly on
the landlord, but that a tax on that remuneration
which the landlord receives for the use
of his stock expended on the farm, falls on
the consumer of raw produce. if a tax were
laid on rent, and no means of separating the
remuneration now paid by the tenant to the
landlord under the name of rent were adopted,
the tax, as far as it regarded the rent on the
buildings and other fixtures, would never fall
for any length of time on the landlord, but
on the consumer. the capital expended on
these buildings, &c., must afford the usual
profits of stock; but it would cease to afford
this profit on the land last cultivated, if the
expenses of those buildings, &c. did not fall
on the tenant; and if they did, the tenant
would then cease to make his usual profits of
stock, unless he could charge them on the
consumer.
tithes are a tax on the gross produce of
the land, and, like taxes on raw produce, fall
wholly on the consumer. they differ from
a tax on rent, inasmuch as they affect land
which such a tax would not reach; and raise
the price of raw produce, which that tax e of raw produce, which that tax
would not alter. lands of the worst quality,
as well as of the best, pay tithes, and exactly
in proportion to the quantity of produce obtained
from them; tithes are therefore an equal tax.
if land of the last quality, or that which
pays no rent, and which regulates the price
of corn, yield a sufficient quantity to give the
farmer the usual profits of stock, when the
price of wheat is l. per quarter, the price
must rise to l. s. before the same profits
can be obtained after the tithes are imposed,
because for every quarter of wheat the cultivator
must pay eight shillings to the church.
the only difference between tithes and
taxes on raw produce, is, that one is a variable
money tax, the other a fixed money tax.
in a stationary state of society, where there is
neither increased nor diminished facility of
producing corn, they will be precisely the
same in their effects; for in such a state corn
will be at an invariable price, and the tax will
therefore be also invariable. in either a retrograde
state, or in a state in which great
improvements are made in agriculture, and
where consequently raw produce will fall in
value comparatively with other things, tithes
will be a lighter tax than a permanent money
tax; for if the price of corn should fall from
l. to l., the tax would fall from eight to six
shillings. in a progressive state of society,
yet without any marked improvements in
agriculture, the price of corn would rise, and
tithes would be a heavier tax than a permanent
money tax. if corn rose from l. to l.,
the tithes on the same land would advance
from eight to ten shillings.
neither tithes nor a money tax will affect
the money rent of landlords, but both will
materially affect corn rents. we have already
observed how a money tax operates
on corn rents, and it is equally evident that a
similar effect would be produced by tithes.
if the lands, no. , , , respectively produced
, , and  quarters, the rents might
be on no. , twenty quarters, and on no.
, ten quarters; but they would no longer
preserve that proportion after the payment
of tithes: for if a tenth be taken from each,
the remaining produce will be , , ,
and consequently the corn rent of no.  will
be reduced to eighteen, and that of no.  to
nine quarters. but the price of corn would
rise from l. to l. s. ⅔d.; for nine quarters
are to l. as ten quarters to l. s. ⅔d., and
consequently the money rent would continue
unaltered; for on no.  it would be l., and
on no. , l.
the chief objection against tithes is, that
they are not a permanent and fixed tax, but
increase in value, in proportion as the difficulty
of producing corn increases. if those
difficulties should make the price of corn
l. the tax is s., if they should increase it to
l., the tax is s., and at l., it is s. they
not only rise in value, but they increase in
amount: thus, when no.  was cultivated,
the tax was only levied on  quarters;
when no.  was cultivated, it was levied on
 + , or  quarters; and when no. 
was cultivated, on  +  +  =  quarters.
not only is the amount of the tax
increased from , quarters, to ,
quarters, when the produce is increased from
one to two millions of quarters; but, owing
to the increased labour necessary to produce
the second million, the relative value of raw
produce is so advanced, that the ,
quarters may be, though only twice in quantity,
yet in value three times that of the
, quarters which were paid before.
if an equal value were raised for the church
by any other means, increasing in the same
manner as tithes increase, proportionably
with the difficulty of cultivation, the effect
would be the same. the church would be
constantly obtaining an increased portion of
the net produce of the land and labour of
the country. in an improving state of society,
the net produce of land is always diminishing
in proportion to its gross produce;
but it is from the net income of a country
that all taxes are ultimately paid, either in a
progressive or in a stationary country. a tax
increasing with the gross income, and falling
on the net income, must necessarily be a very
burdensome, and a very intolerable tax. tithes
are a tenth of the gross, and not of the net
produce of the land, and therefore as society
improves in wealth, they must, though the
same proportion of the gross produce, become
a larger and larger portion of the net
produce.
tithes however may be considered as injurious
to landlords, inasmuch as they act as a
bounty on importation, by taxing the growth
of home corn, while the importation of foreign
corn remains unfettered. and if in order to
relieve the landlords from the effects of the
diminished demand for land, which such a
bounty must encourage, imported corn were
also taxed one tenth, and the produce paid
to the state, no measure could be more fair
and equitable; since whatever were paid to
the state by this tax, would go to diminish
the other taxes which the expenses of government
make necessary: but if such a tax
were devoted only to increase the fund paid
to the church, it might indeed on the whole
increase the general mass of production, but
it would diminish the portion of that mass
allotted to the productive classes.
if the trade of cloth were left perfectly
free, our manufacturers might be able to sell
cloth cheaper than we could import it. if a
tax were laid on the home manufacturer, and
not on the importer of cloth, capital might
be injuriously driven from the manufacture
of cloth to the manufacture of some other
commodity, as it might then be imported
cheaper than it could be made at home. if
imported cloth should also be taxed, cloth
would again be manufactured at home. the
consumer first bought cloth at home, because
it was cheaper than foreign cloth; he then
bought foreign cloth, because it was cheaper
untaxed than home cloth taxed: he lastly
bought it again at home, because it was
cheaper when both home and foreign cloth
were taxed. it is in the last case that he
pays the greatest price for his cloth, but all
his additional payment is gained by the state.
in the second case, he pays more than in the
first, but all he pays in addition is not received
by the state, it is an increased price
caused by difficulty of production, which is
incurred, because the easiest means of production
are taken away from us, by being
fettered with a tax.
a land-tax, levied in proportion to the rent
of land, and varying with every variation of
rent, is in effect a tax on rent; and as such a
tax will not apply to that land which yields
no rent, nor to the produce of that capital
which is employed on the land with a view
to profit merely, and which never pays rent,
it will not in any way affect the price of raw
produce, but will fall wholly on the landlords.
in no respect would such a tax differ
from a tax on rent. but if a land-tax be imposed
on all cultivated land, however moderate
that tax may be, it will be a tax on produce,
and will therefore raise the price of
produce. if no.  be the land last cultivated,
although it should pay no rent, it cannot,
after the tax, be cultivated, and afford
the general rate of profit, unless the price of
produce rise to meet the tax. either capital
will be withheld from that employment until
the price of corn shall have risen, in consequence
of demand, sufficiently to afford the
usual profit; or if already employed on such
land, it will quit it, to seek a more advantageous
employment. the tax cannot be
removed to the landlord, for by the supposition
he receives no rent. such a tax may be
proportioned to the quality of the land and
the abundance of its produce, and then it
differs in no respect from tithes; or it may
be a fixed tax per acre on all land cultivated,
whatever its quality may be.
a land-tax of this latter description would
be a very unequal tax, and would be contrary
to one of the four maxims with regard
to taxes in general, to which, according to
adam smith, all taxes should conform. the
four maxims are as follow:
. "the subjects of every state ought to
contribute towards the support of the
government, as nearly as possible in
proportion to their respective abilities.
. "the tax which each individual is bound
to pay ought to be certain and not arbitrary.
. "every tax ought to be levied at the
time, or in the manner in which it is
most likely to be convenient for the contributor
to pay it.
. "every tax ought to be so contrived as
both to take out and to keep out of the
pockets of the people as little as possible,
over and above what it brings into the
public treasury of the state."
an equal land-tax, imposed indiscriminately
and without any regard to the distinction
of its quality, on all land cultivated, will
raise the price of corn in proportion to the
tax paid by the cultivator of the land of the
worst quality. lands of different quality,
with the employment of the same capital, will
yield very different quantities of raw produce.
if on the land which yields a thousand quarters
of corn with a given capital, a tax of l.
be laid, corn will rise s. per quarter to compensate
the farmer for the tax. but with the
same capital on land of a better quality, ,
quarters may be produced, which at s. a
quarter advance, would give l.; the tax,
however, bearing equally on both lands will
be l. on the better as well as on the inferior,
and consequently the consumer of
corn will be taxed, not only to pay the exigencies
of the state, but also to give to the
cultivator of the better land, l. per annum.
during the period of his lease, and afterwards
to raise the rent of the landlord to that amount.
a tax of this description then would
be contrary to the fourth maxim of adam
smith, it would take out and keep out of the
pockets of the people, more than what it
brought into the treasury of the state. the
taille in france before the revolution, was
a tax of this description; those lands only
were taxed, which were held by an ignoble
tenure, the price of raw produce rose in proportion
to the tax, and therefore they whose
lands were not taxed, were benefited by the
increase of their rent. taxes on raw produce
as well as tithes are free from this objection:
they raise the price of raw produce, but they
take from each quality of land a contribution
in proportion to its actual produce, and not
in proportion to the produce of that which
is the least productive.
from the peculiar view which adam smith
took of rent, from his not having observed
that much capital is expended in every country,
on the land for which no rent is paid,
he concluded that all taxes on the land,
whether they were laid on the land itself in
the form of land-tax or tithes, or on the produce
of the land, or were taken from the
profits of the farmer, were all invariably paid
by the landlord, and that he was in all cases
the real contributor, although the tax was in
general, nominally advanced by the tenant.
"taxes upon the produce of the land," he
says, "are in reality taxes upon the rent; and
though they may be originally advanced by
the farmer, are finally paid by the landlord.
when a certain portion of the produce is to be
paid away for a tax, the farmer computes as
well as he can, what the value of this portion
is, one year with another, likely to amount
to, and he makes a proportionable abatement
in the rent which he agrees to pay to the
landlord. there is no farmer who does not
compute before hand what the church tithe,
which is a land-tax of this kind, is, one year
with another, likely to amount to." it is undoubtedly
true, that the farmer does calculate
his probable outgoings of all descriptions,
when agreeing with his landlord concerning
the rent of his farm; and if for the tithe paid
to the church, or for the tax on the produce
of the land, he were not compensated by a
rise in the relative value of the produce of his
farm, he would naturally deduct them from
his rent. but this is precisely the question
in dispute: whether he will eventually deduct
them from his rent, or be compensated
by a higher price of produce. for the reasons
which have been already given, i cannot
have the least doubt but that they would raise
the price of produce, and consequently that
adam smith has taken an incorrect view of
this important question.
dr. smith's view of this subject is probably
the reason why he has described "the tithe, and
every other land-tax of this kind, under the appearance
of perfect equality, as very unequal
taxes; a certain portion of the produce being
in different situations, equivalent to a very different
portion of the rent." i have endeavoured
to shew that such taxes do not fall with unequal
weight on the different classes of farmers
or landlords, as they are both compensated by
the rise of raw produce, and only contribute
to the tax in proportion as they are consumers
of raw produce. inasmuch indeed as
wages, and through wages, the rate of profits
are affected, landlords, instead of contributing
their full share to such a tax, are the class
peculiarly exempted. it is the profits of
stock, from which that portion of the tax is
derived which falls on those labourers, who
from the insufficiency of their funds, are incapable
of paying taxes; this portion is exclusively
borne by all those whose income is
derived from the employment of stock, and
therefore it in no degree affects landlords.
it is not to be inferred from this view
of tithes, and taxes on the land and its produce,
that they do not discourage cultivation.
every thing which raises the exchangeable
value of commodities of any kind, which are
in very general demand, tends to discourage
both cultivation and production; but this is
an evil inseparable from all taxation, and is
not confined to the particular taxes of which
we are now speaking.
this may be considered indeed as the
unavoidable disadvantage attending all taxes
received and expended by the state. every
new tax becomes a new charge on production,
and raises natural price. a portion of the
labour of the country which was before at the
disposal of the contributor to the tax, is
placed at the disposal of the state. this
portion may become so large, that sufficient
surplus produce may not be left to stimulate
the exertions of those who usually augment
by their savings the capital of the state.
taxation has happily never yet in any free
country been carried so far as constantly from
year to year to diminish its capital. such a
state of taxation could not be long endured;
or if endured, it would be constantly absorbing
so much of the annual produce of the country
as to occasion the most extensive scene of
misery, famine, and depopulation.
"a land-tax," says adam smith, "which
like that of great britain, is assessed upon
each district according to a certain invariable
canon, though it should be equal at the time
of its first establishment, necessarily becomes
unequal in process of time, according to the
unequal degrees of improvement or neglect in
the cultivation of the different parts of the
country. in england the valuation according
to which the different counties and parishes
were assessed to the land-tax by the th.
william and mary, was very unequal, even at
its first establishment. this tax, therefore, so
far offends against the first of the four maxims
above mentioned. it is perfectly agreeable
to the other three. it is perfectly certain.
the time of payment for the tax being the
same as that for the rent, is as convenient as
it can be to the contributor. though the
landlord is in all cases the real contributor,
the tax is commonly advanced by the tenant,
to whom the landlord is obliged to allow it
in the payment of the rent."
if the tax be shifted by the tenant not on
the landlord but on the consumer, then if it
be not unequal at first, it can never become
so; for the price of produce has been at once
raised in proportion to the tax, and will
afterwards vary no more on that account.
it may offend if unequal, as i have attempted
to shew that it will, against the fourth maxim
above mentioned, but it will not offend
against the first. it may take more out of
the pockets of the people than it brings into
the public treasury of the state, but it will not
fall unequally on any particular class of
contributors. m. say appears to me to have
mistaken the nature and effects of the english
land-tax, when he says, "many persons
attribute to this fixed valuation, the great
prosperity of english agriculture. that it
has very much contributed to it there can be
no doubt. but what should we say to a
government, which, addressing itself to a
small trader, should hold this language:
'with a small capital you are carrying on a
limited trade, and your direct contribution is
in consequence very small. borrow, and
accumulate capital; extend your trade, so
that it may procure you immense profits; yet
you shall never pay a greater contribution.
moreover, when your successors shall inherit
your profits, and shall have further increased
them, they shall not be valued higher to
them than they are to you; and your successors
shall not bear a greater portion of the
public burdens.'
"without doubt this would be a great
encouragement given to manufactures and
trade; but would it be just? could not their
advancement be obtained at any other price?
in england itself, has not manufacturing and
commercial industry made even greater progress,
since the same period, without being
distinguished with so much partiality? a
landlord by his assiduity, economy, and skill,
increases his annual revenue by  francs.
if the state claim of him the fifth part of his
augmented income, will there not remain
 francs of increase to stimulate his further
exertions?"
if mr. say's suggestion were followed, and
the state were to claim the fifth part of the
augmented income of the farmer, it would be
a partial tax, acting on the farmer's profits,
and not affecting the profits of other employments.
the tax would be paid by all lands,
by those which yielded scantily as well as
by those which yielded abundantly; and on
some lands there could be no compensation
for it by deduction from rent, for no rent is
paid. a partial tax on profits never falls on
the trade on which it is laid, for the trader
will either quit his employment, or remunerate
himself for the tax. now those who pay no
rent could be recompensed only by a rise in
the price of produce, and thus would m. say's
proposed tax fall on the consumer, and not
either on the landlord or farmer.
if the proposed tax were increased in proportion
to the increased quantity, or value, of
the gross produce obtained from the land, it
would differ in nothing from tithes, and
would equally be transferred to the consumer.
whether then it fell on the gross or on the
net produce of land, it would be equally
a tax on consumption, and would only affect
the landlord and farmer in the same way as
other taxes on raw produce.
if no tax whatever had been laid on the
land, and the same sum had been raised by
any other means, agriculture would have
flourished at least as well as it has done; for it
is impossible that any tax on land can be an
encouragement to agriculture; a moderate
tax may not, and probably does not, greatly
prevent, but it cannot encourage production.
the english government has held no such
language as m. say has supposed. it did not
promise to exempt the agricultural class and
their successors from all future taxation, and
to raise the further supplies which the state
might require, from the other classes of
society; it said only, "in this mode we will no
further burthen the land; but we retain to
ourselves the most perfect liberty of making
you pay, under some other form, your full
quota to the future exigencies of the state."
speaking of taxes in kind, or a tax of a
certain proportion of the produce, which is
precisely the same as tithes, m. say says,
"this mode of taxation appears to be the
most equitable; there is however none which
is less so: it totally leaves out of consideration
the advances made by the producer; it is
proportioned to the gross, and not to the net
revenue. two agriculturists cultivate different
kinds of raw produce: one cultivates
corn on middling land, his expenses amounting
annually on an average to  francs;
the raw produce from his lands sells for ,
francs; he has then a net revenue of 
francs.
"his neighbour has pasture or wood land,
which brings in every year a like sum of
, francs, but his expenses amount only
to  francs. he has therefore on an
average a net revenue of , francs.
"a law ordains that a twelfth of the produce
of all the fruits of the earth be levied in kind,
whatever they may be. from the first is
taken in consequence of this law, corn of the
value of  francs; and from the second,
hay, cattle, or wood, of the same value of
 francs. what has happened? from
the one, a quarter of his net income, 
francs, has been taken; from the other, whose
income was , francs, a tenth only has
been taken. income is the net profit which
remains after replacing the capital exactly in
its former state. has a merchant an income
equal to all the sales which he makes in the
course of a year? certainly not; his income
only amounts to the excess of his sales above
his advances, and it is on this excess only that
taxes on income should fall."
m. say's error in the above passage lies in
supposing that because the value of the produce
of one of these two farms, after re-instating
the capital, is greater than the value of the
produce of the other, on that account the net
income of the cultivators will differ by the
same amount. m. say has wholly omitted
the consideration of the different amount of
rent, which these cultivators would have to
pay. there cannot be two rates of profit in
the same employment, and therefore when
produce is in different proportions to capital,
it is the rent which will differ, and not
the profit. upon what pretence would one
man with a capital of  francs, be allowed
to obtain a net profit of , francs from its
employment, whilst another with a capital of
 francs would only obtain  francs?
let m. say make a due allowance for rent;
let him further allow for the effect which such
a tax would have on the prices of these different
kinds of raw produce, and he will then
perceive that it is not an unequal tax, and
further that the producers themselves will not
otherwise contribute to it, than any other class
of consumers.
the rise in the price of commodities, in
consequence of taxation or of difficulty of
production, will in all cases ultimately ensue;
but the duration of the interval, before the
market price of commodities conforms to
their natural price, must depend on the nature
of the commodity, and on the facility with
which it can be reduced in quantity. if the
quantity of the commodity taxed could not
be diminished, if the capital of the farmer or
of the hatter for instance, could not be withdrawn
to other employments, it would be of no
consequence that their profits were reduced
below the general level by means of a tax; unless
the demand for their commodities should
increase, they would never be able to elevate
the market price of corn and hats up to the
increased natural price. their threats to leave
their employments, and remove their capitals
to more favoured trades, would be treated as
an idle menace which could not be carried
into effect; and consequently the price would
not be raised by diminished production.
commodities however of all descriptions can
be reduced in quantity, and capital can be
removed from trades which are less profitable
to those which are more so, but with different
degrees of rapidity. in proportion as the
supply of a particular commodity can be more
easily reduced, the price of it will more
quickly rise after the difficulty of its production
has been increased by taxation, or by
any other means. corn being a commodity
indispensably necessary to every one, little
effect will be produced on the demand for it
in consequence of a tax, and therefore the
supply could not be long excessive, even if
the producers had great difficulty in removing
their capitals from the land; the price of corn
therefore, will speedily be raised by taxation,
and the farmer will be enabled to transfer
the tax from himself to the consumer.
if the mines which supply us with gold
were in this country, and if gold were taxed,
it could not rise in relative value to other
things till its quantity were reduced. this
would be more particularly the case, if gold
were exclusively used for money. it is true
that the least productive mines, those which
paid no rent, could no longer be worked, as
they could not afford the general rate of
profits till the relative value of gold rose, by
a sum equal to the tax. the quantity of
gold, and therefore the quantity of money
would be slowly reduced; it would be a little
diminished in one year, a little more in another,
and finally its value would be raised in
proportion to the tax; but in the interval, the
proprietors or holders, as they would pay the
tax, would be the sufferers, and not those who
used money. if out of every  quarters
of wheat in the country, and every 
produced in future, government should exact
 quarters as a tax, the remaining 
quarters would exchange for the same quantity
of other commodities that  did
before; but if the same thing took place
with respect to gold, if of every l. money
now in the country, or in future to be
brought into it, government could exact
l. as a tax, the remaining l. would
purchase very little more than l. purchased
before. the tax would fall upon him, whose
property consisted of money, and would continue
to do so till its quantity were reduced
in proportion to the increased cost of its production
caused by the tax.
this perhaps would be more particularly
the case with respect to a metal used for
money, than any other commodity, because
the demand for money is not for a definite
quantity, as is the demand for clothes, or for
food. the demand for money is regulated
entirely by its value, and its value by its
quantity. if gold were of double the value,
half the quantity would perform the same
functions in circulation, and if it were of half
the value, double the quantity would be required.
if the market value of corn be increased
one tenth by taxation, or by difficulty
of production, it is doubtful, whether any
effect whatever would be produced on the
quantity consumed, because every man's
want is for a definite quantity, and, therefore,
if he has the means of purchasing, he will
continue to consume as before; but for money,
the demand is exactly proportioned to
its value. no man could consume twice the
quantity of corn, which is usually necessary
for his support, but every man purchasing and
selling only the same quantity of goods, may
be obliged to employ twice, thrice, or any number
of times the same quantity of money.
the argument which i have just been
using, applies only to those states of society
in which the precious metals are used for
money, and where paper credit is not established.
the metal gold like all other commodities
has its value in the market ultimately
regulated by the comparative facility or
difficulty of producing it; and although from
its durable nature, and from the difficulty of
reducing its quantity, it does not readily
bend to variations in its market value, yet
that difficulty is much increased from the circumstance
of its being used as money. if
the quantity of gold in the market for the
purpose of commerce only, were , ounces,
and the consumption in our manufactures
were  ounces annually, it might be raised
one fourth, or  per cent. in its value, in
one year, by withholding the annual supply;
but if in consequence of its being used as
money, the quantity employed were ,
ounces, it would not be raised one fourth in
value in less than ten years. as money
made of paper may be readily reduced in
quantity, its value, though its standard were
gold, would be increased as rapidly as that
of the metal itself would be increased if it had
no connexion whatever with money.
if gold were the produce of one country
only, and it were used universally for money,
a very considerable tax might be imposed on
it, which would not fall on any country,
except in proportion as they used it in manufactures,
and for utensils; upon that portion
which was used for money, though a large
tax might be received, nobody would pay it.
this is a quality peculiar to money. all
other commodities of which there exists a limited
quantity, and which cannot be increased
by competition, are dependant for
their value, on the tastes, the caprice, and the
power of purchasers; but money is a commodity
which no country has any wish or necessity
to increase: no more advantage results
from using twenty millions, than from using
ten millions of currency. a country might
have a monopoly of silk, or of wine, and
yet the prices of silks and wine might fall,
because from caprice or fashion, or taste,
cloth and brandy might be preferred, and
substituted; the same effect might in a degree
take place with gold, as far as its use is confined
to manufactures: but while money is
the general medium of exchange, the demand
for it is never a matter of choice, but
always of necessity; you must take it in exchange
for your goods, and therefore there
are no limits to the quantity which may be
forced on you by foreign trade, if it fall in value;
and no reduction to which you must
not submit, if it rise. you may indeed substitute
paper money, but by this you do not,
and cannot lessen the quantity of money; it
is only by the rise of the price of commodities,
that you can prevent them from being
exported from a country where they are purchased
with little money, to a country where
they can be sold for more, and this rise can
only be effected by an importation of metallic
money from abroad, or by the creation or
addition of paper money at home. if then
the king of spain, supposing him to be in
exclusive possession of the mines, and gold
alone to be used for money, were to lay a
considerable tax on gold, he would very
much raise its natural value; and as its market
value in europe is ultimately regulated by its
natural value in spanish america, more commodities
would be given by europe for a
given quantity of gold. but the same quantity
of gold would not be produced in america,
as its value would only be increased in
proportion to the diminution of quantity
consequent on its increased cost of production.
no more goods then would be obtained
in america, in exchange for all their
gold exported, than before; and it may be
asked, where then would be the benefit to
spain and her colonies? the benefit would
be this, that if less gold were produced, less capital
would be employed in producing it;
the same value of goods from europe would
be imported by the employment of the smaller
capital, that was before obtained by the employment
of the larger; and therefore all the
productions obtained by the employment of
the capital withdrawn from the mines, would
be a benefit which spain would derive from
the imposition of the tax, and which she
could not obtain in such abundance, or with
such certainty, by possessing the monopoly
of any other commodity whatever. from
such a tax, as far as money was concerned,
the nations of europe would suffer no injury
whatever; they would have the same quantity
of goods, and consequently the same
means of enjoyment as before, but these
goods would be circulated with a less quantity
of money.
if in consequence of the tax, only one tenth
of the present quantity of gold were obtained
from the mines, that tenth would be of equal
value with the ten tenths now produced.
but the king of spain is not exclusively in
possession of the mines of the precious metals;
and if he were, his advantage from their
possession, and the power of taxation, would
be very much reduced by the limitation of
demand and consumption in europe, in consequence
of the universal substitution, in a
greater or less degree, of paper money. the
agreement of the market and natural prices
of all commodities, depends at all times on
the facility with which the supply can be increased
or diminished. in the case of gold,
houses, and labour, as well as many other
things, this effect cannot, under some circumstances,
be speedily produced. but it is different
with those commodities which are consumed
and reproduced from year to year,
such as hats, shoes, corn, and cloth; they
may be reduced if necessary, and the interval
cannot be long before the supply is contracted
in proportion to the increased charge of producing
them.
a tax on raw produce from the surface of
the earth, will, as we have seen, fall on the
consumer, and will in no way affect rent; unless,
by diminishing the funds for the maintenance
of labour, it lowers wages, reduces the
population, and diminishes the demand for
corn. but a tax on the produce of gold
mines must, by enhancing the value of that
metal, necessarily reduce the demand for it,
and must therefore necessarily displace capital
from the employment to which it was applied.
notwithstanding then, that spain
would derive all the benefits which i have
stated from a tax on gold, the proprietors of
mines from which capital was withdrawn
would lose all their rent. this would
be a loss to individuals, but not a national
loss; rent being not a creation, but merely a
transfer of wealth: the king of spain, and
the proprietors of the mines which continued
to be worked, would together receive not
only all that the liberated capital produced,
but all that the other proprietors lost.
suppose the mines of the st, nd, and rd
quality to be worked, and to produce respectively
, , and  pounds weight of gold,
and therefore the rent of no.  to be thirty
pounds, and that of no.  ten pounds. suppose
now the tax to be seventy pounds of gold
per annum on each mine worked; and consequently
that no.  alone could be profitably
worked; it is evident that all rent would immediately
disappear. before the imposition of
the tax, out of the  pounds produced on
no. , a rent was paid of thirty pounds, and the
worker of the mine retained seventy, a sum
equal to the produce of the least productive
mine. the value then of what remains to the
capitalist of the mine no.  must be the same
as before, or he would not obtain the common
profits of stock; and consequently, after paying
seventy out of his  pounds for tax,
the value of the remaining thirty must be
as great as seventy were before, and therefore
the value of the whole hundred as great as
 pounds before. its value might be higher,
but it could not be lower, or even this mine
would cease to be worked. being a monopolised
commodity, it could exceed its natural
value, and then it would pay a rent
equal to that excess; but no funds would be
employed in the mine, if it were below this
value. in return for one third of the labour
and capital employed in the mines, spain
would obtain as much gold as would exchange
for the same, or very nearly the same,
quantity of commodities as before. she would
be richer by the produce of the two thirds
liberated from the mines. if the value of
the  pounds of gold should be equal to
that of the  pounds extracted before; the
king of spain's portion, his seventy pounds,
would be equal to  at the former value: a
small part of the king's tax only would fall
on his own subjects, the greater part being obtained
by the better distribution of capital.
the account of spain would stand thus:
formerly produced:
gold  pounds, of the value of (suppose).
yards of cloth.
now produced:
by the two capitalists who quitted the mines,
the value of  pounds of gold, or
yards of cloth.
by the capitalist who works the mine, no. ,
thirty pounds of gold increased in value, as
 to ½, and therefore now of the value of
yards of cloth.
tax to the king seventy pounds, now of the
value of
yards of cloth.
of the  received by the king, the people
of spain would contribute only , and
 would be pure gain, effected by the
liberated capital.
if the tax, instead of being a fixed sum per
mine worked, were a certain portion of its
produce, the quantity would not be reduced
in consequence. if a half, a fourth, or a
third of each mine were taken for the tax, it
would nevertheless be the interest of the proprietors
to make their mines yield as abundantly
as before; but if the quantity were not
reduced, but only a part of it transferred from
the proprietor to the king, its value would not
rise; the tax would fall on the people of the
colonies, and no advantage would be gained.
a tax of this kind would have the effect that
adam smith supposes taxes on raw produce
would have on the rent of land—it would fall
entirely on the rent of the mine. if pushed
a little further, the tax would not only absorb
the whole rent, but would deprive the worker
of the mine of the common profits of stock,
and he would consequently withdraw his capital
from the production of gold. if still
further extended, the rent of still better mines
would be absorbed, and capital would be
further withdrawn; and thus the quantity
would be continually reduced, and its value
raised, and the same effects would take place
as we have already pointed out; a part of
the tax would be paid by the people of the
spanish colonies, and the other part would be
a new creation of produce, by increasing the
power of the instrument used as a medium
of exchange. taxes on gold are of two
kinds, one on the actual quantity of gold in
circulation, the other on the quantity that is
annually produced from the mines. both
have a tendency to reduce the quantity, and
to raise the value of gold; but by neither
will its value be raised till the quantity is reduced,
and therefore such taxes will fall for
a time, until the supply is diminished, on the
proprietors of money, but ultimately they
will be paid by the owner of the mine in the
reduction of rent, and by the purchasers of
that portion of gold, which is used as a commodity
contributing to the enjoyments of
mankind, and not set apart exclusively for a
circulating medium.
there are also other commodities besides
gold which cannot be speedily reduced in
quantity; any tax on which will therefore
fall on the proprietor, if the increase of price
should lessen the demand.
taxes on houses are of this description;
though laid on the occupier, they will frequently
fall by a diminution of rent on the
landlord. the produce of the land is consumed
and reproduced from year to year, and
so are many other commodities; as they may
therefore be speedily brought to a level with
the demand, they cannot long exceed their
natural price. but as a tax on houses may
be considered in the light of an additional
rent paid by the tenant, its tendency will be
to diminish the demand for houses of the
same annual rent, without diminishing their
supply. rent will therefore fall, and a part
of the tax will be paid indirectly by the landlord.
"the rent of a house," says adam smith,
"may be distinguished into two parts, of
which the one may very properly be called the
building rent, the other is commonly called
the ground rent. the building rent is the
interest or profit of the capital expended in
building the house. in order to put the trade
of a builder upon a level with other trades,
it is necessary that this rent should be sufficient
first to pay the same interest which
he would have got for his capital, if he had
lent it upon good security; and secondly, to
keep the house in constant repair, or what
comes to the same thing, to replace within a
certain term of years the capital which had
been employed in building it." "if in proportion
to the interest of money, the trade
of the builder affords at any time a much
greater profit than this, it will soon draw so
much capital from other trades, as will reduce
the profit to its proper level. if it
affords at any time much less than this, other
trades will soon draw so much capital from
it as will again raise that profit. whatever
part of the whole rent of a house is over and
above what is sufficient for affording this
reasonable profit, naturally goes to the ground
rent; and where the owner of the ground,
and the owner of the building are two different
persons, it is in most cases completely
paid to the former. in country houses, at a
distance from any great town, where there is
a plentiful choice of ground, the ground rent
is scarcely any thing, or no more than what
the space upon which the house stands, would
pay if employed in agriculture. in country
villas, in the neighbourhood of some great
town, it is sometimes a good deal higher,
and the peculiar conveniency, or beauty of
situation, is there frequently very highly paid
for. ground rents are generally highest in
the capital, and in those particular parts of
it, where there happens to be the greatest
demand for houses, whatever be the reason
for that demand, whether for trade and business,
for pleasure and society, or for mere
vanity and fashion." a tax on the rent of
houses may either fall on the occupier, on the
ground landlord, or on the building landlord.
in ordinary cases it may be presumed, that
the whole tax would be paid both immediately
and finally by the occupier.
if the tax be moderate, and the circumstances
of the country such, that it is either
stationary or advancing, there would be little
motive for the occupier of a house to content
himself with one of a worse description.
but if the tax be high, or any other circumstances
should diminish the demand for houses,
the landlord's income would fall, for the
occupier would be partly compensated for the
tax by a diminution of rent. it is, however,
difficult to say, in what proportions that part
of the tax, which was saved by the occupier
by a fall of rent, would fall on the building
rent and the ground rent. it is probable,
that in the first instance, both would be affected;
but as houses are, though slowly, yet
certainly perishable, and as no more would
be built, till the profits of the builder were
restored to the general level, building rent,
would, after an interval, be restored to its
natural price. as the builder receives rent
only whilst the building endures, he could
pay no part of the tax, under the most disastrous
circumstances, for any longer period.
the payment of this tax, then, would ultimately
fall on the occupier and ground
landlord, but "in what proportion, this final
payment would be divided between them,"
says adam smith, "it is not perhaps very easy
to ascertain. the division would probably be
very different in different circumstances, and
a tax of this kind might, according to those
different circumstances, affect very unequally
both the inhabitant of the house, and the
owner of the ground."
adam smith considers ground rents as
peculiarly fit subjects for taxation. "both
ground rents, and the ordinary rent of land,"
he says, "are a species of revenue, which the
owner in many cases enjoys, without any
care or attention of his own. though a part
of this revenue should be taken from him, in
order to defray the expenses of the state, no
discouragement will thereby be given to any
sort of industry. the annual produce of the
land and labour of the society, the real
wealth and revenue of the great body of the
people, might be the same after such a tax
as before. ground rents, and the ordinary
rent of land, are, therefore, perhaps the
species of revenue, which can best bear to
have a peculiar tax imposed upon them." it
must be admitted that the effects of these
taxes would be such as adam smith has
described; but it would surely be very unjust,
to tax exclusively the revenue of any particular
class of a community. the burdens of
the state should be borne by all in proportion
to their means: this is one of the four maxims
mentioned by adam smith, which should govern
all taxation. rent often belongs to those
who after many years of toil, have realised their
gains, and expended their fortunes in the purchase
of land; and it certainly would be an infringement
of that principle which should ever
be held sacred, the security of property, to subject
it to unequal taxation. it is to be lamented,
that the duty by stamps, with which the
transfer of landed property is loaded, materially
impedes the conveyance of it into
those hands, where it would probably be
made most productive. and if it be considered,
that land, regarded as a fit subject for
exclusive taxation, would not only be reduced
in price, to compensate for the risk of
that taxation, but in proportion to the indefinite
nature and uncertain value of the risk,
would become a fit subject for speculations,
partaking more of the nature of gambling,
than of sober trade, it will appear probable,
that the hands into which land would in that
case be most apt to fall, would be the hands
of those, who possess more of the qualities of
the gambler, than of the qualities of the
sober-minded proprietor, who is likely to
employ his land to the greatest advantage.
taxes on those commodities, which are generally
denominated luxuries, fall on those
only who make use of them. a tax on wine
is paid by the consumer of wine. a tax on
pleasure horses, or on coaches, is paid by
those who provide for themselves such enjoyments,
and in exact proportion as they provide
them. but taxes on necessaries do not
affect the consumers of necessaries, in proportion
to the quantity that may be consumed
by them, but often in a much
higher proportion. a tax on corn, we have
observed, not only affects a manufacturer in
the proportion that he and his family may
consume corn, but it alters the rate of profits
of stock, and therefore also affects his income.
whatever raises the wages of labour, lowers
the profits of stock; therefore every tax on
any commodity consumed by the labourer,
has a tendency to lower the rate of profits.
a tax on hats will raise the price of hats;
a tax on shoes, the price of shoes; if this
were not the case, the tax would be finally
paid by the manufacturer; his profits would
be reduced below the general level, and he
would quit his trade. a partial tax on
profits will raise the price of the commodity
on which it falls: a tax, for example, on the
profits of the hatter, would raise the price of
hats; for if his profits were taxed, and not
those of any other trade, his profits, unless he
raised the price of his hats, would be below
the general rate of profits, and he would quit
his employment for another.
in the same manner a tax on the profits of
the farmer would raise the price of corn; a
tax on the profits of the clothier, the price of
cloth; and if a tax in proportion to profits
were laid on all trades, every commodity
would be raised in price. but if the mine,
which supplied us with the standard of our
money, were in this country, and the profits of
the miner were also taxed, the price of no
commodity would rise, each man would give
an equal proportion of his income, and every
thing would be as before.
if money be not taxed, and therefore be
permitted to preserve its value, whilst every
thing else is taxed, and is raised in value, the
hatter, the farmer, and clothier, each employing
the same capitals, and obtaining the same
profits, will pay the same amount of tax. if
the tax be l., the hats, the cloth, and the
corn, will each be increased in value l.
if the hatter gain by his hats l., instead
of l., he will pay l. to government
for the tax; and therefore will still have l.
to lay out on goods for his own consumption.
but as the cloth, corn, and all other commodities,
will be raised in price from the
same cause, he will not obtain more for his
l. than he before obtained for l., and
thus will he contribute by his diminished expenditure
to the exigencies of the state; he will,
by the payment of the tax, have placed a portion
of the produce of the land and labour of
the country at the disposal of government, instead
of using that portion himself. if instead of
expending his l., he adds it to his capital,
he will find in the rise of wages, and in the
increased cost of the raw material and machinery,
that his saving of l. does not
amount to more than a saving of l. amounted
to before.
if money be taxed, or if by any other cause
its value be altered, and all commodities
remain precisely at the same price as before,
the profits of the manufacturer and farmer
will also be the same as before, they will
continue to be l.; and as they will each
have to pay l. to government, they will
retain only l., which will give them a
less command over the produce of the land
and labour of the country, whether they
expend it in productive or unproductive
labour. precisely what they lose, government
will gain. in the first case the contributor to
the tax would, for l., have as great a
quantity of goods as he before had for l.;
in the second, he would have only as much
as he before had for l. this proceeds
from the difference in the amount of the tax;
in the first case it is only an eleventh of his
income, in the second it is a tenth; money in
the two cases being of a different value.
but although, if money be not taxed, and
do not alter in value, all commodities will rise
in price, they will not rise in the same proportion;
they will not after the tax bear the
same relative value to each other which they
did before the tax. in a former part of this
work, we discussed the effects of the division
of capital into fixed and circulating, or rather
into durable and perishable capital, on the
prices of commodities. we shewed that two
manufacturers might employ precisely the
same amount of capital, and might derive from
it precisely the same amount of profits, but
that they would sell their commodities for
very different sums of money, according as the
capitals they employed were rapidly, or slowly,
consumed and reproduced. the one might
sell his goods for l., the other for ,l.,
and they might both employ ,l. of capital,
and obtain  per cent. profit, or l.
the capital of one might consist for example
of l. circulating capital, to be reproduced,
and l. fixed, in buildings and machinery;
the capital of the other on the contrary might
consist of l. of circulating, and of only
l. fixed capital in machinery and buildings.
now if each of these persons were to
be taxed  per cent. on his income, or
l., the one, to make his business yield him
the general rate of profit, must raise his goods
from ,l. to ,l.; the other would
also be obliged to raise the price of his goods
from l. to l. before the tax, the
goods sold by one of these manufacturers
were ½ times more valuable than the goods of
the other; after the tax they will be . times
more valuable: the one kind will have risen 
per cent.; the other  per cent.: consequently
a tax upon income, whilst money continued
unaltered in value, would alter the relative
prices and value of commodities. this is
true, if the tax instead of being laid on the
profits were laid on the commodities themselves:
provided they were taxed in proportion
to the value of the capital employed on their
production, they would rise equally, whatever
might be their value, and therefore they
would not preserve the same proportion as
before. a commodity, which rose from ten
to eleven thousand pounds, would not bear
the same relation as before, to another which
rose from  to l. if under these circumstances
money rose in value, from whatever
cause it might proceed, it would not affect
the prices of commodities in the same proportion.
the same cause which would
lower the price of one from ,l. to ,l.
or less than  per cent., would lower the
price of the other from l. to l. or
-/ per cent. if they fell in any different
proportion, profits would not be equal; for
to make them equal, when the price of the
first commodity was ,l., the price of the
second should be l.; and when the price
of the first was ,l., the price of the
other should be l.
the consideration of this fact will lead to
the understanding of a very important principle,
which i believe has never been adverted
to. it is this; that in a country where no
taxation subsists, the alteration in the value of
money arising from scarcity or abundance will
operate in an equal proportion on the prices of
all commodities; that if a commodity of l.
value rise to l., or fall to l., a commodity
of ,l. value will rise to ,l.
or fall to l.; but in a country where
prices are artificially raised by taxation, the
abundance of money from an influx, or the
exportation and consequent scarcity of it
from foreign demand, will not operate in the
same proportion on the prices of all commodities;
some it will raise or lower , , or 
per cent., others , , or  per cent. if a
country were not taxed, and money should
fall in value, its abundance in every market
would produce similar effects in each. if
meat rose  per cent., bread, beer, shoes,
labour, and every commodity, would also rise
 per cent.; it is necessary they should do
so, to secure to each trade the same rate of
profits. but this is no longer true when any
of these commodities is taxed; if in that case
they should all rise in proportion to the fall
in the value of money, profits would be rendered
unequal; in the case of the commodities
taxed profits would be raised above the
general level, and capital would be removed
from one employment to another, till an
equilibrium of profits was restored, which
could only be, after the relative prices were
altered.
will not this principle account for the
different effects, which it was remarked were
produced on the prices of commodities, from
the altered value of money during the bank-restriction?
it was objected to those who
contended that the currency was at that
period depreciated, from the too great abundance
of the paper circulation, that, if that were
the fact, all commodities ought to have risen
in the same proportion; but it was found
that many had varied considerably more than
others, and thence it was inferred that the
rise of prices was owing to something affecting
the value of commodities, and not to any
alteration in the value of the currency. it
appears however, as we have just seen, that in
a country where commodities are taxed, they
will not all vary in price in the same proportion,
either in consequence of a rise or of a fall
in the value of currency.
if the profits of all trades were taxed,
excepting the profits of the farmer, all goods
would rise in money value, excepting raw
produce. the farmer would have the same
corn income as before, and would sell his
corn also for the same money price; but as he
would be obliged to pay an additional price
for all the commodities, except corn, which
he consumed, it would be to him a tax on
expenditure. nor would he be relieved
from this tax by an alteration in the value of
money, for an alteration in the value of
money might sink all the taxed commodities
to their former price, but the untaxed one
would sink below its former level; and therefore,
though the farmer would purchase his
commodities at the same price as before, he
would have less money with which to purchase
them.
the landlord too would be precisely in
the same situation, he would have the same
corn, and the same money rent as before, if
all commodities rose in price, and money
remained at the same value; and he would have
the same corn, but a less money rent, if all
commodities remained at the same price: so
that in either case, though his income were
not directly taxed, he would indirectly contribute
towards the money raised.
but suppose the profits of the farmer to be
also taxed, he then would be in the same
situation as other traders; his raw produce
would rise, so that he would have the same
money revenue, after paying the tax, but he
would pay an additional price for all the
commodities he consumed, raw produce included.
his landlord however would be differently
situated, he would be benefited by the tax on
his tenant's profits, as he would be compensated
for the additional price at which he
would purchase his manufactured commodities,
if they rose in price; and he would
have the same money revenue, if in consequence
of a rise in the value of money,
commodities sold at their former price. a
tax on the profits of the farmer, is not a tax
proportioned to the gross produce of the land,
but to its net produce, after the payment of
rent, wages, and all other charges. as the
cultivators of the different kinds of land,
no. , , and , employ precisely the same
capitals, they will get precisely the same
profits, whatever may be the quantity of
gross produce, which one may obtain more
than the other; and consequently they will be
all taxed alike. suppose the gross produce
of the land of the quality no. , to be 
qrs., that of no. ,  qrs., and of no , ,
and each to be taxed  quarters, the difference
between the produce of no. , no. , and
no. , after paying the tax, will be the same as
before; for if no.  be reduced to , no. 
to , and no.  to  qrs.; the difference
between  and  will be as before,  qrs.; and
of no.  and no. ,  qrs. if after the tax the
prices of corn and of every other commodity
should remain the same as before, money rent
as well as corn rent, would continue unaltered;
but if the price of corn, and every other commodity
should rise in consequence of the tax,
money rent will also rise in the same proportion.
if the price of corn were l. per quarter,
the rent of no.  would have been l., and
that of no. , l.; but if corn rose ten per
cent., or to l. s., rent would also rise ten per
cent., for twenty quarters of corn would then
be worth l., and ten quarters l.; so that in
every case the landlord will be unaffected by
such a tax. a tax on the profits of stock
always leaves corn rent unaltered, and therefore
money rent varies with the price of corn;
but a tax on raw produce, or tithes, never
leaves corn rent unaltered, but generally
leaves money rent the same as before. in
another part of this work i have observed,
that if a land-tax of the same money amount,
were laid on every kind of land in cultivation,
without any allowance for difference of
fertility, it would be very unequal in its operation,
as it would be a profit to the landlord
of the more fertile lands. it would raise the
price of corn in proportion to the burden
borne by the farmer of the worst land; but
this additional price being obtained for the
greater quantity of produce yielded by the
better land, farmers of such land would be
benefited during their leases, and afterwards,
the advantage would go to the landlord in
the form of an increase of rent. the effect
of an equal tax on the profits of the farmer
is precisely the same; it raises the money rent
of the landlords, if money retains the same
value; but as the profits of all other trades
are taxed, as well as those of the farmer, and
consequently the prices of all goods, as well
as corn, are raised, the landlord loses as much
by the increased money price of the goods
and corn on which his rent is expended, as
he gains by the rise of his rent. if money
should rise in value, and all things should,
after a tax on the profits of stock, fall to their
former prices, rent also would be the same as
before. the landlord would receive the same
money rent, and would obtain all the commodities
on which it was expended at their
former price; so that under all circumstances
he would continue untaxed.
a tax on the profits of stock would also
affect the stockholder, if all commodities
were to rise in proportion to the tax; but if
from the alteration in the value of money,
all commodities were to sink to their former
price, the stockholder would pay nothing
towards the tax; he would purchase all his
commodities at the same price, but would
still receive the same money dividend.
if it be agreed, that by taxing the profits
of one manufacturer only, the price of his
goods would rise, to put him on an equality
with all other manufacturers; and that by
taxing the profits of two manufacturers, the
prices of two descriptions of goods must rise,
i do not see how it can be disputed, that by
taxing the profits of all manufacturers, the
prices of all goods would rise, provided the
mine which supplied us with money, were in
the country taxed. but as money, or the
standard of money, is a commodity imported
from abroad, the prices of all goods could
not rise; for such an effect could not take
place without an additional quantity of money,
which could not be obtained in exchange
for dear goods, as was shewn in page .
if however, such a rise could take place, it
could not be permanent, for it would have a
powerful influence on foreign trade. in return
for commodities imported, those dear
goods could not be exported, and therefore
we should for a time continue to buy, although
we ceased to sell; and should export
money, or bullion, till the relative prices of
commodities were nearly the same as before.
it appears to me absolutely certain, that a
well regulated tax on profits, would ultimately
restore commodities both of home and
foreign manufacture, to the same money price
which they bore before the tax was imposed.
as taxes on raw produce, tithes, taxes on
wages, and on the necessaries of the labourer,
will, by raising wages, lower profits, they will
all, though not in an equal degree, be attended
with the same effects.
the discovery of machinery, which materially
improves home manufactures, always
tends to raise the relative value of money,
and therefore to encourage its importation.
all taxation, all increased impediments, either
to the manufacturer, or the grower of commodities,
tend on the contrary to lower the
relative value of money, and therefore to
encourage its exportation.
taxes on wages will raise wages, and therefore
will diminish the rate of the profits of
stock. we have already seen that a tax on
necessaries will raise their prices, and will be
followed by a rise of wages. the only difference
between a tax on necessaries, and a
tax on wages is, that the former will necessarily
be accompanied by a rise in the price of
necessaries, but the latter will not; towards
a tax on wages, consequently, neither the
stockholder, the landlord, nor any other class
but the employers of labour will contribute.
a tax on wages is wholly a tax on profits, a
tax on necessaries is partly a tax on profits,
and partly a tax on rich consumers. the
ultimate effects which will result from such
taxes then are precisely the same as those
which result from a direct tax on profits.
"the wages of the inferior classes of workmen,"
says adam smith, "i have endeavoured
to shew in the first book, are every where
necessarily regulated by two different circumstances;
the demand for labour, and the ordinary
or average price of provisions. the
demand for labour, according as it happens
to be either increasing, stationary, or declining,
or to require an increasing, stationary,
or declining population, regulates the subsistence
of the labourer, and determines in
what degree it shall be either liberal, moderate,
or scanty. the ordinary or average
price of provisions determines the quantity
of money which must be paid to the workman,
in order to enable him one year with
another to purchase this liberal, moderate, or
scanty subsistence. while the demand for
labour, and the price of provisions, therefore
remain the same, a direct tax upon the wages
of labour can have no other effect than
to raise them somewhat higher than the
tax."
to the proposition, as it is here advanced by
dr. smith, mr. buchanan offers two objections.
first, he denies that the money
wages of labour are regulated by the price of
provisions; and secondly, he denies that a
tax on the wages of labour would raise the
price of labour. on the first point, mr. buchanan's
argument is as follows, page :
"the wages of labour, it has already been
remarked, consist not in money, but in what
money purchases, namely, provisions and
other necessaries; and the allowance of the
labourer out of the common stock, will always
be in proportion to the supply. where
provisions are cheap and abundant, his share
will be the larger; and where they are scarce
and dear, it will be the less. his wages will
always give him his just share, and they
cannot give him more. it is an opinion indeed,
adopted by dr. smith and most other
writers, that the money price of labour is
regulated by the money price of provisions,
and that when provisions rise in price, wages
rise in proportion. but it is clear that the
price of labour has no necessary connexion
with the price of food, since it depends entirely
on the supply of labourers compared
with the demand. besides, it is to be observed,
that the high price of provisions is a
certain indication of a deficient supply, and
arises in the natural course of things, for the
purpose of retarding the consumption. a
smaller supply of food, shared among the
same number of consumers, will evidently
leave a smaller portion to each, and the
labourer must bear his share of the common
want. to distribute this burden equally,
and to prevent the labourer from consuming
subsistence so freely as before, the price rises.
but wages it seems must rise along with it,
that he may still use the same quantity of a
scarcer commodity; and thus nature is represented
as counteracting her own purposes:
first, raising the price of food, to diminish
the consumption, and afterwards, raising
wages to give the labourer the same supply
as before."
in this argument of mr. buchanan, there
appears to me, to be a great mixture of truth
and error. because a high price of provisions
is sometimes occasioned by a deficient supply,
mr. buchanan assumes it as a certain indication
of a deficient supply. he attributes
to one cause exclusively, that which may
arise from many. it is undoubtedly true,
that in the case of a deficient supply, a smaller
quantity will be shared among the same
number of consumers, and a smaller portion
will fall to each. to distribute this privation
equally, and to prevent the labourer from
consuming subsistence so freely as before,
the price rises. it must therefore be conceded
to mr. buchanan, that any rise in the
price of provisions, occasioned by a deficient
supply, will not necessarily raise the money
wages of labour; as the consumption must
be retarded; which can only be effected by
diminishing the power of the consumers to
purchase. but, because the price of provisions
is raised by a deficient supply, we are
by no means warranted in concluding, as mr.
buchanan appears to do, that there may not
be an abundant supply, with a high price;
not a high price with regard to money only,
but with regard to all other things.
the natural price of commodities, which always
ultimately governs their market price,
depends on the facility of production; but the
quantity produced is not in proportion to that
facility. although the lands, which are now
taken into cultivation, are much inferior to
the lands in cultivation three centuries ago,
and therefore the difficulty of production is
increased, who can entertain any doubt, but
that the quantity produced now, very far
exceeds the quantity then produced? not
only is a high price compatible with an increased
supply, but it rarely fails to accompany
it. if, then, in consequence of taxation,
or of difficulty of production, the price of
provisions be raised, and the quantity be not
diminished, the money wages of labour will
rise; for as mr. buchanan has justly observed,
"the wages of labour consist not in money,
but in what money purchases, namely, provisions
and other necessaries; and the allowance
of the labourer out of the common stock,
will always be in proportion to the supply."
with respect to the second point, whether
a tax on the wages of labour would raise
the price of labour, mr. buchanan says, "after
the labourer has received the fair recompense
of his labour, how can he have recourse
on his employer, for what he is afterwards
compelled to pay away in taxes? there is
no law or principle in human affairs to warrant
such a conclusion. after the labourer
has received his wages, they are in his own
keeping, and he must, as far as he is able,
bear the burthen of whatever exactions he
may ever afterwards be exposed to: for he
has clearly no way of compelling those to
reimburse him, who have already paid him
the fair price of his work." mr. buchanan
has quoted with great approbation, the following
able passage from mr. malthus's work
on population, which appears to me completely
to answer his objection. "the price
of labour, when left to find its natural level, is
a most important political barometer, expressing
the relation between the supply of provisions,
and the demand for them, between
the quantity to be consumed, and the number
of consumers; and, taken on the average,
independently of accidental circumstances, it
further expresses, clearly, the wants of the society
respecting population, that is, whatever
may be the number of children to a marriage
necessary to maintain exactly the present
population, the price of labour will be just
sufficient to support this number, or be above
it, or below it, according to the state of
the real funds, for the maintenance of labour,
whether stationary, progressive, or retrograde.
instead, however, of considering it
in this light, we consider it as something
which we may raise or depress at pleasure,
something which depends principally on his
majesty's justices of the peace. when an
advance in the price of provisions already
expresses that the demand is too great for
the supply, in order to put the labourer in
the same condition as before, we raise the
price of labour, that is, we increase the
demand, and are then much surprised, that
the price of provisions continues rising. in
this, we act much in the same manner, as if,
when the quicksilver in the common weather
glass, stood at stormy, we were to raise it by
some forcible pressure to settled fair, and
then be greatly astonished that it continued
raining."
"the price of labour will express, clearly,
the wants of the society respecting population;"
it will be just sufficient to support
the population, which at that time the
state of the funds for the maintenance of labourers,
requires. if the labourer's wages
were before only adequate to supply the requisite
population, they will, after the tax,
be inadequate to that supply, for he will not
have the same funds to expend on his family.
labour will therefore rise, because the demand
continues, and it is only by raising the
price, that the supply is not checked.
nothing is more common, than to see hats
or malt rise when taxed; they rise because
the requisite supply would not be afforded if
they did not rise: so with labour, when wages
are taxed, its price rises, because, if it did
not, the requisite population would not be
kept up. does not mr. buchanan allow all
that is contended for, when he says, that "were
he (the labourer) indeed reduced to a bare
allowance of necessaries, he would then suffer
no further abatement of his wages, as he
could not on such conditions continue his
race?" suppose the circumstances of the
country to be such, that the lowest labourers
are not only called upon to continue their
race, but to increase it; their wages would have
been regulated accordingly. can they multiply,
if a tax takes from them a part of their
wages, and reduces them to bare necessaries?
it is undoubtedly true, that a taxed commodity
will not rise in proportion to the tax,
if the demand for it will diminish, and if the
quantity cannot be reduced. if metallic
money were in general use, its value would
not for a considerable time be increased by
a tax, in proportion to the amount of the
tax, because at a higher price, the demand
would be diminished, and the quantity would
not be diminished; and unquestionably the
same cause frequently influences the wages of
labour, the number of labourers cannot be
rapidly increased or diminished in proportion
to the increase or diminution of the
fund, which is to employ them; but in the
case supposed, there is no necessary diminution
of demand for labour, and if diminished,
the demand does not abate in proportion
to the tax. mr. buchanan forgets that the
fund raised by the tax is employed by government
in maintaining labourers, unproductive
indeed, but still labourers. if labour
were not to rise when wages are taxed, there
would be a great increase in the competition
for labour, because the owners of capital,
who would have nothing to pay towards
such a tax, would have the same funds for
imploying labour; whilst the government
who received the tax would have an additional
fund for the same purpose. government and
the people thus become competitors, and the
consequence of their competition is a rise in
the price of labour. the same number of
men only will be employed, but they will be
employed at additional wages.
if the tax had been laid at once on the
people, their fund for the maintenance of
labour would have been diminished in the very
same degree that the fund of government for
that purpose had been increased; and therefore
there would have been no rise in wages;
for though there would be the same demand,
there would not be the same competition. if
when the tax were levied, government at
once exported the produce of it as a subsidy
to a foreign state, and if therefore these funds
were devoted to the maintenance of foreign,
and not of english labourers, such as soldiers,
sailors, &c. &c.; then, indeed, there would
be a diminished demand for labour, and
wages might not increase although they were
taxed; but the same thing would happen if
the tax had been laid on consumable commodities,
on the profits of stock, or if in any
other manner the same sum had been raised
to supply this subsidy: less labour could be
employed at home. in one case wages are
prevented from rising, in the other they must
absolutely fall. but suppose the amount of a
tax on wages were, after being raised on the
labourers, paid gratuitously to their employers,
it would increase their money fund for
the maintenance of labour, but it would not
increase either commodities or labour. it
would consequently increase the competition
amongst the employers of labour, and the tax
would be ultimately attended with no loss
either to master or labourer. the master
would pay an increased price for labour; the
addition which the labourer received would
be paid as a tax to government, and would
be again returned to the masters. it must
however not be forgotten that the produce of
taxes is often wastefully expended, and that
by diminishing capital they tend to diminish
the real fund destined for the maintenance of
labour; and therefore to diminish the real
demand for it. taxes then, generally, as far
as they impair the real capital of the country,
diminish the demand for labour, and therefore
it is a probable, but not a necessary, nor a
peculiar consequence of a tax on wages, that
though wages would rise, they would not
rise by a sum precisely equal to the tax.
adam smith, as we have seen, has fully
allowed that the effect of a tax on wages
would be to raise wages by a sum at least
equal to the tax, and would be finally, if not
immediately, paid by the employer of labour.
thus far we fully agree; but we essentially
differ in our views of the subsequent operation
of such a tax.
"a direct tax upon the wages of labour,
therefore," says adam smith, "though the
labourer might perhaps pay it out of his
hand, could not properly be said to be even
advanced by him; at least if the demand for
labour and the average price of provisions
remained the same after the tax as before it.
in all such cases, not only the tax, but something
more than the tax, would in reality be
advanced by the person who immediately
employed him. the final payment would in
different cases fall upon different persons.
the rise which such a tax might occasion in
the wages of manufacturing labour, would be
advanced by the master manufacturer, who
would be entitled and obliged to charge it with a
profit, upon the price of his goods. the rise
which such a tax might occasion in country
labour would be advanced by the farmer,
who, in order to maintain the same number
of labourers as before, would be obliged to
employ a greater capital. in order to get
back this greater capital, together with the
ordinary profits of stock, it would be necessary
that he should retain a larger portion, or
what comes to the same thing, the price of a
larger portion of the produce of the land, and
consequently that he should pay less rent to
the landlord. the final payment of this rise
of wages, therefore, would in this case fall
upon the landlord, together with the additional
profits of the farmer who had advanced it. in
all cases a direct tax upon the wages of labour
must, in the long run, occasion both a
greater reduction in the rent of land, and a
greater rise in the price of manufactured
goods, than would have followed, from the
proper assessment of a sum equal to the produce
of the tax, partly upon the rent of land,
and partly upon consumable commodities."
vol. iii. p. . in this passage it is asserted
that the additional wages paid by farmers
will ultimately fall on the landlords, who will
receive a diminished rent; but that the additional
wages paid by manufacturers will occasion
a rise in the price of manufactured
goods, and will therefore fall on the consumers
of those commodities.
now suppose a society to consist of landlords,
manufacturers, farmers, and labourers.
the labourers, it is agreed, would be recompensed
for the tax;—but by whom?—who
would pay that portion which did not fall on
the landlords?—the manufacturers could pay
no part of it; for if the price of their commodities
should rise in proportion to the additional
wages they paid, they would be in a
better situation after than before the tax. if
the clothier, the hatter, the shoemaker, &c.,
should be each able to raise the price of
their goods  per cent.,—supposing  per
cent. to recompense them completely for the
additional wages they paid,—if, as adam
smith says, "they would be entitled and
obliged to charge the additional wages with a
profit upon the price of their goods," they
could each consume as much as before of
each other's goods, and therefore they would
pay nothing towards the tax. if the clothier
paid more for his hats and shoes, he would
receive more for his cloth, and if the hatter
paid more for his cloth and shoes, he would
receive more for his hats. all manufactured
commodities then would be bought by them
with as much advantage as before, and inasmuch
as corn would not be raised in price
whilst they had an additional sum to lay out
upon its purchase, they would be benefited,
and not injured by such a tax.
if then neither the labourers nor the manufacturers
would contribute towards such a
tax; if the farmers would be also recompensed
by a fall of rent, landlords alone must not
only bear its whole weight, but they must
also contribute to the increased gains of the
manufacturers. to do this, however, they
should consume all the manufactured commodities
in the country, for the additional price
charged on the whole mass is little more than
the tax originally imposed on the labourers in
manufactures.
now it will not be disputed that the clothier,
the hatter, and all other manufacturers,
are consumers of each other's goods; it will
not be disputed that labourers of all descriptions
consume soap, cloth, shoes, candles, and
various other commodities: it is therefore
impossible that the whole weight of these
taxes should fall on landlords only.
but if the labourers pay no part of the tax,
and yet manufactured commodities rise in
price, wages must rise, not only to compensate
them for the tax, but for the increased price of
manufactured necessaries, which, as far as it
affects agricultural labour, will be a new
cause for the fall of rent; and, as far as it
affects manufacturing labour, for a further rise
in the price of goods. this rise in the price
of goods will again operate on wages, and the
action and re-action, first of wages on goods,
and then of goods on wages, will be extended
without any assignable limits. the arguments
by which this theory is supported, lead to such
absurd conclusions that it may at once be
seen that the principle is wholly indefensible.
all the effects which are produced on the
profits of stock and the wages of labour,
by a rise of rent and a rise of necessaries,
in the natural progress of society, and increasing
difficulty of production, will be produced
by a rise of wages in consequence of
taxation; and therefore the enjoyments of the
labourer, as well as those of his employers,
will be curtailed by the tax; and not by this
tax particularly, but by any other which
should raise an equal amount.
the error of adam smith proceeds in the
first place from supposing, that all taxes paid
by the farmer must necessarily fall on the
landlord, in the shape of a deduction from
rent. on this subject i have explained
myself most fully, and i trust that it has been
shewn, to the satisfaction of the reader, that
since much capital is employed on the land
which pays no rent, and since it is the result
obtained by this capital which regulates the
price of raw produce, no deduction can be
made from rent; and consequently either no
remuneration will be made to the farmer for a
tax on wages, or if made, it must be made by
an addition to the price of raw produce.
if taxes press unequally on the farmer, he
will be enabled to raise the price of raw produce,
to place himself on a level with those
who carry on other trades; but a tax on
wages, which would not affect him more than
it would affect any other trade, could not be
removed or compensated by a high price of
raw produce; for, the same reason which
should induce him to raise the price of corn,
namely, to remunerate himself for the tax,
would induce the clothier to raise the price of
cloth, the shoemaker, hatter, and upholsterer,
to raise the price of shoes, hats, and furniture.
if they could all raise the price of their
goods, so as to remunerate themselves, with a
profit, for the tax; as they are all consumers
of each other's commodities, it is obvious that
the tax could never be paid; for who would
be the contributors if all were compensated?
i hope then that i have succeeded in
shewing, that any tax which shall have the
effect of raising wages, will be paid by a
diminution of profits, and therefore that a
tax on wages is in fact a tax on profits.
this principle of the division of the produce
of labour and capital between wages
and profits, which i have attempted to establish,
appears to me so certain, that excepting
in the immediate effects, i should think
it of little importance whether the profits of
stock, or the wages of labour, were taxed.
by taxing the profits of stock, you would
probably alter the rate at which the funds for
the maintenance of labour increase, and wages
would be disproportioned to the state of that
fund, by being too high. by taxing wages,
the reward paid to the labourer would also
be disproportioned to the state of that fund,
by being too low. in the one case by a fall,
and in the other by a rise in money wages,
the natural equilibrium between profits and
wages would be restored. a tax on wages then
does not fall on the landlord, but it falls on
the profits of stock: it does not "entitle and
oblige the master manufacturer to charge it
with a profit on the prices of his goods," for
he will be unable to increase their price, and
therefore he must himself wholly and without
compensation pay such a tax.
if the effect of taxes on wages be such as i
have described, they do not merit the censure
cast upon them by dr. smith. he observes
of such taxes, "these, and some other
taxes of the same kind, by raising the price
of labour, are said to have ruined the greater
part of the manufactures of holland. similar
taxes, though not quite so heavy, take
place in the milanese, in the states of genoa,
in the duchy of modena, in the duchies of
parma, placentia, and guastalla, and in the
ecclesiastical states. a french author of some
note, has proposed to reform the finances of
his country, by substituting in the room of
other taxes, this most ruinous of all taxes.
'there is nothing so absurd,' says cicero,
'which has not sometimes been asserted by
some philosophers.'" and in another place
he says: "taxes upon necessaries, by raising
the wages of labour, necessarily tend to raise
the price of all manufactures, and consequently
to diminish the extent of their sale and
consumption." they would not merit this censure;
even if dr. smith's principle were correct
that such taxes would enhance the prices
of manufactured commodities; for such an effect
could be only temporary, and would subject
us to no disadvantage in our foreign
trade. if any cause should raise the price
of a few manufactured commodities, it would
prevent or check their exportation; but if
the same cause operated generally on all, the
effect would be merely nominal, and would
neither interfere with their relative value, nor
in any degree diminish the stimulus to a trade
of barter; which all commerce, both foreign
and domestic, really is.
i have already attempted to shew, that when
any cause raises the prices of all commodities
in general, the effects are nearly similar to a
fall in the value of money. if money falls
in value, all commodities rise in price; and
if the effect is confined to one country, it will
affect its foreign commerce in the same way
as a high price of commodities caused by
general taxation; and therefore in examining
the effects of a low value of money confined
to one country, we are also examining the
effects of a high price of commodities confined
to one country. indeed adam smith
was fully aware of the resemblance between
these two cases, and consistently maintained
that the low value of money, or, as he calls
it, of silver in spain, in consequence of the
prohibition against its exportation, was very
highly prejudicial to the manufactures and
foreign commerce of spain. "but that degradation
in the value of silver, which being
the effect either of the peculiar situation, or
of the political institutions of a particular
country, takes place only in that country, is
a matter of very great consequence, which,
far from tending to make any body really
richer, tends to make every body really
poorer. the rise in the money price of all
commodities, which is in this case peculiar
to that county, tends to discourage more or
less every sort of industry which is carried on
within it, and to enable foreign nations, by
furnishing almost all sorts of goods for a
smaller quantity of silver than its own workmen
can afford to do, to undersell them not
only in the foreign, but even in the home
market." vol. ii. page .
one, and i think the only one of the disadvantages
of a low value of silver in a country,
proceeding from a forced abundance, has
been ably explained by dr. smith. if the trade
in gold and silver were free, "the gold and
silver which would go abroad, would not go
abroad for nothing, but would bring back an
equal value of goods of some kind or another.
those goods too would not be all matters of
mere luxury and expense, to be consumed by
idle people, who produce nothing in return for
their consumption. as the real wealth and
revenue of idle people would not be augmented
by this extraordinary exportation of
gold and silver, so would neither their consumption
be augmented by it. those goods
would, probably the greater part of them,
and certainly some part of them, consist in
materials, tools, and provisions, for the employment
and maintenance of industrious
people, who would reproduce with a profit,
the full value of their consumption. a part
of the dead stock of the society would thus
be turned into active stock, and would put
into motion a greater quantity of industry
than had been employed before."
by not allowing a free trade in the precious
metals when the prices of commodities are
raised, either by taxation, or by the influx of
the precious metals, you prevent a part of the
dead stock of the society from being turned
into active stock—you prevent a greater quantity
of industry from being employed. but
this is the whole amount of the evil; an evil
never felt by those countries where the exportation
of silver is either allowed or connived
at.
the exchanges between countries are at par
only, whilst they have precisely that quantity
of currency which in the actual situation
of things they should have to carry on the circulation
of their commodities. if the trade in
the precious metals were perfectly free, and
money could be exported without any expense
whatever, the exchanges could be no otherwise
in every country than at par. if the trade in
the precious metals were perfectly free, if they
were generally used in circulation, even with
the expenses of transporting them, the exchange
could never in any of them deviate
more from par, than by these expenses. these
principles i believe are now no where disputed.
if a country used paper money not
exchangeable for specie, and therefore not
regulated by any fixed standard, the exchanges
in that country might deviate as
much from par, as its money might be multiplied
beyond that quantity which would
have been allotted to it by general commerce,
if the trade in money had been free, and the
precious metals had been used, either for
money, or for the standard of money.
if by the general operations of commerce,
 millions of pounds sterling, of a known
weight and fineness of bullion, should be
the portion of england, and  millions
of paper pounds were substituted, no effect
would be produced on the exchange; but
if by the abuse of the power of issuing
paper money,  millions of pounds should
be employed in the circulation, the exchange
would be  per cent. against england; if 
millions were employed, the exchange would
be  per cent.; and if  millions, the exchange
would be  per cent. against england.
to produce this effect it is not however
necessary that paper money should be
employed: any cause which retains in circulation
a greater quantity of pounds than would
have circulated, if commerce had been free,
and the precious metals of a known weight
and fineness had been used, either for money,
or for the standard of money, would exactly
produce the same effects. suppose that by
clipping the money, each pound did not contain
the quantity of gold or silver which by
law it should contain, a greater number of
such pounds might be employed in the circulation,
than if they were not clipped. if
from each pound one tenth were taken away,
 millions of such pounds might be used
instead of ; if two tenths were taken away,
 millions might be employed; and if one
half were taken away,  millions might not
be found superfluous. if the latter sum were
used instead of  millions, every commodity
in england would be raised to double its
former price, and the exchange would be 
per cent. against england, but this would
occasion no disturbance in foreign commerce,
nor discourage the manufacture of any one
commodity. if for example, cloth rose in
england from l. to l. per piece, we should
just as freely export it after as before the rise,
for a compensation of  per cent. would be
made to the foreign purchaser in the exchange;
so that with l. of his money, he
could purchase a bill which would enable him
to pay a debt of l. in england. in the
same manner if he exported a commodity
which cost l. at home, and which sold in
england for l. he would only receive l.,
for l. in england would only purchase a
bill for l. on a foreign country. the same
effects would follow from whatever cause 
millions could be forced to perform the business
of circulation in england, if  millions
only were necessary. if so absurd a law,
as the prohibition of the exportation of the
precious metals, could be enforced, and the
consequence of such prohibition were to force
 millions instead of  into circulation, the
exchange would be  per cent. against england;
if  millions,  per cent.; and if 
millions,  per cent. against england. but
no discouragement would be given to the
manufactures of england; if home commodities
sold at a high price in england, so would
foreign commodities; and whether they were
high or low would be of little importance to
the foreign exporter and importer, whilst he
would, on the one hand, be obliged to allow a
compensation in the exchange when his commodities
sold at a dear rate, and would receive
the same compensation, when he was
obliged to purchase english commodities at
a high price. the sole disadvantage then
which could happen to a country from retaining
by prohibitory laws a greater quantity of
gold and silver in circulation than would
otherwise remain there, would be the loss
which it would sustain from employing a
portion of its capital unproductively, instead
of employing it productively. in the form
of money this capital is productive of no profit;
in the form of materials, machinery, and
food, for which it might be exchanged, it
would be productive of revenue, and would
add to the wealth and the resources of the
state. thus then i hope i have satisfactorily
proved, that a comparatively low price of the
precious metals, in consequence of taxation,
or in other words, a generally high price of
commodities, would be of no disadvantage to
a state, as a part of the metals would be exported,
which, by raising their value, would
again lower the prices of commodities. and
further, that if they were not exported, if by
prohibitory laws they could be retained in a
country, the effect on the exchange would
counterbalance the effect of high prices. if
then taxes on necessaries and on wages would
not raise the prices of all commodities on
which labour was expended, they cannot be
condemned on such grounds; and moreover,
even if the opinion that they would have such
an effect were well founded, they would be
in no degree injurious on that account.
it is undoubtedly true, that "taxes upon
luxuries have no tendency to raise the price
of any other commodities, except that of the
commodities taxed;" but it is not true, that
taxes upon necessaries, by raising the wages
of labour, necessarily tend to raise the price
of all manufactures." it is true, that "taxes
upon luxuries are finally paid by the consumers
of the commodities taxed, without any
retribution. they fall indifferently upon
every species of revenue, the wages of labour,
the profits of stock, and the rent of land;"
but it is not true, "that taxes upon necessaries
so far as they affect the labouring poor,
are finally paid partly by landlords in the
diminished rent of their lands, and partly by
rich consumers, whether landlords or others,
in the advanced price of manufactured goods;"
for so far as these taxes affect the labouring poor,
they will be almost wholly paid by the diminished
profits of stock, a small part only
being paid by the labourers themselves in the
diminished demand for labour, which taxation
of every kind has a tendency to produce.
it is from dr. smith's erroneous view of the
effect of those taxes, that he has been led to the
conclusion, that "the middling and superior
ranks of people, if they understood their own
interest, ought always to oppose all taxes upon
the necessaries of life, as well as all direct taxes
upon the wages of labour." this conclusion
follows from his reasoning, "that the final
payment of both one and the other falls altogether
upon themselves, and always with a
considerable overcharge. they fall heaviest
upon the landlords, who always pay in a double
capacity; in that of landlords, by the
reduction of their rent, and in that of rich
consumers, by the increase of their expense.
the observation of sir matthew decker, that
certain taxes are in the price of certain goods,
sometimes repeated and accumulated four or
five times, is perfectly just with regard to
taxes upon the necessaries of life. in the
price of leather, for example, you must pay,
not only for the tax upon the leather of your
own shoes, but for a part of that upon those
of the shoemaker and the tanner. you must
pay too for the tax upon the salt, upon the
soap, and upon the candles, which those
workmen consume while employed in your
service, and for the tax upon the leather,
which the salt-maker, the soap-maker, and
the candle-maker consume, while employed
in their service."
now as dr. smith does not contend that the
tanner, the salt-maker, the soap-maker, and
the candle-maker, will either of them be benefited
by the tax on leather, salt, soap, and
candles; and as it is certain, that government
will receive no more than the tax imposed, it
is impossible to conceive, that more can be
paid by the public upon whomsoever the tax
may fall. the rich consumers may, and indeed
will, pay for the poor consumer, but
they will pay no more than the whole amount
of the tax; and it is not in the nature of things,
that "the tax should be repeated and accumulated
four or five times."
a system of taxation may be defective;
more may be raised from the people, than
what finds its way into the coffers of the state,
as a part, in consequence of its effect on prices,
may possibly be received by those, who
are benefited by the peculiar mode in which
taxes are laid. such taxes are pernicious,
and should not be encouraged; for it may be
laid down as a principle, that when taxes
operate justly, they conform to the first of
dr. smith's maxims, and raise from the
people as little as possible beyond what enters
into the public treasury of the state. m.
say says, "others offer plans of finance, and
propose means for filling the coffers of the
sovereign, without any charge to his subjects.
but unless a plan of finance is of the nature of
a commercial undertaking, it cannot give
government more than it takes away, either
from individuals, or from government itself,
under some other form. something cannot
be made out of nothing, by the stroke of a
wand. in whatever way an operation may
be disguised, whatever forms we may constrain
a value to take, whatever metamorphosis
we may make it undergo, we can
only have a value by creating it, or by taking
it from others. the very best of all
plans of finance is to spend little, and the
best of all taxes is, that which is the least
in amount."
dr. smith uniformly, and i think justly,
contends, that the labouring classes cannot
materially contribute to the burdens of the
state. a tax on necessaries, or on wages,
will therefore be shifted from the poor to the
rich: if then, the meaning of dr. smith is,
"that certain taxes are in the price of certain
goods sometimes repeated, and accumulated
four or five times," for the purpose only
of accomplishing this end, namely, the transference
of the tax from the poor to the rich, they
cannot be liable to censure on that account.
suppose the just share of the taxes of a rich
consumer to be l., and that he would pay it
directly, if the tax were laid on income, on wine,
or on any other luxury, he would suffer no injury
if by the taxation of necessaries, he should
be only called upon for the payment of l., as
far as his own consumption of necessaries, and
that of his family was concerned, but should
be required to repeat this tax three times, by
paying an additional price for other commodities
to remunerate the labourers, or their
employers, for the tax which they have been
called upon to advance. even in that case
the reasoning is inconclusive: for if there be no
more paid than what is required by government;
of what importance can it be to the
rich consumer, whether he pay the tax directly,
by paying an increased price for an
object of luxury, or indirectly, by paying an
increased price for the necessaries and other
commodities he consumes? if more be not
paid by the people, than what is received by
government, the rich consumer will only pay
his equitable share; if more is paid, adam
smith should have stated by whom it is received.
m. say does not appear to me to have
consistently adhered to the obvious principle,
which i have quoted from his able work; for
in the next page, speaking of taxation, he
says, "when it is pushed too far, it produces
this lamentable effect, it deprives the contributor
of a portion of his riches, without
enriching the state. this is what we may
comprehend, if we consider that every man's
power of consuming, whether productively
or not, is limited by his income. he cannot
then be deprived of a part of his income,
without being obliged proportionally to reduce
his consumption. hence arises a diminution
of demand for those goods, which he
no longer consumes, and particularly for
those on which the tax is imposed. from
this diminution of demand, there results a
diminution of production, and consequently
of taxable commodities. the contributor
then will lose a portion of his enjoyments; the
producer, a portion of his profits; and the
treasury, a portion of its receipts."
m. say instances the tax on salt in france,
previous to the revolution; which, he says, diminished
the production of salt by one half. if,
however, less salt was consumed, less capital
was employed in producing it; and therefore,
though the producer would obtain less
profits on the production of salt, he would
obtain more on the production of other things.
if a tax, however burdensome it may be,
falls on revenue, and not on capital, it does
not diminish demand, it only alters the nature
of it. it enables government to consume
as much of the produce of the land and
labour of the country, as was before consumed
by the individuals who contribute to the tax.
if my income is l. per annum, and i am
called upon for l. per annum for a tax,
i shall only be able to demand nine tenths
of the quantity of goods, which i before consumed,
but i enable government to demand
the other tenth. if the commodity taxed be
corn, it is not necessary that my demand for
corn should diminish, as i may prefer to pay
l. per annum more for my corn, and
to the same amount abate in my demand for
wine, furniture, or any other luxury. less
capital will consequently be employed in the
wine or upholstery trade, but more will be
employed in manufacturing those commodities,
on which the taxes levied by government
will be expended.
m. say says that m. turgot, by reducing
the market dues on fish (les droits d'entrée
et de halle sur la marée) in paris one half,
did not diminish the amount of their produce,
and that consequently, the consumption of
fish must have doubled. he infers from this,
that the profits of the fisherman and those
engaged in the trade, must also have doubled,
and that the income of the country
must have increased, by the whole amount of
these increased profits; and by giving a stimulus
to accumulation, must have increased
the resources of the state.
without calling in question the policy,
which dictated this alteration of the tax, i
may be permitted to doubt whether it gave
any great stimulus to accumulation. if the
profits of the fisherman and others engaged
in the trade, were doubled in consequence of
more fish being consumed, capital and labour
must have been withdrawn from other occupations
to engage them in this particular
trade. but in those occupations capital
and labour were productive of profits, which
must have been given up when they were
withdrawn. the ability of the country to
accumulate was only increased by the difference
between the profits obtained in the
business in which the capital was newly
engaged, and those obtained in that from
which it was withdrawn.
whether taxes be taken from revenue or
capital, they diminish the taxable commodities
of the state. if i cease to expend l.
on wine, because by paying a tax of that
amount i have enabled government to expend
l. instead of expending it myself,
one hundred pounds worth of goods are
necessarily withdrawn from the list of taxable
commodities. if the revenue of the individuals
of a country be  millions, they will
have at least  millions worth of taxable
commodities. if by taxing some, one million
be transferred to the disposal of government,
their revenue will still be nominally 
millions, but they will remain with only nine
millions worth of taxable commodities. there
are no circumstances under which taxation
does not abridge the enjoyments of those on
whom the taxes ultimately fall, and no means
by which those enjoyments can again be extended,
but the accumulation of new revenue.
taxation can never be so equally applied,
as to operate in the same proportion on the
value of all commodities, and still to preserve
them at the same relative value. it frequently
operates very differently from the intention
of the legislature, by its indirect effects. we
have already seen, that the effect of a direct
tax on corn and raw produce, is, if money be
also produced in the country, to raise the
price of all commodities, in proportion as
raw produce enters into their composition,
and thereby to destroy the natural relation
which previously existed between them.
another indirect effect is, that it raises wages,
and lowers the rate of profits; and we have
also seen, in another part of this work, that
the effect of a rise of wages, and a fall of
profits, is to lower the money prices of those
commodities which are produced in a greater
degree by the employment of fixed capital.
that a commodity when taxed can no
longer be so profitably exported, is so well
understood, that a drawback is frequently
allowed on its exportation, and a duty laid on
its importation. if these drawbacks and
duties be accurately laid, not only on the
commodities themselves, but on all which
they may indirectly affect, then indeed there
will be no disturbance in the value of the
precious metals. since we could as readily
export a commodity after being taxed as
before, and since no peculiar facility would
be given to importation, the precious metals
would not, more than before, enter into the
list of exportable commodities.
of all commodities, none are perhaps so
proper for taxation, as those which either by
the aid of nature or art, are produced with
peculiar facility. with respect to foreign
countries, such commodities may be classed
under the head of those which are not
regulated in their price by the quantity of
labour bestowed, but rather by the caprice,
the tastes, and the power of the purchasers.
if england had more productive tin mines
than other countries, or if from superior
machinery or fuel she had peculiar facilities
in manufacturing cotton goods, the prices of
tin, and of cotton goods would still in england
be regulated by the comparative quantity of
labour and capital required to produce them,
and the competition of our merchants would
make them very little dearer to the foreign
consumer. our advantage in the production
of these commodities might be so decided,
that probably they could bear a very great
additional price in the foreign market, without
very materially diminishing their consumption.
this price they never could attain,
whilst competition was free at home, by any
other means but by a tax on their exportation.
this tax would fall wholly on foreign consumers,
and part of the expenses of the
government of england would be defrayed,
by a tax on the land and labour of other
countries. the tax on tea, which at present is
paid by the people of england, and goes to aid
the expenses of the government of england,
might, if laid in china, on the exportation of
the tea, be diverted to the payment of the
expenses of the government of china.
taxes on luxuries have some advantage
over taxes on necessaries. they are generally
paid from income, and therefore do not
diminish the productive capital of the country.
if wine were much raised in price in consequence
of taxation, it is probable that a man
would rather forego the enjoyments of wine,
than make any important encroachments on
his capital, to be enabled to purchase it.
they are so identified with price, that the
contributor is hardly aware that he is paying
a tax. but they have also their disadvantages.
first, they never reach capital, and on some
extraordinary occasions it may be expedient
that even capital should contribute towards
the public exigencies; and secondly, there is
no certainty as to the amount of the tax, for
it may not reach even income. a man intent
on saving will exempt himself from a tax on
wine, by giving up the use of it. the income
of the country may be undiminished, and
yet the state may be unable to raise a shilling
by the tax.
whatever habit has rendered delightful,
will be relinquished with reluctance, and will
continue to be consumed notwithstanding a
very heavy tax; but this reluctance has its
limits, and experience every day demonstrates
that an increase in the nominal amount of
taxation, often diminishes the produce. one
man will continue to drink the same quantity
of wine, though the price of every bottle
should be raised three shillings, who would
yet relinquish the use of wine rather than pay
four. another will be content to pay four,
yet refuse to pay five shillings. the same
may be said of other taxes on luxuries: many
would pay a tax of l. for the enjoyment
which a horse affords, who would not pay
l. or l. it is not because they cannot
pay more, that they give up the use of wine
and of horses, but because they will not pay
more. every man has some standard in his
own mind by which he estimates the value
of his enjoyments, but that standard is as
various as the human character. a country
whose financial situation has become extremely
artificial, by the mischievous policy
of accumulating a large national debt, and a
consequently enormous taxation, is particularly
exposed to the inconvenience attendant
on this mode of raising taxes. after visiting
with a tax the whole round of luxuries; after
laying horses, carriages, wine, servants, and
all the other enjoyments of the rich, under
contribution; a minister is disposed to conclude
that the country is arrived at the
maximum of taxation, because by increasing
the rate, he cannot increase the amount of any
one of these taxes. but in this conclusion
he will not be always correct, for it is very
possible that such a country could bear a
very great addition to its burdens without
infringing on the integrity of its capital.
on the same principle that a tax on corn
would raise the price of corn, a tax on any
other commodity would raise the price of
that commodity. if the commodity did not
rise by a sum equal to the tax, it would not
give the same profit to the producer which he
had before, and he would remove his capital
to some other employment.
the taxing of all commodities, whether
they be necessaries or luxuries, will, while
money remains at an unaltered value, raise
their prices by a sum at least equal to the
tax. a tax on the manufactured necessaries
of the labourer would have the same effect
on wages as a tax on corn, which differs from
other necessaries only by being the first and
most important on the list; and it would produce
precisely the same effects on the profits
of stock and foreign trade. but a tax on
luxuries would have no other effect than to
raise their price. it would fall wholly on the
consumer, and could neither increase wages,
nor lower profits.
taxes which are levied on a country for
the purpose of supporting war, or for the
ordinary expenses of the state, and which
are chiefly devoted to the support of unproductive
labourers, are taken from the productive
industry of the country; and every
saving which can be made from such expenses
will be generally added to the income,
if not to the capital of the contributors.
when for the expenses of a year's war,
twenty millions are raised by means of a loan,
it is the twenty millions which are withdrawn
from the productive capital of the nation.
the million per annum which is raised by
taxes to pay the interest of this loan, is merely
transferred from those who pay it to those
who receive it, from the contributor to the
tax to the national creditor. the real expense
is the twenty millions, and not the
interest which must be paid for it. whether
the interest be or be not paid, the country
will neither be richer nor poorer. government
might at once have required the twenty
millions in the shape of taxes; in which case
it would not have been necessary to raise
annual taxes to the amount of a million.
this however would not have changed the
nature of the transaction. an individual
instead of being called upon to pay l. per
annum, might have been obliged to pay
l. once for all. it might also have suited
his convenience rather to borrow this l.,
and to pay l. per annum for interest to the
lender, than to spare the larger sum from his
own funds. in one case it is a private transaction
between a and b, in the other government
guarantees to b the payment of
the interest to be equally paid by a. if the
transaction had been of a private nature, no
public record would be kept of it, and it
would be a matter of comparative indifference
to the country whether a faithfully performed
his contract to b, or unjustly retained, the
l. per annum in his own possession. the
country would have a general interest in the
faithful performance of a contract, but with
respect to the national wealth, it would have
no other interest than whether a or b would
make this l. most productive, but on this
question it would neither have the right nor
the ability to decide. it might be possible,
that if a retained it for his own use, he might
squander it unprofitably, and if it were paid
to b, he might add it to his capital, and
employ it productively. and the converse
would also be possible, b might squander it,
and a might employ it productively. with
a view to wealth only, it might be equally or
more desirable that a should or should not
pay it; but the claims of justice and good
faith, a greater utility, are not to be compelled
to yield to those of a less; and accordingly, if
the state were called upon to interfere, the
courts of justice would oblige a to perform
his contract. a debt guaranteed by the
nation, differs in no respect from the above
transaction. justice and good faith demand
that the interest of the national debt should
continue to be paid, and that those who have
advanced their capitals for the general benefit,
should not be required to forego their equitable
claims, on the plea of expediency.
but independently of this consideration, it
is by no means certain, that political utility
would gain any thing by the sacrifice of
political integrity; it does by no means follow,
that the party exonerated from the payment
of the interest of the national debt
would employ it more productively than those
to whom indisputably it is due. by cancelling
the national debt, one man's income might
be raised from l. to l., but another
man's would be lowered from l. to l.
these two men's income now amount to
l., they would amount to no more then.
if it be the object of government to raise
taxes, there would be precisely the same taxable
capital and income in one case, as in
the other. it is not then by the payment of
the interest on the national debt that a country
is distressed, nor is it by the exoneration
from payment that it can be relieved. it is
only by saving from income, and retrenching
in expenditure, that the national capital can
be increased; and neither the income would
be increased, nor the expenditure diminished
by the annihilation of the national debt. it
is by the profuse expenditure of government,
and of individuals, and by loans, that a country
is impoverished; every measure therefore
which is calculated to promote public and
private œconomy will relieve the public distress;
but it is error and delusion, to suppose
that a real national difficulty can be removed,
by shifting it from the shoulders of one class of
the community, who justly ought to bear it,
to the shoulders of another class, who upon
every principle of equity ought to bear no
more than their share. from what i have
said, it must not be inferred that i consider
the system of borrowing as the best calculated
to defray the extraordinary expenses
of the state. it is a system which tends to
make us less thrifty—to blind us to our real
situation. if the expenses of a war be 
millions per annum, and the share which a
man would have to contribute towards that
annual expense were l., he would endeavour,
on being at once called upon for
his portion, to save speedily the l. from
his income. by the system of loans he is
called upon to pay only the interest of this
l., or l. per annum, and considers that he
does enough by saving this l. from his expenditure,
and then deludes himself with the
belief that he is as rich as before. the whole
nation, by reasoning and acting in this manner,
save only the interest of  millions, or two
millions; and thus, not only lose all the interest
or profit which  millions of capital,
employed productively, would afford, but
also  millions, the difference between their
savings and expenditure. if, as i before observed,
each man had to make his own loan,
and contribute his full proportion to the exigencies
of the state, as soon as the war ceased,
taxation would cease, and we should immediately
fall into a natural state of prices. out of
his private funds, a might have to pay to b interest
for the money he borrowed of him during
the war, to enable him to pay his quota
of the expense; but with this the nation would
have no concern. a country which has accumulated
a large debt is placed in a most
artificial situation; and although the amount
of taxes, and the increased price of labour,
may not, and i believe does not, place it
under any other disadvantage with respect to
foreign countries, except the unavoidable one
of paying those taxes, yet it becomes the interest
of every contributor to withdraw his
shoulder from the burthen, and to shift this
payment from himself to another; and the
temptation to remove himself and his capital to
another country, where he will be exempted
from such burthens, becomes at last irresistible,
and overcomes the natural reluctance
which every man feels to quit the place of
his birth, and the scene of his early associations.
a country which has involved itself in
the difficulties attending this artificial system,
would act wisely by ransoming itself from
them, at the sacrifice of any portion of its property
which might be necessary to redeem its
debt. that which is wise in an individual, is
wise also in a nation. a man who has ,l.,
paying him an income of l., out of which
he has to pay l. per annum towards the
interest of the debt, is really worth only l.,
and would be equally rich, whether he continued
to pay l. per annum, or at once, and
for only once, sacrificed l. but where, it is
asked, would be the purchaser of the property
which he must sell to obtain this l.? the
answer is plain: the national creditor, who is to
receive this l., will want an investment for
his money, and will be disposed either to
lend it to the landholder, or manufacturer,
or to purchase from them a part of the property
of which they have to dispose. to such
an effect the stockholders themselves would
largely contribute. such a scheme has been
often recommended, but we have, i fear,
neither wisdom enough, nor virtue enough, to
adopt it. it must however be admitted, that
during peace, our unceasing efforts should be
directed towards paying off that part of the
debt which has been contracted during war;
and that no temptation of relief, no desire of
escape from present, and i hope temporary
distresses, should induce us to relax in our
attention to that great object. no sinking
fund can be efficient for the purpose of diminishing
the debt, if it be not derived from the
excess of the public revenue over the public
expenditure. it is to be regretted, that the
sinking fund in this country is only such in
name; for there is no excess of revenue above
expenditure. it ought by economy, to be
made what it is professed to be, a really efficient
fund for the payment of the debt. if on
the breaking out of any future war, we shall
not have very considerably reduced our debt,
one of two things must happen, either the
whole expenses of that war must be defrayed
by taxes raised from year to year, or we must,
at the end of that war, if not before, submit to
a national bankruptcy; not that we shall be
unable to bear any large additions to the
debt; it would be difficult to set limits to the
powers of a great nation; but assuredly there
are limits to the price, which in the form of
perpetual taxation, individuals will submit to
pay for the privilege merely of living in their
native country.
when a commodity is at a monopoly price,
it is at the very highest price at which the
consumers are willing to purchase it. commodities
are only at a monopoly price, when
by no possible device their quantity can be
augmented; and when therefore, the competition
is wholly on one side—amongst the
buyers. the monopoly price of one period
may be much lower or higher than the monopoly
price of another, because the competition
amongst the purchasers must depend on
their wealth, and their tastes and caprices.
those peculiar wines, which are produced in
very limited quantity, and those works of
art, which from their excellence or rarity, have
acquired a fanciful value, will be exchanged
for a very different quantity of the produce
of ordinary labour, according as the society
is rich or poor, as it possesses an abundance
or scarcity of such produce, or as it may be
in a rude or polished state. the exchangeable
value therefore of a commodity which
is at a monopoly price, is no where regulated
by the cost of production.
raw produce is not at a monopoly price,
because the market price of barley and wheat
is as much regulated by their cost of production,
as the market price of cloth and linen.
the only difference is this, that one portion
of the capital employed in agriculture regulates
the price of corn, namely, that portion
which pays no rent; whereas, in the production
of manufactured commodities, every portion
of capital is employed with the same
results; and as no portion pays rent, every
portion is equally a regulator of price: corn,
and other raw produce, can be augmented
too in quantity, by the employment of more
capital on the land, and therefore they are
not at a monopoly price. there is competition
among the sellers, as well as amongst the
buyers. this is not the case in the production
of those rare wines, and those valuable
specimens of art, of which we have been
speaking; their quantity cannot be increased,
and their price is limited only by the extent
of the power and will of the purchasers.
the rent of these vineyards may be raised
beyond any moderately assignable limits, because
no other land being able to produce
such wines, none can be brought into competition
with them.
the corn and raw produce of a country,
may indeed for a time sell at a monopoly price;
but they can do so permanently only when
no more capital can be profitably employed
on the lands, and when, therefore, their produce
cannot be increased. at such time,
every portion of land in cultivation, and
every portion of capital employed on the
land will yield a rent, differing indeed in proportion
to the difference in the return. at
such a time too, any tax which may be imposed
on the farmer, will fall on rent, and
not on the consumer. he cannot raise the
price of his corn, because, by the supposition,
it is already at the highest price at which
the purchasers will or can buy it. he will
not be satisfied with a lower rate of profits,
than that obtained by other capitalists, and,
therefore, his only alternative will be to obtain
a reduction of rent, or to quit his employment.
mr. buchanan considers corn and raw
produce as at a monopoly price, because
they yield a rent: all commodities which
yield a rent, he supposes must be at a monopoly
price; and thence he infers, that all
taxes on raw produce would fall on the
landlord, and not on the consumer. "the
price of corn," he says, "which always affords
a rent, being in no respect influenced by
the expenses of its production, those expenses
must be paid out of the rent; and when they
rise or fall, therefore, the consequence is not a
higher or a lower price, but a higher or a lower
rent. in this view, all taxes on farm servants,
horses, or the implements of agriculture,
are in reality land-taxes; the burden
falling on the farmer during the currency of
his lease, and on the landlord, when the
lease comes to be renewed. in like manner
all those improved implements of husbandry
which save expense to the farmer, such as
machines for threshing and reaping, whatever
gives him easier access to the market, such
as good roads, canals, and bridges, though
they lessen the original cost of corn, do not
lessen its market price. whatever is saved
by those improvements, therefore, belongs to
the landlord as part of his rent."
it is evident that if we yield to mr. buchanan
the basis on which his argument is built,
namely, that the price of corn always yields
a rent, all the consequences which he contends
for would follow of course. taxes on
the farmer would then fall not on the consumer
but on rent; and all improvements in
husbandry would increase rent: but i hope
i have made it sufficiently clear, that until a
country is cultivated in every part, and up
to the highest degree, there is always a portion
of capital employed on the land which
yields no rent, and that it is this portion of
capital, the result of which, as in manufactures,
is divided between profits and wages,
that regulates the price of corn. the price
of corn then, which does not afford a rent,
being influenced by the expenses of its production,
those expenses cannot be paid out
of rent. the consequence therefore of those
expenses increasing, is a higher price, and not
a lower rent.
it is remarkable that both adam smith and
mr. buchanan, who entirely agree that taxes
on raw produce, a land-tax, and tithes, all fall
on the rent of land, and not on the consumers
of raw produce, should nevertheless admit that
taxes on malt would fall on the consumer
of beer, and not on the rent of the landlord.
adam smith's argument is so able a statement
of the view which i take of the subject
of the tax on malt, and every other tax on
raw produce, that i cannot refrain from offering
it to the attention of the reader.
"the rent and profits of barley land must
always be nearly equal to those of other
equally fertile, and equally well cultivated
land. if they were less, some part of the
barley land would soon be turned to some
other purpose; and if they were greater,
more land would soon be turned to the raising
of barley. when the ordinary price of
any particular produce of land is at what
may be called a monopoly price, a tax upon
it necessarily reduces the rent and profit of
the land which grows it. a tax upon the
produce of those precious vineyards, of which
the wine falls so much short of the effectual
demand, that its price is always above the
natural proportion to that of other equally
fertile, and equally well cultivated land,
would necessarily reduce the rent and profit
of those vineyards. the price of the wines
being already the highest that could be got
for the quantity commonly sent to market,
it could not be raised higher without diminishing
that quantity; and the quantity
could not be diminished without still greater
loss, because the lands could not be turned
to any other equally valuable produce. the
whole weight of the tax, therefore, would
fall upon the rent and profit; properly upon
the rent of the vineyard." "but the ordinary
price of barley has never been a monopoly
price; and the rent and profit of barley land
have never been above their natural proportion
to those of other equally fertile and equally
well cultivated land. the different taxes
which have been imposed upon malt, beer,
and ale, have never lowered the price of barley;
have never reduced the rent and profit of
barley land. the price of malt to the brewer
has constantly risen in proportion to the taxes
imposed upon it; and those taxes, together
with the different duties upon beer and ale,
have constantly either raised the price, or,
what comes to the same thing, reduced the
quality of those commodities to the consumer.
the final payment of those taxes has fallen
constantly upon the consumer, and not upon
the producer." on this passage mr. buchanan
remarks, "a duty on malt never could
reduce the price of barley, because, unless
as much could be made of barley by malting
it as by selling it unmalted, the quantity required
would not be brought to market. it
is clear, therefore, that the price of malt
must rise in proportion to the tax imposed
on it, as the demand could not otherwise be
supplied. the price of barley, however, is
just as much a monopoly price as that of
sugar; they both yield a rent, and the market
price of both has equally lost all connexion
with the original cost."
it appears then to be the opinion of mr.
buchanan, that a tax on malt would raise the
price of malt, but that a tax on the barley
from which malt is made, would not raise the
price of barley; and therefore, if malt is taxed,
the tax will be paid by the consumer; if
barley is taxed, it will be paid by the landlord,
as he will receive a diminished rent.
according to mr. buchanan then, barley is
at a monopoly price, at the highest price
which the purchasers are willing to give for
it; but malt made of barley is not at a
monopoly price, and consequently it can be
raised in proportion to the taxes that may be
imposed upon it. this opinion of mr. buchanan
of the effects of a tax on malt appears
to me to be in direct contradiction to the
opinion he has given of a similar tax, a tax
on bread. "a tax on bread will be ultimately
paid, not by a rise of price, but by a
reduction of rent." if a tax on malt would
raise the price of beer, a tax on bread must
raise the price of bread.
the following argument of m. say is founded
on the same views as mr. buchanan's:
"the quantity of wine or corn which a piece
of land will produce, will remain nearly the
same, whatever may be the tax with which it
is charged. the tax may take away a half,
or even three-fourths of its net produce, or of
its rent if you please, yet the land would
nevertheless be cultivated for the half or the
quarter not absorbed by the tax. the rent,
that is to say the landlord's share, would
merely be somewhat lower. the reason of
this will be perceived, if we consider, that in
the case supposed, the quantity of produce
obtained from the land, and sent to market,
will remain nevertheless the same. on the
other hand the motives on which the demand
for the produce is founded continue also the
same.
"now, if the quantity of produce supplied,
and the quantity demanded, necessarily continue
the same, notwithstanding the establishment
or the increase of the tax, the price of
that produce will not vary; and if the price do
not vary, the consumer will not pay the
smallest portion of this tax.
"will it be said that the farmer, he who
furnishes labour and capital, will, jointly with
the landlord, bear the burden of this tax?
certainly not; because the circumstance or
the tax has not diminished the number of
farms to be let, nor increased the number of
farmers. since in this instance also the
supply and demand remain the same, the
rent of farms must also remain the same.
the example of the manufacturer of salt, who
can only make the consumers pay a portion
of the tax, and that of the landlord who cannot
reimburse himself in the smallest degree,
prove the error of those who maintain, in
opposition to the economists, that all taxes
fall ultimately on the consumer."—vol. ii.
p. .
if the tax "took away half, or even three-fourths
of the net produce of the land," and
the price of produce did not rise, how could
those farmers obtain the usual profits of stock
who paid very moderate rents, having that
quality of land which required a much larger
proportion of labour to obtain a given result,
than land of a more fertile quality? if the
whole rent were remitted, they would still obtain
lower profits than those in other trades,
and would therefore not continue to cultivate
their land, unless they could raise the price of
its produce. if the tax fell on the farmers, there
would be fewer farmers disposed to hire farms;
if it fell on the landlord, many farms would
not be let at all, for they would afford no rent.
but from what fund would those pay the tax
who produce corn without paying any rent?
it is quite clear that the tax must fall on
the consumer. how would such land, as
m. say describes in the following passage,
pay a tax of one-half or three-fourths of its
produce?
"we see in scotland poor lands thus cultivated
by the proprietor, and which could be
cultivated by no other person. thus too we
see in the interior provinces of the united
states vast and fertile lands, the revenue of
which alone would not be sufficient for the
maintenance of the proprietor. these lands
are cultivated nevertheless, but it must be by
the proprietor himself, or, in other words, he
must add to the rent, which is little or
nothing, the profits of his capital and industry,
to enable him to live in competence. it
is well known that land, though cultivated,
yields no revenue to the landlord when no
farmer will be willing to pay a rent for it:
which is a proof that such land will give only
the profits of the capital and of the industry
necessary for its cultivation."—say, vol. ii.
p. .
we have seen that taxes on raw produce,
and on the profits of the farmer, will fall on
the consumer of raw produce; since unless
he had the power of remunerating himself by
an increase of price, the tax would reduce his
profits below the general level of profits, and
would urge him to remove his capital to some
other trade. we have seen too that he could
not, by deducting it from his rent, transfer
the tax to his landlord; because that farmer
who paid no rent, would, equally with the
cultivator of better land, be subject to the
tax, whether it were laid on raw produce, or
on the profits of the farmer. i have also attempted
to shew, that if a tax were general,
and affected equally all profits, whether manufacturing
or agricultural, it would not
operate either on the price of goods or raw
produce, but would be immediately, as well
as ultimately, paid by the producers. a tax
on rent, it has been observed, would fall on
the landlord only, and could not by any
means be made to devolve on the tenant.
the poor rate is a tax which partakes of
the nature of all these taxes, and under different
circumstances falls on the consumer of
raw produce and goods, on the profits of
stock, and on the rent of land. it is a tax
which falls with peculiar weight on the profits
of the farmer, and therefore may be considered
as affecting the price of raw produce. according
to the degree in which it bears on manufacturing
and agricultural profits equally,
it will be a general tax on the profits of stock,
and will occasion no alteration in the price
of raw produce and manufactures. in proportion
to the farmer's inability to remunerate
himself, by raising the price of raw produce,
for that portion of the tax which peculiarly
affects him, it will be a tax on rent, and will
be paid by the landlord. to know then the
operation of the poor rate at any particular
time, we must ascertain whether at that time
it affects in an equal or unequal degree the
profits of the farmer and manufacturer; and
also whether the circumstances be such as to
afford to the farmer the power of raising the
price of raw produce.
the poor rates are professed to be levied
on the farmer in proportion to his rent; and
accordingly, the farmer who paid a very small
rent, or no rent at all, should pay little or no
tax. if this were true, poor rates, as far as
they are paid by the agricultural class, would
entirely fall on the landlord, and could not
be shifted to the consumer of raw produce.
but i believe that is not true; the poor rate
is not levied according to the rent which a
farmer actually pays to his landlord; it is
proportioned to the annual value of his land,
whether that annual value be given to it by
the capital of the landlord or of the tenant.
if two farmers rented land of two different
qualities in the same parish, the one paying a
rent of l. per annum for  acres of the
most fertile land, and the other the same sum
of l. for  acres of the least fertile land,
they would pay the same amount of poor
rates, if neither of them attempted to improve
the land; but if the farmer of the poor land,
presuming on a very long lease, should be
induced at a great expense to improve the
productive powers of his land, by manuring,
draining, fencing, &c., he would contribute to
the poor rates, not in proportion to the actual
rent paid to the landlord, but to the actual
annual value of the land. the rate might
equal or exceed the rent; but whether it did
or not, no part of this rate would be paid by
the landlord. it would have been previously
calculated upon by the tenant; and if the
price of produce were not sufficient to compensate
him for all his expenses, together
with this additional charge for poor rates, his
improvements would not have been undertaken.
it is evident then that the tax in this
case is paid by the consumer; for if there had
been no rate, the same improvements would
have been undertaken, and the usual and
general rate of profits would have been obtained
on the stock employed, with a lower
price of corn.
nor would it make the slightest difference
in this question, if the landlord had made
these improvements himself, and had in consequence
raised his rent from l. to l.;
the rate would be equally charged to the
consumer; for whether he should expend a
large sum of money on his land, would depend
on the rent, or what is called rent, which he
would receive as a remuneration for it; and
this again would depend on the price of corn,
or other raw produce, being sufficiently high
not only to cover this additional rent, but
also the rate to which the land would be
subject. but if at the same time all manufacturing
capital contributed to the poor
rates, in the same proportion as the capital
expended by the farmer or landlord in improving
the land, then it would no longer be
a partial tax on the profits of the farmer's or
landlord's capital, but a tax on the capital of
all producers; and therefore it could no longer
be shifted either on the consumer of raw
produce or on the landlord. the farmer's
profits would feel the effect of the rate no
more than those of the manufacturer; and the
former could not, any more than the latter,
plead it as a reason for an advance in the
price of his commodity. it is not the absolute,
but the relative fall of profits, which prevents
capital from being employed in any
particular trade: it is the difference of profit
which sends capital from one employment to
another.
it must be acknowledged however, that in
the actual state of the poor rates, a much
larger amount falls on the farmer than on the
manufacturer, in proportion to their respective
profits; the farmer being rated according
to the actual productions which he obtains, the
manufacturer only according to the value of
the buildings in which he works, without any
regard to the value of the machinery, labour,
or stock, which he may employ. from
this circumstance it follows, that the farmer
will be enabled to raise the price of his produce
by this whole difference. for since the
tax falls unequally, and peculiarly on his profits,
he would have less motive to devote his
capital to the land, than to employ it in some
other trade, unless the price of raw produce
were raised. if on the contrary, the rate
had fallen with greater weight on the manufacturer
than on the farmer, he would have
been enabled to raise the price of his goods
by the amount of the difference, for the same
reason that the farmer, under similar circumstances,
could raise the price of raw produce.
in a society therefore, which is extending its
agriculture, when poor rates fall with peculiar
weight on the land, they will be paid partly
by the employers of capital in a diminution
of the profits of stock, and partly by the consumer
of raw produce in its increased price.
in such a state of things, the tax may, under
some circumstances, be even advantageous
rather than injurious to landlords; for if the
tax paid by the cultivator of the worst land, be
higher in proportion to the quantity of produce
obtained, than that paid by the farmers of the
more fertile lands, the rise in the price of
corn, which will extend to all corn, will more
than compensate the latter for the tax. this
advantage will remain with them during the
continuance of their leases, but it will afterwards
be transferred to their landlords. this
then would be the effect of poor rates in an
advancing society; but in a stationary, or in
a retrograde country, so far as capital could
not be withdrawn from the land, if a further
rate were levied for the support of the poor, that
part of it which fell on agriculture would be
paid, during the current leases, by the farmers,
but at the expiration of those leases it would
almost wholly fall on the landlords. the
farmer, who during his former lease, had expended
his capital in improving his land, if it
were still in his own hands, would be rated
for this new tax according to the new value
which the land had acquired by its improvement,
and this amount he would be obliged
to pay during his lease, although his profits
might thereby be reduced below the general
rate of profits; for the capital which he has
expended may be so incorporated with the
land, that it cannot be removed from it. if
indeed he, or his landlord, (should it have
been expended by him) were able to remove
this capital, and thereby reduce the annual
value of the land, the rate would proportionably
fall, and as the produce would at the
same time be diminished, its price would rise;
he would be compensated for the tax, by
charging it to the consumer, and no part would
fall on rent; but this is impossible, at least
with respect to some proportion of the capital,
and consequently in that proportion the
tax will be paid by the farmers during their
leases, and by landlords at their expiration.
this additional tax, as far as it fell unequally
on manufacturers, would under such circumstances
be added to the price of their goods;
for there can be no reason why their profits
should be reduced below the general rate of
profits, when their capitals might be easily
removed to agriculture.
a great manufacturing country is peculiarly
exposed to temporary reverses and contingencies,
produced by the removal of capital
from one employment to another. the demands
for the produce of agriculture are uniform,
they are not under the influence of
fashion, prejudice, or caprice. to sustain
life, food is necessary, and the demand for
food must continue in all ages, and in all
countries. it is different with manufactures;
the demand for any particular manufactured
commodity, is subject not only to the wants,
but to the tastes and caprice of the purchasers.
a new tax too may destroy the comparative
advantage which a country before
possessed in the manufacture of a particular
commodity; or the effects of war may so raise
the freight and insurance on its conveyance,
that it can no longer enter into competition
with the home manufacture of the country
to which it was before exported. in all such
cases, considerable distress, and no doubt
some loss, will be experienced by those who
are engaged in the manufacture of such commodities;
and it will be felt not only at the
time of the change, but through the whole interval
during which they are removing their
capitals, and the labour which they can command,
from one employment to another.
nor will distress be experienced in that
country alone where such difficulties originate,
but in the countries to which its commodities
were before exported. no country
can long import unless it also exports, or can
long export unless it also imports. if then
any circumstance should occur, which should
permanently prevent a country from importing
the usual amount of foreign commodities,
it will necessarily diminish the manufacture
of some of those commodities which were
usually exported; and although the total
value of the productions of the country will
probably be but little altered, since the same
capital will be employed, yet they will not
be equally abundant and cheap; and considerable
distress will be experienced through
the change of employments. if by the employment
of ,l. in the manufacture of
cotton goods for exportation, we imported
annually  pair of silk stockings of the
value of l., and by the interruption of
foreign trade we should be obliged to withdraw
this capital from the manufacture of
cotton, and employ it ourselves in the manufacture
of stockings, we should still obtain
stockings of the value of l. provided no
part of the capital were destroyed; but instead
of having  pair, we might only
have ,. in the removal of the capital
from the cotton to the stocking trade, much
distress might be experienced, but it would
not considerably impair the value of the national
property, although it might lessen the
quantity of our annual productions.
the commencement of war after a long
peace, or of peace after a long war, generally
produces considerable distress in trade. it
changes in a great degree the nature of the
employments to which the respective capitals
of countries were before devoted; and during
the interval while they are settling in the
situations which new circumstances have
made the most beneficial, much fixed capital
is unemployed, perhaps wholly lost, and
labourers are without full employment. the
duration of this distress will be longer or
shorter according to the strength of that disinclination,
which most men feel to abandon
that employment of their capital to which
they have long been accustomed. it is often
protracted too by the restrictions and prohibitions,
to which the absurd jealousies which
prevail between the different states of the
commercial commonwealth give rise.
the distress which proceeds from a revulsion
of trade, is often mistaken for that
which accompanies a diminution of the
national capital, and a retrograde state of society;
and it would perhaps be difficult to
point out any marks by which they may be
accurately distinguished.
when, however, such distress immediately
accompanies a change from war to peace,
our knowledge of the existence of such a cause
will make it reasonable to believe, that the
funds for the maintenance of labour have
rather been diverted from their usual channel
than materially impaired, and that after temporary
suffering, the nation will again advance
in prosperity. it must be remembered
too that the retrograde condition is always an
unnatural state of society. man from youth
grows to manhood, then decays, and dies;
but this is not the progress of nations. when
arrived to a state of the greatest vigour, their
further advance may indeed be arrested, but
their natural tendency is to continue for ages,
to sustain undiminished their wealth, and
their population.
in rich and powerful countries where large
capitals are invested in machinery, more distress
will be experienced from a revulsion in
trade, than in poorer countries where there
is proportionally a much smaller amount of
fixed, and a much larger amount of circulating
capital, and where consequently more
work is done by the labour of men. it is
not so difficult to withdraw a circulating as a
fixed capital, from any employment in which
it may be engaged. it is often impossible to
divert the machinery which may have been
erected for one manufacture, to the purposes
of another; but the clothing, the food, and
the lodging of the labourer in one employment
may be devoted to the support of the
labourer in another, or the same labourer
may receive the same food, clothing, and
lodging, whilst his employment is changed.
this, however, is an evil to which a rich
nation must submit; and it would not be
more reasonable to complain of it, than it
would be in a rich merchant to lament that
his ship was exposed to the dangers of the
sea, whilst his poor neighbour's cottage was
safe from all such hazard.
from contingencies of this kind, though
in an inferior degree, even agriculture is not
exempted. war, which in a commercial
country, interrupts the commerce of states,
frequently prevents the exportation of corn
from countries where it can be produced with
little cost, to others not so favourably situated.
under such circumstances an unusual
quantity of capital is drawn to agriculture,
and the country which before imported becomes
independent of foreign aid. at the
termination of the war, the obstacles to importation
are removed, and a competition
destructive to the home-grower commences,
from which he is unable to withdraw, without
the sacrifice of a great part of his capital.
the best policy of the state would be, to lay
a tax, decreasing in amount from time to time,
on the importation of foreign corn, for a limited
number of years, in order to afford to the
home-grower an opportunity to withdraw his
capital gradually from the land. in so doing
the country might not be making the most
advantageous distribution of its capital, but
the temporary tax to which it was subjected,
would be for the advantage of a particular
class, the distribution of whose capital was
highly useful in procuring a supply of food
when importation was stopped. if such
exertions in a period of emergency were followed
by risk of ruin on the termination of
the difficulty, capital would shun such an
employment. besides the usual profits of
stock, farmers would expect to be compensated
for the risk which they incurred of a
sudden influx of corn, and therefore the
price to the consumer, at the seasons when
he most required a supply, would be enhanced,
not only by the superior cost of
growing corn at home, but also by the insurance
which he would have to pay, in
the price, for the peculiar risk to which this
employment of capital was exposed. notwithstanding
then, that it would be more
productive of wealth to the country, at whatever
sacrifice of capital it might be done, to
allow the importation of cheap corn, it would
perhaps be advisable to charge it with a
duty for a few years.
in examining the question of rent, we found,
that with every increase in the supply of
corn, and with the consequent fall of its price,
capital would be withdrawn from the poorer
land; and land of a better description, which
would then pay no rent, would become the
standard by which the natural price of corn
would be regulated. at l. per quarter, land
of an inferior quality, which may be designated
by no. , might be cultivated; at l. s.
no. ; at l. no. , and so on. if corn, in consequence
of permanent abundance, fell to
l. s. the capital employed on no.  would
cease to be employed; for it was only when
corn was at l. that it could obtain the general
profits, even without paying rent: it would
therefore be withdrawn to manufacture those
commodities with which all the corn grown
on no.  would be purchased and imported.
in this employment it would necessarily
be more productive to its owner, or it would
not be withdrawn from the other; for if he
could obtain more corn by growing it on land
for which he paid no rent, than by manufacturing
a commodity with which he purchased it,
its price could not be under l.
it has, however, been said that capital
cannot be withdrawn from the land; that it
takes the form of expenses, which cannot
be recovered, such as manuring, fencing,
draining, &c., which are necessarily inseparable
from the land. this is in some degree
true; but that capital which consists
of cattle, sheep, hay and corn ricks, carts,
&c. may be withdrawn; and it always becomes
a matter of calculation whether these
shall continue to be employed on the land,
notwithstanding the low price of corn, or
whether they shall be sold, and their value
transferred to another employment.
suppose, however, the fact to be as stated,
and that no part of the capital could be
withdrawn; the farmer would continue to
raise corn, and precisely the same quantity
too, at whatever price it might sell; for it could
not be his interest to produce less, and if he
did not so employ his capital, he would obtain
from it no return whatever. corn could
not be imported, because he would sell it
lower than l. s. rather than not sell it at all,
and by the supposition the importer could
not sell it under that price. although then
the farmers, who cultivated land of this
quality, would undoubtedly be injured by the
fall in the exchangeable value of the commodity
which they produced,—how would
the country be affected? we should have
precisely the same quantity of every commodity
produced, but raw produce and corn
would sell at a much cheaper price. the
capital of a country consists of its commodities,
and as these would be the same as before,
reproduction would go on at the same
rate. this low price of corn would however
only afford the usual profits of stock to the
land, no. , which would then pay no rent,
and the rent of all better land would fall:
wages would also fall, and profits would rise.
however low the price of corn might fall;
if capital could not be removed from the land,
and the demand did not increase, no importation
would take place; for the same quantity as
before would be produced at home. although
there would be a different division of the
produce, and some classes would be benefited,
and others injured, the aggregate of production
would be precisely the same, and the
nation collectively would neither be richer
nor poorer.
but there is this advantage always resulting
from a relatively low price of corn,—that the
division of the actual production is more
likely to increase the fund for the maintenance
of labour, inasmuch as more will be
allotted, under the name of profit, to the productive
class, a less, under the name of rent,
to the unproductive class.
this is true, even if the capital cannot be
withdrawn from the land, and must be employed
there, or not be employed at all: but
if great part of the capital could be withdrawn,
as it evidently could, it will be only
withdrawn, when it will yield more to the
owner by being withdrawn than by being
suffered to remain where it was; it will only
be withdrawn then, when it can elsewhere be
employed more productively both for the
owner and the public. he consents to sink
that part of his capital which cannot be
separated from the land, because with that
part which he can take away, he can obtain
a greater value, and a greater quantity of
raw produce, than by not sinking this part
of the capital. his case is precisely similar
to that of a man who has erected machinery
in his manufactory at a great expense,
machinery which is afterwards so much
improved upon by more modern inventions,
that the commodities manufactured by him
very much sink in value. it would be
entirely a matter of calculation with him
whether he should abandon the old machinery,
and erect the more perfect, losing all
the value of the old, or continue to avail himself
of its comparatively feeble powers. who,
under such circumstances, would exhort him
to forego the use of the better machinery,
because it would deteriorate or annihilate
the value of the old? yet this is the argument
of those who would wish us to prohibit
the importation of corn, because it will deteriorate
or annihilate that part of the capital
of the farmer which is for ever sunk in land.
they do not see that the end of all commerce
is to increase production, and that by increasing
production, though you may occasion
partial loss, you increase the general happiness.
to be consistent, they should endeavour
to arrest all improvements in agriculture
and manufactures, and all inventions of
machinery; for though these contribute to
general abundance, and therefore to the
general happiness, they never fail, at the
moment of their introduction, to deteriorate
or annihilate a part of the existing capital of
farmers and manufacturers.
agriculture like all other trades, and particularly
in a commercial country, is subject
to a re-action, which, in an opposite direction,
succeeds the action of a strong stimulus.
thus, when war interrupts the importation of
corn, its consequent high price attracts capital
to the land, from the large profits which
such an employment of it affords; this will
probably cause more capital to be employed,
and more raw produce to be brought to market
than the demands of the country require.
in such case, the price of corn will fall from
the effects of a glut, and much agricultural
distress will be produced, till the average supply
is brought to a level with the average
demand.
"a man is rich or poor," says adam smith,
"according to the degree in which he can
afford to enjoy the necessaries, conveniences,
and amusements of human life."
value then essentially differs from riches,
for value depends not on abundance, but on
the difficulty or facility of production. the
labour of a million of men in manufactures,
will always produce the same value, but will
not always produce the same riches. by the
invention of machinery, by improvements in
skill, by a better division of labour, or by
the discovery of new markets, where more
advantageous exchanges may be made, a
million of men may produce double, or treble
the amount of riches, of "necessaries,
conveniences, and amusements," in one state
of society, that they could produce in another,
but they will not on that account add
any thing to value; for every thing rises or
falls in value, in proportion to the facility or
difficulty of producing it, or in other words,
in proportion to the quantity of labour employed
on its production. suppose with a
given capital, the labour of a certain number
of men produced  pair of stockings, and
that by inventions in machinery, the same
number of men can produce  pair, or
that they can continue to produce  pair,
and can produce besides  hats; then the
value of the  pair of stockings; or of
the  pair of stockings, and  hats, will
be neither more nor less than that of the 
pair of stockings before the introduction of
machinery; for they will be the produce of
the same quantity of labour. but the value
of the general mass of commodities will nevertheless
be diminished; for although the value
of the increased quantity produced in consequence
of the improvement will be the same
exactly as the value would have been of the
less quantity that would have been produced,
had no improvement taken place, an effect
is also produced on the portion of goods still
unconsumed, which were manufactured previously
to the improvement; the value of
those goods will be reduced, inasmuch as they
must fall to the level, quantity for quantity,
of the goods produced under all the advantages
of the improvement: and the society
will, notwithstanding the increased quantity
of its commodities, notwithstanding its
augmented riches, and its augmented means
of enjoyment, have a less amount of value.
by constantly increasing the facility of production,
we constantly diminish the value of
some of the commodities before produced,
though by the same means we not only add
to the national riches, but also to the power
of future production. many of the errors
in political economy have arisen from errors
on this subject, from considering an increase
of riches, and an increase of value, as meaning
the same thing, and from unfounded
notions as to what constituted a standard
measure of value. one man considers money
as a standard of value, and a nation grows
richer or poorer, according to him, in proportion
as its commodities of all kinds can
exchange for more or less money. others
represent money as a very convenient medium
for the purpose of barter, but not as a
proper measure by which to estimate the
value of other things: the real measure of
value according to them is corn, and a
country is rich or poor, according as its commodities
will exchange for more or less corn.
there are others again, who consider a country
rich or poor, according to the quantity of
labour that it can purchase. but why should
gold, or corn, or labour, be the standard measure
of value, more than coals or iron?—more
than cloth, soap, candles, and the other necessaries
of the labourer?—why, in short, should
any commodity, or all commodities together,
be the standard, when such a standard is itself
subject to fluctuations in value? corn, as well
as gold, may from difficulty or facility of
production, vary , , or  per cent., relatively
to other things; why should we
always say, that it is those other things
which have varied, and not the corn? that
commodity is alone invariable, which at all
times requires the same sacrifice of toil and
labour to produce it. of such a commodity
we have no knowledge, but we may hypothetically
argue and speak about it, as if we
had; and may improve our knowledge of the
science, by shewing distinctly the absolute
inapplicability of all the standards which have
been hitherto adopted. but supposing either
of these to be a correct standard of value,
still it would not be a standard of riches, for
riches do not depend on value. a man is
rich or poor, according to the abundance of
necessaries and luxuries, which he can command;
and whether the exchangeable value of
these for money, for corn, or for labour, be
high or low, they will equally contribute to
the enjoyment of their possessor. it is through
confounding the ideas of value and wealth,
or riches, that it has been asserted, that by
diminishing the quantity of commodities, that
is to say, of the necessaries, conveniences, and
enjoyments of human life, riches may be
increased. if value were the measure of
riches this could not be denied, because by
scarcity the value of commodities is raised;
but if adam smith be correct, if riches consist
in necessaries and enjoyments, then they cannot
be increased by a diminution of quantity.
it is true, that the man in possession of a
scarce commodity is richer, if by means of
it he can command more of the necessaries
and enjoyments of human life; but as the
general stock out of which each man's riches
are drawn, is diminished in quantity, by all
that any individual takes from it, other men's
shares must necessarily be reduced in proportion
as this favoured individual is able to appropriate
a greater quantity to himself.
let water become scarce, says lord lauderdale,
and be exclusively possessed by an
individual, and you will increase his riches,
because water will then have value; and if
wealth be the aggregate of individual riches,
you will by the same means also increase
wealth. you undoubtedly will increase the
riches of this individual, but inasmuch as the
farmer must sell a part of his corn, the shoemaker
a part of his shoes, and all men give
up a portion of their possessions for the sole
purpose of supplying themselves with water,
which they before had for nothing, they are
poorer by the whole quantity of commodities
which they are obliged to devote to this
purpose, and the proprietor of water is benefited
precisely by the amount of their loss.
the same quantity of water, and the same
quantity of commodities, are enjoyed by the
whole society, but they are differently distributed.
this is however supposing rather
a monopoly of water than a scarcity of it. if
it should be scarce, then the riches of the
country and of individuals would be actually
diminished, inasmuch as it would be deprived
of a portion of one of its enjoyments. the
farmer would not only have less corn to exchange
for the other commodities which
might be necessary or desirable to him, but
he and every other individual would be
abridged in the enjoyment of one of the most
essential of their comforts. not only would
there be a different distribution of riches, but
an actual loss of wealth.
it may be said then of two countries possessing
precisely the same quantity of all the
necessaries and comforts of life, that they are
equally rich, but the value of their respective
riches would depend on the comparative
facility or difficulty with which they were
produced. for if an improved piece of
machinery should enable us to make two pair
of stockings, instead of one, without additional
labour, double the quantity would be given
in exchange for a yard of cloth. if a similar
improvement be made in the manufacture of
cloth, stockings and cloth will exchange in
the same proportions as before, but they will
both have fallen in value; for in exchanging
them for hats, for gold, or other commodities
in general, twice the former quantity must be
given. extend the improvement to the production
of gold, and every other commodity;
and they will all regain their former proportions.
there will be double the quantity of
commodities annually produced in the country,
and therefore the wealth of the country
will be doubled, but this wealth will not
have increased in value.
although adam smith has given the correct
description of riches, which i have more
than once noticed, he afterwards explains them
differently, and says, "that a man must be
rich or poor according to the quantity of
labour which he can afford to purchase."
now this description differs essentially from
the other, and is certainly incorrect; for suppose
the mines were to become more productive,
so that gold and silver fell in value,
from the greater facility of their production;
or that velvets were to be manufactured with
so much less labour than before, that they
fell to half their former value; the riches of all
those who purchased those commodities would
be increased: one man might increase the
quantity of his plate, another might buy
double the quantity of velvet; but with the
possession of this additional plate, and velvet,
they could employ no more labour than
before; because as the exchangeable value of
velvet and of plate would be lowered, they
must part with proportionally more of these
species of riches to purchase a day's labour.
riches then cannot be estimated by the
quantity of labour which they can purchase.
from what has been said, it will be seen
that the wealth of a country may be increased
in two ways: it may be increased by employing
a greater portion of revenue in the maintenance
of productive labour,—which will not
only add to the quantity, but to the value of
the mass of commodities; or it may be increased,
without employing any additional
quantity of labour, by making the same
quantity more productive,—which will add to
the abundance, but not to the value of commodities.
in the first case, a country would not only
become rich, but the value of its riches would
increase. it would become rich by parsimony;
by diminishing its expenditure on objects of
luxury and enjoyment; and employing those
savings in reproduction.
in the second case, there will not necessarily
be either any diminished expenditure
on luxuries and enjoyments, or any increased
quantity of productive labour employed, but
with the same labour more would be produced;
wealth would increase, but not value.
of these two modes of increasing wealth, the
last must be preferred, since it produces the
same effect without the privation and diminution
of enjoyments, which can never fail to
accompany the first mode. capital is that
part of the wealth of a country which is
employed with a view to future production,
and may be increased in the same manner as
wealth. an additional capital will be equally
efficacious in the production of future wealth,
whether it be obtained from improvements in
skill and machinery, or from using more revenue
reproductively; for wealth always depends
on the quantity of commodities produced,
without any regard to the facility with
which the instruments employed in production
may have been procured. a certain quantity
of clothes and provisions will maintain and
employ the same number of men, and will
therefore procure the same quantity of work
to be done, whether they be produced by the
labour of  or of  men; but they will be
of twice the value if  have been employed
on their production.
m. say appears to me to have been singularly
unfortunate in his definition of riches
and value in the first chapter of his excellent
work: the following is the substance of his
reasoning: riches, he observes, consist only
of things which have a value in themselves:
riches are great, when the sum of the values
of which they are composed is great. they
are small when the sum of their values is
small. two things having an equal value,
are riches of equal amount. they are of
equal value, when by general consent they
are freely exchanged for each other. now,
if mankind attach value to a thing, it is on
account of the uses to which it is applicable.
this faculty, which certain things have, of
satisfying the various wants of mankind, i
call utility. to create objects that have a
value of any kind is to create riches, since the
utility of things is the first foundation of their
value, and it is the value of things which
constitutes riches. but we do not create
objects: all we can do is to reproduce matter
under another form—we can give it utility.
production then is a creation, not of matter
but of utility, and it is measured by the value
arising from the utility of the object produced.
the utility of any object, according
to general estimation, is pointed out by the
quantity of other commodities for which it
will exchange. this valuation, arising from
the general estimate formed by society, constitutes
what adam smith calls value in exchange;
what turgot calls appreciable value;
and what we may more briefly designate by
the term value.
thus far m. say, but in his account of value
and riches he has confounded two things which
ought always to be kept separate, and which
are called by adam smith, value in use and
value in exchange. if by an improved machine
i can, with the same quantity of labour,
make two pair of stockings instead of one, i in
no way impair the utility of one pair of stockings,
though i diminish their value. if then i
had precisely the same quantity of coats, shoes,
stockings, and all other things, as before, i
should have precisely the same quantity of
useful objects, and should therefore be equally
rich, if utility were the measure of riches; but
i should have a less amount of value, for my
stockings would be of only half their former
value. utility then is not the measure of
exchangeable value.
if we ask m. say in what riches consist, he
tells us in the possession of objects having
value. if we then ask him what he means
by value, he tells us that things are valuable
in proportion as they possess utility. if
again we ask him to explain to us by what
means we are to judge of the utility of objects,
he answers, by their value. thus then the
measure of value is utility, and the measure
of utility is value.
m. say, in speaking of the excellences and
imperfections of the great work of adam
smith, imputes to him, as an error, that "he
attributes to the labour of man alone the
power of producing value. a more correct
analysis shews us that value is owing to the
action of labour, or rather the industry of
man, combined with the action of those agents
which nature supplies, and with that of capital.
his ignorance of this principle prevented
him from establishing the true theory of the
influence of machinery in the production of
riches."
in contradiction to the opinion of adam
smith, m. say, in the fourth chapter, speaks
of the value which is given to commodities by
natural agents, such as the sun, the air, the
pressure of the atmosphere &c., which are
sometimes substituted for the labour of man,
and sometimes concur with him in producing.
but these natural agents, though they add
greatly to value in use, never add exchangeable
value, of which m. say is speaking, to a commodity:
as soon as by the aid of machinery,
or by the knowledge of natural philosophy,
you oblige natural agents to do the work
which was before done by man, the exchangeable
value of such work falls accordingly.
if ten men turned a corn mill, and it be discovered
that by the assistance of wind, or of
water, the labour of these ten men may be
spared, the flour, which is the produce of the
work performed by the mill, would immediately
fall in value, in proportion to the
quantity of labour saved; and the society
would be richer by the commodities which
the labour of the ten men could produce, the
funds destined for their maintenance being in
no degree impaired.
m. say accuses dr. smith of having overlooked
the value which is given to commodities
by natural agents, and by machinery, because
he considered that the value of all things
was derived from the labour of man; but it
does not appear to me, that this charge is
made out; for adam smith no where undervalues
the services which these natural agents
and machinery perform for us, but he very
justly distinguishes the nature of the value
which they add to commodities—they are serviceable
to us, by increasing the abundance
of productions, by making men richer, by
adding to value in use; but as they perform
their work gratuitously, as nothing is paid
for the use of air, of heat, and of water, the
assistance which they afford us, adds nothing
to value in exchange. in the first chapter of
the second book, m. say himself gives a similar
statement of value, for he says that "utility
is the foundation of value, that commodities
are only desirable, because they are in
some way useful, but that their value depends
not on their utility, not on the degree in
which they are desired, but on the quantity
of labour necessary to procure them." "the
utility of a commodity thus understood,
makes it an object of man's desire, makes him
wish for it, and establishes a demand for it.
when to obtain a thing, it is sufficient to
desire it, it may be considered as an article
of natural wealth, given to man in an unlimited
quantity, and which he enjoys, without
purchasing it by any sacrifice; such are
the air, water, the light of the sun. if he
obtained in this manner all the objects of his
wants and desires, he would be infinitely
rich: he would be in want of nothing. but
unfortunately this is not the case; the greater
part of the things which are convenient and
agreeable to him, as well as those which are
indispensably necessary in the social state, for
which man seems to be specifically formed,
are not given to him gratuitously; they could
only exist by the exertion of certain labour,
the employment of a certain capital, and, in
many cases, by the use of land. these are
obstacles in the way of gratuitous enjoyment;
obstacles from which result a real expense of
production; because we are obliged to pay
for the assistance of these agents of production."
"it is only when this utility has thus
been communicated to a thing (viz. by industry,
capital, and land,) that it is a production,
and that it has a value. it is its utility
which is the foundation of the demand
for it, but the sacrifices, and the charges necessary
to obtain it, or in other words, its price,
limits the extent of this demand."
the confusion which arises from confounding
the terms "value" and "riches" will best
be seen in the following passages. his pupil
observes: "you have said, besides, that the
riches of a society were composed of the sum
total of the values which it possessed; it appears
to me to follow, that the fall of one production,
of stockings for example, by diminishing
the sum total of the value belonging to the
society, diminishes the mass of its riches;" to
which the following answer is given: "the
sum of the society's riches will not fall on
that account. two pair of stockings are produced
instead of one; and two pair at three
francs, are equally valuable with one pair at
six francs. the income of the society remains
the same, because the manufacturer has
gained as much on two pair at three francs,
as he gained on one pair at six francs." thus
far m. say, though incorrect, is at least consistent.
if value be the measure of riches,
the society is equally rich, because the value
of all its commodities is the same as before.
but now for his inference. "but when the
income remains the same, and productions fall
in price, the society is really enriched. if the
same fall took place in all commodities at the
same time, which is not absolutely impossible,
the society by procuring at half their
former price, all the objects of its consumption,
without having lost any portion of its
income, would really be twice as rich as before,
and could purchase twice the quantity
of goods."
in the first passage we are told, that if
every thing fell to half its value, from abundance,
the society would be equally rich, because
there would be double the quantity of
commodities at half their former value, or in
other words, there would be the same value.
but in the last passage we are informed, that
by doubling the quantity of commodities, although
the value of each commodity should
be diminished one half, and therefore the
value of all the commodities together be precisely
the same as before, yet the society
would be twice as rich as before. in the first
case riches are estimated by the amount of
value: in the second, they are estimated by
the abundance of commodities contributing
to human enjoyments. m. say further says,
"that a man is infinitely rich without valuables,
if he can for nothing obtain all the objects
he desires; yet in another place we are
told, "that riches consist, not in the product
itself, for it is not riches if it have not value,
but in its value." vol. ii. p. .
from the account which has been given of
the profits of stock, it will appear, that no
accumulation of capital will permanently
lower profits, unless there be some permanent
cause for the rise of wages. if the funds
for the maintenance of labour were doubled,
trebled, or quadrupled, there would not long
be any difficulty in procuring the requisite
number of hands, to be employed by those
funds; but owing to the increasing difficulty
of making constant additions to the food of
the country, funds of the same value would
probably not maintain the same quantity of
labour. if the necessaries of the workman
could be constantly increased with the same
facility, there could be no permanent alteration
in the rate of profits or wages, to whatever
amount capital might be accumulated.
adam smith, however, uniformly ascribes the
fall of profits to accumulation of capital, and
to the competition which will result from it,
without ever adverting to the increasing difficulty
of providing food for the additional
number of labourers which the additional capital
will employ. "the increase of stock
he says, which raises wages, tends to lower
profit. when the stocks of many rich merchants
are turned into the same trade, their
mutual competition naturally tends to lower
its profit; and when there is a like increase
of stock in all the different trades carried on
in the same society, the same competition
must produce the same effect in all." adam
smith speaks here of a rise of wages, but it is
of a temporary rise, proceeding from increased
funds before the population is increased;
and he does not appear to see, that at the
same time that capital is increased, the work
to be effected by capital, is increased in the
same proportion. m. say has however most
satisfactorily shewn, that there is no amount
of capital which may not be employed in a
country, because demand is only limited by
production. no man produces, but with a
view to consume or sell, and he never sells,
but with an intention to purchase some other
commodity, which may be immediately useful
to him, or which may contribute to future
production. by producing, then, he necessarily
becomes either the consumer of his own
goods, or the purchaser and consumer of the
goods of some other person. it is not to be
supposed that he should, for any length of
time, be ill-informed of the commodities which
he can most advantageously produce, to attain
the object which he has in view, namely,
the possession of other goods; and therefore
it is not probable that he will continually
produce a commodity for which there is no
demand.
there cannot then be accumulated in a
country any amount of capital which cannot
be employed productively, until wages rise so
high in consequence of the rise of necessaries,
and so little consequently remains for the profits
of stock, that the motive for accumulation
ceases. while the profits of stock are high,
men will have a motive to accumulate.
whilst a man has any wished-for gratification
unsupplied he will have a demand for more
commodities; and it will be an effectual demand
while he has any new value to offer in
exchange for them. if ten thousand pounds
were given to a man having ,l. per
annum, he would not lock it up in a chest,
but would either increase his expenses by
,l.; employ it himself productively, or
lend it to some other person for that purpose;
in either case, demand would be increased,
although it would be for different objects.
if he increased his expenses, his effectual
demand might probably be for buildings, furniture,
or some such enjoyment. if he employed
his ,l. productively, his effectual
demand would be for food, clothing, and
raw material, which might set new labourers
to work; but still it would be demand.
productions are always bought by productions,
money is only the medium by
which the exchange is effected. too much
of a particular commodity may be produced,
of which there may be such a glut in the
market, as not to repay the capital expended
on it; but this cannot be the case with respect
to all commodities; the demand for
corn is limited by the mouths which are to
eat it, for shoes and coats by the persons
who are to wear them; but though a community,
or a part of a community, may have as
much corn, and as many hats and shoes, as
it is able or may wish to consume, the same
cannot be said of every commodity produced
by nature or by art. some would consume
more wine, if they had the ability to procure it.
others having enough of wine, would wish to
increase the quantity or improve the quality of
their furniture. others might wish to ornament
their grounds, or to enlarge their houses.
the wish to do all or some of these is implanted
in every man's breast; nothing is required but
the means, and nothing can afford the means,
but an increase of production. if i had food
and necessaries at my disposal, i should not
be long in want of workmen who would
put me in possession of some of the objects
most useful or most desirable to me.
whether these increased productions, and
the consequent demand which they occasion,
shall or shall not lower profits, depends
solely on the rise of wages; and the rise of
wages, excepting for a limited period, on the
facility of producing the food and necessaries
of the labourer. i say excepting for a limited
period, because no point is better established,
than that the supply of labourers will always
ultimately be in proportion to the means of
supporting them.
there is only one case, and that will be
temporary, in which the accumulation of capital
with a low price of food may be attended
with a fall of profits; and that is, when the
funds for the maintenance of labour increase
much more rapidly than population;—wages
will then be high, and profits low. if every
man were to forego the use of luxuries, and
be intent only on accumulation, a quantity
of necessaries might be produced, for which
there could not be any immediate consumption.
of commodities so limited in number,
there might undoubtedly be an universal glut,
and consequently there might neither be demand
for an additional quantity of such commodities,
nor profits on the employment of
more capital. if men ceased to consume,
they would cease to produce. this admission,
does not impugn the general principle. in
such a country as england, for example, it is
difficult to suppose that there can be any disposition
to devote the whole capital and
labour of the country to the production of
necessaries only.
when merchants engage their capitals in
foreign trade, or in the carrying trade, it is always
from choice, and never from necessity:
it is because in that trade their profits will be
somewhat greater than in the home trade.
adam smith has justly observed "that the
desire of food is limited in every man by the
narrow capacity of the human stomach, but
the desire of the conveniences and ornaments
of building, dress, equipage, and household
furniture, seems to have no limit or certain
boundary." nature then has necessarily limited
the amount of capital which can at
any one time be profitably engaged in agriculture,
but she has placed no limits to the
amount of capital that may be employed in
procuring "the conveniences and ornaments"
of life. to procure these gratifications in
the greatest abundance is the object in view,
and it is only because foreign trade, or the
carrying trade, will accomplish it better, that
men engage in them, in preference to manufacturing
the commodities required, or a
substitute for them, at home. if, however,
from peculiar circumstances, we were precluded
from engaging capital in foreign trade,
or in the carrying trade, we should, though
with less advantage, employ it at home; and
while there is no limit to the desire of "conveniences,
ornaments of building, dress, equipage,
and household furniture," there can be
no limit to the capital that may be employed
in procuring them, except that which bounds
our power to maintain the workmen who are
to produce them.
adam smith however, speaks of the carrying
trade as one not of choice, but of necessity;
as if the capital engaged in it would
be inert if not so employed, as if the capital in
the home trade could overflow, if not confined
to a limited amount. he says, "when the
capital stock of any country is increased to
such a degree, that it cannot be all employed in
supplying the consumption, and supporting the
productive labour of that particular country, the
surplus part of it naturally disgorges itself into
the carrying trade, and is employed in performing
the same offices to other countries."
"about ninety-six thousand hogsheads of
tobacco are annually purchased with a part
of the surplus produce of british industry.
but the demand of great britain does not
require, perhaps, more than fourteen thousand.
if the remaining eighty-two thousand,
therefore, could not be sent abroad and exchanged
for something more in demand at home,
the importation of them would cease immediately,
and with it the productive labour of all
the inhabitants of great britain, who are at present
employed in preparing the goods with which
these eighty-two thousand hogsheads are annually
purchased." but could not this portion of the
productive labour of great britain be employed
in preparing some other sort of goods,
with which something more in demand at
home might be purchased? and if it could
not, might we not employ this productive
labour, though with less advantage, in making
those goods in demand at home, or at least
some substitute for them? if we wanted velvets,
might we not attempt to make velvets;
and if we could not succeed, might we not
make more cloth, or some other object desirable
to us?
we manufacture commodities, and with
them buy goods abroad, because we can obtain
a greater quantity than we could make
at home. deprive us of this trade, and we immediately
manufacture again for ourselves.
but this opinion of adam smith is at variance
with all his general doctrines on this subject.
"if a foreign country can supply us with a
commodity cheaper than we ourselves can
make it, better buy it of them with some part
of the produce of our own industry, employed
in a way in which we have some advantage.
the general industry of the country being always
in proportion to the capital which employs it,
will not thereby be diminished, but only left
to find out the way in which it can be employed
with the greatest advantage."
again. "those, therefore, who have the
command of more food than they themselves
can consume, are always willing to exchange
the surplus, or, what is the same thing, the
price of it, for gratifications of another kind.
what is over and above satisfying the limited
desire, is given for the amusement of those
desires which cannot be satisfied, but seem
to be altogether endless. the poor, in order
to obtain food, exert themselves to gratify
those fancies of the rich; and to obtain it
more certainly, they vie with one another in
the cheapness and perfection of their work.
the number of workmen increases with the
increasing quantity of food, or with the growing
improvement and cultivation of the lands;
and as the nature of their business admits of
the utmost subdivisions of labours, the quantity
of materials which they can work up increases
in a much greater proportion than
their numbers. hence arises a demand for
every sort of material which human invention
can employ, either usefully or ornamentally,
in building, dress, equipage, or household
furniture; for the fossils and minerals contained
in the bowels of the earth, the precious
metals, and the precious stones."
adam smith has justly observed, that it is
extremely difficult to determine the rate of
the profits of stock. "profit is so fluctuating,
that even in a particular trade, and much
more in trades in general, it would be difficult
to state the average rate of it. to judge
of what it may have been formerly, or in
remote periods of time, with any degree of precision,
must be altogether impossible." yet
since it is evident that much will be given
for the use of money, when much can be
made by it, he suggests, that "the market rate
of interest will lead us to form some notion
of the rate of profits, and the history of the
progress of interest afford us that of the progress
of profits." undoubtedly if the market
rate of interest could be accurately known
for any considerable period, we should have
a tolerably correct criterion, by which to
estimate the progress of profits.
but in all countries, from mistaken notions
of policy, the state has interfered to prevent a
fair and free market rate of interest, by imposing
heavy and ruinous penalties on all those
who shall take more than the rate fixed by law.
in all countries probably these laws are evaded,
but records give us little information on this
head, and point out rather the legal and fixed
rate, than the market rate of interest. during
the present war, exchequer and navy bills
have frequently been at so high a discount, as
to afford the purchasers of them ,  per cent.,
or a greater rate of interest for their money.
loans have been raised by government at
an interest exceeding  per cent., and individuals
have been frequently obliged, by indirect
means, to pay more than  per cent.,
for the interest of money; yet during this
same period the legal rate of interest has
been uniformly at  per cent. little dependance
for information then can be placed on
that which is the fixed and legal rate of interest,
when we find it may differ so considerably
from the market rate. adam smith informs
us, that from the th of henry viii.,
to st of james i.,  per cent. continued
to be the legal rate of interest. soon after
the restoration, it was reduced to  per cent.,
and by the th of anne, to  per cent. he
thinks the legal rate followed, and did not
precede the market rate of interest. before
the american war, government borrowed at
 per cent., and the people of credit in the
capital, and in many other parts of the kingdom
at ½, , and ½ per cent.
the rate of interest, though ultimately and
permanently governed by the rate of profit,
is however subject to temporary variations
from other causes. with every fluctuation
in the quantity and value of money, the
prices of commodities naturally vary. they
vary also, as we have already shewn, from the
alteration in the proportion of supply to demand,
although there should not be either
greater facility or difficulty of production.
when the market prices of goods fall from
an abundant supply, from a diminished demand,
or from a rise in the value of money,
a manufacturer naturally accumulates an unusual
quantity of finished goods, being unwilling
to sell them at very depressed prices.
to meet his ordinary payments, for which
he used to depend on the sale of his goods,
he now endeavours to borrow on credit, and
is often obliged to give an increased rate
of interest. this however is but of temporary
duration; for either the manufacturer's
expectations were well grounded, and the
market price of his commodities rises, or he
discovers that there is a permanently diminished
demand, and he no longer resists the
course of affairs: prices fall, and money and
interest regain their real value. if by the
discovery of a new mine, by the abuses of
banking, or by any other cause, the quantity
of money be greatly increased, its ultimate
effect is to raise the prices of commodities in
proportion to the increased quantity of money;
but there is probably always an interval, during
which some effect is produced on the rate
of interest.
the price of funded property is not a
steady criterion by which to judge of the
rate of interest. in time of war, the stock
market is so loaded by the continual loans
of government, that the price of stock has
not time to settle at its fair level before a new
operation of funding takes place, or it is
affected by anticipation of political events.
in time of peace, on the contrary, the operations
of the sinking fund, the unwillingness,
which a particular class of persons feel
to divert their funds to any other employment
than that to which they have been accustomed,
which they think secure, and in
which their dividends are paid with the utmost
regularity, elevates the price of stock,
and consequently depresses the rate of interest
on these securities below the general
market rate. it is observable too, that for
different securities, government pays very
different rates of interest. whilst l. capital
in  per cent. stock is selling for l.,
an exchequer bill of l., will be sometimes
selling for l. s., for which exchequer
bill, no more interest will be annually paid
than l. s. d.: one of these securities pays
to a purchaser at the above prices, an interest
of more than ¼ per cent., the other but
little more than ¼; a certain quantity of
these exchequer bills is required as a safe
and marketable investment for bankers; if
they were increased much beyond this demand,
they would probably be as much depreciated
as the  per cent. stock. a stock
paying  per cent. per annum will always
sell at a proportionally greater price than
stock paying  per cent., for the capital debt of
neither can be discharged but at par, or l.
money for l. stock. the market rate of
interest may fall to  per cent., and government
would then pay the holder of  per cent.
stock at par, unless he consented to take 
per cent., or some diminished rate of interest
under  per cent.: they would have no advantage
from so paying the holder of  per cent.
stock, till the market rate of interest had
fallen below  per cent. per annum. to pay
the interest on the national debt, large sums
of money are withdrawn from circulation four
times in the year for a few days. these demands
for money being only temporary,
seldom affect prices; they are generally surmounted
by the payment of a large rate of
interest.
a bounty on the exportation of corn tends
to lower its price to the foreign consumer,
but it has no permanent effect on its price in
the home market.
suppose that to afford the usual and
general profits of stock, the price of corn
should in england be l. per quarter; it could
not then be exported to foreign countries where
it sold for l. s. per quarter. but if a bounty
of s. per quarter were given on exportation,
it could be sold in the foreign market at l.
s., and consequently the same profit would
be afforded to the corn grower, whether he
sold it at l. s. in the foreign, or at l. in the
home market.
a bounty then, which should lower the
price of british corn in the foreign country,
below the cost of producing corn in that
country, would naturally extend the demand
for british, and diminish the demand for
their own corn. this extension of demand for
british corn could not fail to raise its price for
a time in the home market, and during that
time to prevent also its falling so low in the
foreign market as the bounty has a tendency
to effect. but the causes which would thus
operate on the market price of corn in england
would produce no effect whatever on its
natural price, on its real cost of production.
to grow corn would neither require more
labour nor more capital, and, consequently, if
the profits of the farmer's stock were before
only equal to the profits of the stock of other
traders, they will, after the rise of price, be considerably
above them. by raising the profits of
the farmer's stock, the bounty will operate as an
encouragement to agriculture, and capital will
be withdrawn from manufactures to be employed
on the land, till the enlarged demand for
the foreign market has been supplied, when
the price of corn will again fall in the home
market to its natural and necessary price,
and profits will be again at their ordinary
and accustomed level. the increased supply
of grain operating on the foreign market,
will also lower its price in the country to
which it is exported, and will thereby restrict
the profits of the exporter to the lowest rate
at which he can afford to trade.
the ultimate effect then of a bounty on
the exportation of corn, is not to raise or to
lower the price in the home market, but to
lower the price of corn to the foreign consumer—to
the whole extent of the bounty, if
the price of corn had not before been lower
in the foreign, than in the home market—and
in a less degree, if the price in the home
had been above the price in the foreign
market.
a writer in the fifth vol. of the edinburgh
review on the subject of a bounty on the exportation
of corn, has very clearly pointed
out its effects on the foreign and home
demand. he has also justly remarked, that
it would not fail to give encouragement to
agriculture in the exporting country; but he
appears to have imbibed the common error
which has misled dr. smith, and i believe
most other writers on this subject. he supposes,
because the price of corn ultimately
regulates wages, that therefore it will regulate
the price of all other commodities. he
says that the bounty, "by raising the profits
of farming, will operate as an encouragement
to husbandry; by raising the price of corn to
the consumers at home, it will diminish for
the time their power of purchasing this necessary
of life, and thus abridge their real wealth.
it is evident, however, that this last effect
must be temporary: the wages of the labouring
consumers had been adjusted before by
competition, and the same principle will
adjust them again to the same rate, by raising
the money price of labour, and, through that,
of other commodities, to the money price of corn.
the bounty upon exportation, therefore, will
ultimately raise the money price of corn in
the home market; not directly, however, but
through the medium of an extended demand
in the foreign market, and a consequent
enhancement of the real price at home: and
this rise of the money price, when it has once been
communicated to other commodities, will of course
become fixed."
if, however, i have succeeded in shewing
that it is not the rise in the money wages of
labour which raises the price of commodities,
but that such rise always affects profits, it will
follow that the prices of commodities would
not rise in consequence of a bounty.
but a temporary rise in the price of corn,
produced by an increased demand from
abroad, would have no effect on the money
price of wages. the rise of corn is occasioned
by a competition for that supply which
was before exclusively appropriated to the
home market. by raising profits, additional
capital is employed in agriculture, and the
increased supply is obtained; but till it be
obtained, the high price is absolutely necessary
to proportion the consumption to the
supply, which would be counteracted by a
rise of wages. the rise of corn is the consequence
of its scarcity, and is the means by
which the demand of the home purchasers is
diminished. if wages were increased, the
competition would increase, and a further
rise of the price of corn would become necessary.
in this account of the effects of a
bounty, nothing has been supposed to occur
to raise the natural price of corn, by which its
market price is ultimately governed; for it has
not been supposed that any additional labour
would be required on the land to insure a
given production, and this alone can raise
natural price. if the natural price of cloth
were s. per yard, a great increase in the
foreign demand might raise the price to s.,
or more, but the profits which would then be
made by the clothier would not fail to attract
capital in that direction, and although the
demand should be doubled, trebled, or quadrupled,
the supply would ultimately be obtained,
and cloth would fall to its natural
price of s. so in the supply of corn, although
we should export , , or ,
quarters, annually, it would ultimately be
produced at its natural price, which never
varies unless a different quantity of labour
becomes necessary to production.
perhaps in no part of adam smith's justly
celebrated work are his conclusions more
liable to objection, than in the chapter on
bounties. in the first place, he speaks of
corn as of a commodity of which the production
cannot be increased in consequence
of a bounty on exportation; he supposes
invariably that it acts only on the quantity
actually produced, and is no stimulus to
further production. "in years of plenty,"
he says, "by occasioning an extraordinary
exportation, it necessarily keeps up the price
of corn in the home market above what it
would naturally fall to. in years of scarcity,
though the bounty is frequently suspended,
yet the great exportation which it occasions
in years of plenty, must frequently hinder,
more or less, the plenty of one year from
relieving the scarcity of another. both in the
years of plenty and in years of scarcity, therefore,
the bounty necessarily tends to raise the
money price of corn somewhat higher than it
otherwise would be in the home market."
adam smith appears to have been fully
aware, that the correctness of his argument
entirely depended on the fact, whether the
increase "of the money price of corn, by
rendering that commodity more profitable to
the farmer, would not necessarily encourage
its production."
"i answer," he says, "that this might be
the case, if the effect of the bounty was to
raise the real price of corn, or to enable the
farmer, with an equal quantity of it, to maintain
a greater number of labourers in the
same manner, whether liberal, moderate, or
scanty, as other labourers are commonly
maintained in his neighbourhood."
if nothing were consumed by the labourer
but corn, and if the portion which he received,
was the very lowest which his sustenance
required, there might be some ground
for supposing that the quantity paid to the
labourer could, under no circumstances, be
reduced,—but the money wages of labour
sometimes do not rise at all, and never rise
in proportion to the rise in the money price
of corn, because corn, though an important
part, is only a part of the consumption of the
labourer. if half his wages were expended
on corn, and the other half on soap, candles,
fuel, tea, sugar, clothing, &c., commodities
on which no rise is supposed to take place, it
is evident that he would be quite as well paid
with a bushel and a half of wheat, when it
was s. a bushel, as he was with two bushels,
when the price was s. per bushel; or with
s. in money, as he was before with s.
his wages would rise only  per cent.
though corn rose  per cent., and, consequently,
there would be sufficient motive to
divert more capital to the land, if profits on
other trades continued the same as before.
but such a rise of wages would also induce
manufacturers to withdraw their capitals
from manufactures, to employ them on the
land; for whilst the farmer increased the
price of his commodity  per cent.,
and his wages only  per cent., the manufacturer
would be obliged also to raise
wages  per cent., whilst he had no compensation
whatever, in the rise of his manufactured
commodity, for this increased
charge of production; capital would consequently
flow from manufactures to agriculture,
till the supply would again lower the price
of corn to s. per bushel, and wages to s.
per week; when the manufacturer would obtain
the same profits as the farmer, and the
tide of capital would cease to set in either
direction. this is in fact the mode in which
the cultivation of corn is always extended,
and the increased wants of the market supplied.
the funds for the maintenance of labour
increase, and wages are raised. the
comfortable situation of the labourer induces
him to marry—population increases, and
the demand for corn raises its price relatively
to other things,—more capital is profitably
employed on agriculture, and continues to
flow towards it, till the supply is equal to
the demand, when the price again falls, and
agricultural and manufacturing profits are
again brought to a level.
but whether wages were stationary after
the rise in the price of corn, or advanced
moderately, or enormously, is of no importance
to this question, for wages are paid
by the manufacturer as well as by the farmer,
and, therefore, in this respect they must be
equally affected by a rise in the price of corn.
but they are unequally affected in their profits,
inasmuch as the farmer sells his commodity
at an advanced price, while the manufacturer
sells his for the same price as before. it
is however the inequality of profit, which is always
the inducement to remove capital from
one employment to another, and therefore
more corn would be produced, and fewer commodities
manufactured. manufactures would
not rise, because fewer were manufactured, for
a supply of them would be obtained in exchange
for the exported corn.
a bounty, if it raises the price of corn,
either raises it in comparison with the price
of other commodities, or it does not. if the
affirmative be true, it is impossible to deny
the greater profits of the farmer, and the
temptation to the removal of capital, till its
price is again lowered by an abundant supply.
if it does not raise it in comparison
with other commodities, where is the injury
to the home consumer, beyond the inconvenience
of paying the tax? if the manufacturer
pays a greater price for his corn, he
is compensated by the greater price at which
he sells his commodity, with which his corn
is ultimately purchased.
the error of adam smith proceeds precisely
from the same source as that of the
writer in the edinburgh review; for they
both think "that the money price of corn
regulates that of all other home-made commodities."
"it regulates," says adam
smith, "the money price of labour, which
must always be such as to enable the labourer
to purchase a quantity of corn sufficient
to maintain him and his family, either
in the liberal, moderate, or scanty manner, in
which the advancing, stationary, or declining
circumstances of the society oblige his
employers to maintain him. by regulating
the money price of all the other parts of the
rude produce of land, it regulates that of the
materials of almost all manufactures. by
regulating the money price of labour, it
regulates that of manufacturing art, and industry;
and by regulating both, it regulates
that of the complete manufacture. the
money price of labour, and of every thing that
is the produce either of land and labour, must
necessarily rise or fall in proportion to the money
price of corn."
this opinion of adam smith, i have before
attempted to refute. in considering a
rise in the price of commodities as a necessary
consequence of a rise in the price of
corn, he reasons as though there were no other
fund from which the increased charge could
be paid. he has wholly neglected the consideration
of profits, the diminution of which
forms that fund, without raising the price of
commodities. if this opinion of dr. smith
were well founded, profits could never really
fall, whatever accumulation of capital there
might be. if when wages rose, the farmer
could raise the price of his corn, and the clothier,
the hatter, the shoemaker, and every
other manufacturer, could also raise the
price of their goods in proportion to the advance,
although estimated in money, they
might be all raised, they would continue to
bear the same value relatively to each other.
each of these trades could command the
same quantity as before of the goods of the
others, which, since it is goods, and not money,
which constitute wealth, is the only circumstance
that could be of importance to them;
and the whole rise in the price of raw produce
and of goods, would be injurious to no
other persons but to those whose property
consisted of gold and silver, or whose annual
income was paid in a contributed quantity of
those metals, whether in the form of bullion
or of money. suppose the use of money to be
wholly laid aside, and all trade to be carried
on by barter. under such circumstances,
could corn rise in exchangeable value with
other things? if it could, then it is not true
that the value of corn regulates the value of
all other commodities; for to do that, it should
not vary in relative value to them. if it
could not, then it must be maintained, that
whether corn be obtained on rich, or on poor
land, with much labour, or with little, with
the aid of machinery, or without, it would
always exchange for an equal quantity of all
other commodities.
i cannot, however, but remark that, though
adam smith's general doctrines correspond
with this which i have just quoted, yet in
one part of his work he appears to have given
a correct account of the nature of value.
"the proportion between the value of gold
and silver, and that of goods of any other
kind, depends in all cases," he says, "upon
the proportion between the quantity of labour
which is necessary in order to bring a certain
quantity of gold and silver to market, and that
which is necessary to bring thither a certain
quantity of any other sort of goods." does he
not here fully acknowledge that if any increase
takes place in the quantity of labour,
required to bring one sort of goods to market,
whilst no such increase takes place in bringing
another sort thither, those goods will rise in
relative value. if no more labour be required
to bring cloth and gold to market, they
will not vary in relative value, but if more
labour be required to bring corn and shoes
to market, will not corn and shoes rise in
value relatively to cloth, and money made of
gold?
adam smith again considers that the effect
of the bounty is to cause a partial degradation
in the value of money. "that
degradation," says he "in the value of
silver, which is the effect of the fertility of
the mines, and which operates equally, or
very nearly equally, through the greater part
of the commercial world, is a matter of very
little consequence to any particular country.
the consequent rise of all money prices,
though it does not make those who receive
them really richer, does not make them really
poorer. a service of plate becomes really
cheaper, and every thing else remains precisely
of the same real value as before." this
observation is most correct.
"but that degradation in the value of silver,
which being the effect either of the peculiar
situation, or of the political institutions of a
particular country, takes place only in that
country, is a matter of very great consequence,
which, far from tending to make any
body really richer, tends to make every body
really poorer. the rise in the money price
of all commodities, which is in this case peculiar
to that country, tends to discourage
more or less every sort of industry which is
carried on within it, and to enable foreign nations,
by furnishing almost all sorts of goods
for a smaller quantity of silver than its own
workmen can afford to do, to undersell them,
not only in the foreign, but even in the home
market."
i have elsewhere attempted to shew that a
partial degradation in the value of money,
which shall affect both agricultural produce,
and manufactured commodities, cannot possibly
be permanent. to say that money is
partially degraded, in this sense, is to say
that all commodities are at a high price; but
while gold and silver are at liberty to make
purchases in the cheapest market, they will be
exported for the cheaper goods of other countries,
and the reduction of their quantity will
increase their value at home; commodities
will regain their usual level, and those fitted
for foreign markets will be exported, as before.
a bounty therefore cannot, i think, be objected
to on this ground.
if then, a bounty raises the price of corn
in comparison with all other things, the
farmer will be benefited, and more land will
be cultivated; but if the bounty do not raise
the value of corn relatively to other things,
then no other inconvenience will attend it,
than that of paying the bounty; one which
i neither wish to conceal nor underrate.
dr. smith states, that "by establishing
high duties on the importation, and bounties
on the exportation of corn, the country gentlemen
seemed to have imitated the conduct
of the manufacturers." by the same means
both had endeavoured to raise the value of
their commodities. "they did not perhaps
attend to the great and essential difference
which nature has established between corn,
and almost every other sort of goods. when
by either of the above means, you enable our
manufacturers to sell their goods for somewhat
a better price than they otherwise could
get for them, you raise not only the nominal,
but the real price of those goods. you increase
not only the nominal, but the real
profit, the real wealth and revenue of those
manufacturers—you really encourage those
manufactures. but when, by the like institutions,
you raise the nominal or money price
of corn, you do not raise its real value, you
do not increase the real wealth of our farmers
or country gentlemen, you do not encourage
the growth of corn. the nature of things
has stamped upon corn a real value, which
cannot be altered by merely altering its money
price. through the world in general,
that value is equal to the quantity of labour
which it can maintain."
i have already attempted to shew, that the
market price of corn, would, under an increased
demand from the effects of a bounty,
exceed its natural price, till the requisite
additional supply was obtained, and that then
it would again fall to its natural price. but
the natural price of corn is not so fixed as the
natural price of commodities; because, with
any great additional demand for corn, land
of a worse quality must be taken into cultivation,
on which more labour will be required
to produce a given quantity, and the
natural price of corn would be raised. by a
continued bounty, therefore, on the exportation
of corn, there would be created a tendency
to a permanent rise in the price of corn, and
this, as i have shewn elsewhere, never fails to
raise rent. country gentlemen then have not
only a temporary but a permanent interest in
prohibitions of the importation of corn, and
in bounties on its exportation; but manufacturers
have no permanent interest in a bounty on
the exportation of commodities, their interest
is wholly temporary.
a bounty on the exportation of manufactures
will undoubtedly, as dr. smith contends,
raise the market price of manufactures,
but it will not raise their natural price. the
labour of  men will produce double the
quantity of these goods that  could produce
before; and consequently, when the requisite
quantity of capital was employed in
supplying the requisite quantity of manufactures,
they would again fall to their natural
price. it is then only during the interval after
the rise in the market price of commodities,
and before the additional supply is obtained,
that the manufacturers will enjoy high profits;
for as soon as prices had subsided, their profits
would sink to the general level.
instead of agreeing, therefore, with adam
smith, that the country gentlemen had not
so great an interest in prohibiting the importation
of corn, as the manufacturer had in
prohibiting the importation of manufactured
goods, i contend that they have a much
superior interest; for their advantage is permanent,
while that of the manufacturer is
only temporary. dr. smith observes, that
nature has established a great and essential
difference between corn and other goods, but
the proper inference from that circumstance is
directly the reverse of that which he draws
from it; for it is on account of this difference
that rent is created, and that country gentlemen
have an interest in the rise of the natural
price of corn. instead of comparing the interest
of the manufacturer with the interest of
the country gentleman, dr. smith should have
compared it with the interest of the farmer,
which is very distinct from that of his landlord.
manufacturers have no interest in the
rise of the natural price of their commodities,
nor have farmers any interest in the rise of
the natural price of corn, or other raw produce,
though both these classes are benefited
while the market price of their productions
exceeds their natural price. on the contrary,
landlords have a most decided interest in the
rise of the natural price of corn; for the rise
of rent is the inevitable consequence of the
difficulty of producing raw produce, without
which its natural price could not rise. now
as bounties on exportation and prohibitions
of the importation of corn increase the demand,
and drive us to the cultivation of poorer
lands, they necessarily occasion an increased
difficulty of production.
the sole effect of the bounty either on the
exportation of manufactures, or of corn, is to
divert a portion of capital to an employment,
which it would not naturally seek. it causes
a pernicious distribution of the general funds
of the society—it bribes a manufacturer to
commence or continue in a comparatively
less profitable employment. it is the worst
species of taxation, for it does not give to the
foreign country all that it takes away from
the home country, the balance of loss being
made up by the less advantageous distribution
of the general capital. thus, if the price of
corn is in england l., and in france l. s.
a bounty of s. will ultimately reduce it to
l. s. in france, and maintain it at the same
price of l. in england. for every quarter
exported, england pays a tax of s. for
every quarter imported into france, france
gains only s., so that the value of s. per
quarter is absolutely lost to the world, by
such a distribution of its funds as to cause
diminished production, probably not of corn,
but of some other object of necessity or enjoyment.
mr. buchanan appears to have seen the
fallacy of dr. smith's arguments respecting
bounties, and on the last passage which i
have quoted, very judiciously remarks: "in
asserting that nature has stamped a real value
on corn, which cannot be altered by merely
altering its money price, dr. smith confounds
its value in use, with its value in exchange.
a bushel of wheat will not feed more people
during scarcity than during plenty; but a
bushel of wheat will exchange for a greater
quantity of luxuries and conveniences when
it is scarce, than when it is abundant; and
the landed proprietors, who have a surplus
of food to dispose of, will therefore, in times
of scarcity, be richer men; they will exchange
their surplus for a greater value of
other enjoyments, than when corn is in
greater plenty. it is vain to argue, therefore,
that if the bounty occasions a forced exportation
of corn, it will not also occasion a real
rise of price." the whole of mr. buchanan's
arguments on this part of the subject of bounties,
appear to me to be perfectly clear and
satisfactory.
mr. buchanan however has not, i think,
any more than dr. smith, or the writer in the
edinburgh review, correct opinions as to the
influence of a rise in the price of labour on
manufactured commodities. from his peculiar
views, which i have elsewhere noticed, he
thinks that the price of labour has no connexion
with the price of corn, and therefore
that the real value of corn might and would
rise without affecting the price of labour; but
if labour were affected, he would maintain
with adam smith and the writer in the
edinburgh review, that the price of manufactured
commodities would also rise; and
then i do not see how he would distinguish
such a rise of corn, from a fall in the value of
money, or how he could come to any other
conclusion than that of dr. smith. in a note
to page , vol. i. of the wealth of nations,
mr. buchanan observes, "but the price of
corn does not regulate the money price of all
the other parts of the rude produce of land.
it regulates the price neither of metals, nor of
various other useful substances, such as coals,
wood, stones, &c.; and as it does not regulate
the price of labour, it does not regulate the price of
manufactures; so that the bounty, in so far as
it raises the price of corn, is undoubtedly a
real benefit to the farmer. it is not on this
ground, therefore, that its policy must be
argued. its encouragement to agriculture,
by raising the price of corn, must be admitted;
and the question then comes to be, whether
agriculture ought to be thus encouraged?"—it
is then, according to mr. buchanan, a real
benefit to the farmer, because it does not
raise the price of labour; but if it did, it would
raise the price of all things in proportion,
and then it would afford no particular encouragement
to agriculture.
it must, however, be conceded, that the
tendency of a bounty on the exportation of
any commodity is to lower in a small degree
the value of money. whatever facilitates
exportation, tends to accumulate money in a
country; and on the contrary, whatever impedes
exportation, tends to diminish it. the
general effect of taxation, by raising the prices
of the commodities taxed, tends to diminish
exportation, and therefore to check the influx
of money; and on the same principle, a
bounty encourages the influx of money.
this is more fully explained in the general
observations on taxation.
the injurious effects of the mercantile system
have been fully exposed by dr. smith;
the whole aim of that system was to raise the
price of commodities, in the home market, by
prohibiting foreign competition; but this
system was no more injurious to the agricultural
classes than to any other part of the
community. by forcing capital into channels
where it would not otherwise flow, it
diminished the whole amount of commodities
produced. the price, though permanently
higher, was not sustained by scarcity, but by
difficulty of production; and therefore, though
the sellers of such commodities sold them for
a higher price, they did not sell them, after
the requisite quantity of capital was employed
in producing them, at higher profits.
the manufacturers themselves, as consumers,
had to pay an additional price for such
commodities, and therefore it cannot be
correctly said, that "the enhancement of price
occasioned by both, (corporation laws and
high duties on the importation of foreign
commodities,) is every where finally paid by
the landlords, farmers, and labourers of the
country."
it is the more necessary, to make this
remark, as in the present day the authority of
adam smith is quoted by country gentlemen
for imposing similar high duties on the importation
of foreign corn. because the cost
of production, and therefore the prices of
various manufactured commodities, are raised
to the consumer by one error in legislation,
the country has been called upon, on the
plea of justice, quietly to submit to fresh
exactions. because we all pay an additional
price for our linen, muslin, and cottons, it is
thought just that we should pay also an
additional price for our corn. because, in the
general distribution of the labour of the world,
we have prevented the greatest amount of
productions from being obtained by that
labour in manufactured commodities; we
should further punish ourselves by diminishing
the productive powers of the general
labour in the supply of raw produce. it
would be much wiser to acknowledge the
errors which a mistaken policy has induced
us to adopt, and immediately to commence a
gradual recurrence to the sound principles of
an universally free trade.
"i have already had occasion to remark,"
observes m. say, "in speaking of what is improperly
called the balance of trade, that if
it suits a merchant better to export the precious
metals to a foreign country than any
other goods, it is also the interest of the state
that he should export them, because the state
only gains or loses through the channel of its
citizens; and in what concerns foreign trade,
that which best suits the individual, best suits
also the state; therefore, by opposing obstacles
to the exportation which individuals would
be inclined to make of the precious metals,
nothing more is done, than to force them to
substitute some other commodity less profitable
to themselves, and to the state. it must
however be remarked, that i say only in what
concerns foreign trade; because the profits
which merchants make by their dealings with
their countrymen, as well as those which are
made in the exclusive commerce with colonies,
are not entirely gains for the state. in
the trade between individuals of the same
country, there is no other gain but the value
of an utility produced; que la valeur d'une
utilité produite." vol. i. p. . i cannot see
the distinction here made between the profits
of the home and foreign trade. the object
of all trade is to increase productions. if
for the purchase of a pipe of wine, i had it
in my power to export bullion, which was
bought with the value of the produce of 
days' labour, but government, by prohibiting
the exportation of bullion, should oblige
me to purchase my wine with a commodity
bought with the value of the produce of one
hundred and five days' labour, the produce
of five days' labour is lost to me, and, through
me, to the state. but if these transactions
took place between individuals, in different
provinces of the same country, the same advantage
would accrue both to the individual,
and, through him, to the country, if he were
unfettered in his choice of the commodities,
with which he made his purchases; and the
same disadvantage, if he were obliged by
government to purchase with the least beneficial
commodity. if a manufacturer could
work up with the same capital, more iron
where coals are plentiful, than he could where
coals are scarce, the country would be benefited
by the difference. but if coals were no
where plentiful, and he imported iron, and
could get this additional quantity, by the manufacture
of a commodity, with the same capital
and labour, he would in like manner
benefit his country by the additional quantity
of iron. in the th chap. of this work, i have
endeavoured to shew that all trade, whether
foreign or domestic, is beneficial, by increasing
the quantity, and not by increasing the
value of productions. we shall have no
greater value, whether we carry on the most
beneficial home and foreign trade, or in consequence
of being fettered by prohibitory laws,
we are obliged to content ourselves with the
least advantageous. the rate of profits, and
the value produced, will be the same. the
advantage always resolves itself into that
which m. say appears to confine to the home
trade; in both cases there is no other gain
but that of the value of an utilité produite.
it may not be uninstructive to consider the
effects of a bounty on the production of raw
produce and other commodities, with a view
to observe the application of the principles
which i have been endeavouring to establish,
with regard to the profits of stock, the annual
produce of the land and labour, and
the relative prices of manufactures and raw
produce. in the first place, let us suppose
that a tax was imposed on all commodities,
for the purpose of raising a fund to be employed
by government, in giving a bounty
on the production of corn. as no part of
such a tax would be expended by government,
and as all that was received from one
class of the people, would be returned to
another, the nation collectively would neither
be richer nor poorer, from such a tax and
bounty. it would be readily allowed, that
the tax on commodities by which the fund
was created, would raise the price of the
commodities taxed; all the consumers of those
commodities therefore would contribute towards
that fund; in other words, their natural
or necessary price being raised, so would too
their market price. but for the same reason
that the natural price of those commodities
would be raised, the natural price of corn
would be lowered; before the bounty was
paid on production, the farmers obtained as
great a price for their corn as was necessary
to repay them their rent and their expenses,
and afford them the general rate of profits;
after the bounty, they would receive more
than that rate, unless the price of corn fell
by a sum at least equal to the bounty. the
effect then of the tax and bounty, would be
to raise the price of commodities in a degree
equal to the tax levied on them, and to lower
the price of corn by a sum equal to the
bounty paid. it will be observed too, that
no permanent alteration could be made in
the distribution of capital between agriculture
and manufactures, because as there would be
no alteration, either in the amount of capital
or population, there would be precisely the
same demand for bread and manufactures.
the profits of the farmer would be no higher
than the general level, after the fall in the
price of corn; nor would the profits of the
manufacturer be lower after the rise of manufactured
goods; the bounty then would not
occasion any more capital to be employed on
the land in the production of corn, nor any
less in the manufacture of goods. but how
would the interest of the landlord be affected?
on the same principles that a tax on raw produce
would lower the corn rent of land, leaving
the money rent unaltered, a bounty on
production, which is directly the contrary
of a tax, would raise corn rent, leaving the
money rent unaltered. with the same money
rent the landlord would have a greater
price to pay for his manufactured goods, and
a less price for his corn; he would probably
therefore be neither richer nor poorer.
now whether such a measure would have
any operation on the wages of labour, would
depend on the question, whether the labourer,
in purchasing commodities, would pay as
much towards the tax, as he would receive
from the bounty, in the low price of his food.
if these two quantities were equal, wages
would continue unaltered; but if the commodities
taxed were not those consumed by
the labourer, his wages would fall, and his
employer would be benefited by the difference.
but this is no real advantage to his
employer; it would indeed operate to increase
the rate of his profits, as every fall of
wages must do; but in proportion as the labourer
contributed less to the fund from which
the bounty was paid, and which, let it be remembered,
must be raised, his employer must
contribute more; in other words, he would
contribute as much to the tax by his expenditure,
as he would receive in the effects of
the bounty and the higher rate of profits
together. he obtains a higher rate of profits
to requite him for his payment, not only
of his own quota of the tax, but of his labourer's
also; the remuneration which he receives
for his labourer's quota appears in diminished
wages, or, which is the same thing,
in increased profits; the remuneration for his
own appears in the diminution in the price
of the corn which he consumes, arising from
the bounty.
here it will be proper to remark the different
effects produced on profits from an
alteration in the real labour value of corn,
and an alteration in the relative value of corn,
from taxation and from bounties. if corn is
lowered in price by an alteration in its labour
price, not only will the rate of the profits of
stock be altered, but the absolute profits also;
which does not happen, as we have just seen,
when the fall is occasioned artificially by a
bounty. in the real fall in the value of corn,
arising from less labour being required to
produce one of the most important objects of
man's consumption, labour is rendered more
productive. with the same capital the same
labour is employed, and an increase of productions
is the result; not only then will
the rate of profits, but the absolute profits
of stock be increased; not only will each capitalist
have a greater money revenue, if he
employs the same money capital, but also
when that money is expended, it will procure
him a greater sum of commodities; his enjoyments
will be augmented. in the case of
the bounty, to balance the advantage which
he derives from the fall of one commodity,
he has the disadvantage of paying a price
more than proportionally high for another; he
receives an increased rate of profits in order
to enable him to pay this higher price; so
that his real situation is in no way improved:
though he gets a higher rate of profits, he has
no greater command of the produce of the
land and labour of the country. when the
fall in the value of corn is brought about by
natural causes, it is not counteracted by the
rise of other commodities; on the contrary,
they fall from the raw material falling from
which they are made: but when the fall in
corn is occasioned by artificial means, it is
always counteracted by a real rise in the value
of some other commodity, so that if corn
be bought cheaper, other commodities are
bought dearer.
this then is a further proof, that no particular
disadvantage arises from taxes on necessaries,
on account of their raising wages and
lowering the rate of profits. profits are indeed
lowered, but only to the amount of the
labourer's portion of the tax, which must at
all events, be paid either by his employer,
or by the consumer of the produce of the
labourer's work. whether you deduct l.
per annum from the employer's revenue,
or add l. to the prices of the commodities
which he consumes, can be of no other consequence
to him or to the community, than
as it may equally affect all other classes. if
it be added to the prices of the commodity, a
miser may avoid the tax by not consuming;
if it be indirectly deducted from every man's
revenue, he cannot avoid paying his fair proportion
of the public burthens.
a bounty on the production of corn then,
would produce no real effect on the annual
produce of the land and labour of the country,
although it would make corn relatively
cheap, and manufactures relatively dear.
but suppose now that a contrary measure
should be adopted, that a tax should be raised
on corn for the purpose of affording a fund
for a bounty on the production of commodities.
in such case, it is evident that corn would
be dear, and commodities cheap; labour would
continue at the same price, if the labourer
were as much benefited by the cheapness of
commodities as he was injured by the dearness
of corn; but if he were not, wages would
rise, and profits would fall, while money
rent would continue the same as before; profits
would fall, because, as we have just explained,
that would be the mode in which
the labourer's share of the tax would be paid
by the employers of labour. by the increase
of wages the labourer would be compensated
for the tax which he would pay in the increased
price of corn; by not expending any
part of his wages on the manufactured commodities,
he would receive no part of the
bounty; the bounty would be all received by
the employers, and the tax would be partly
paid by the employed; a remuneration would
be made to the labourers, in the shape of
wages, for this increased burden laid upon
them, and thus the rate of profits would be
reduced. in this case too there would be a
complicated measure producing no national
result whatever.
in considering this question, we have purposely
left out of our consideration the effect
of such a measure on foreign trade; we have
rather been supposing the case of an insulated
country, having no commercial connexion
with other countries. we have seen that
as the demand of the country for corn and
commodities would be the same, whatever
direction the bounty might take, there would
be no temptation to remove capital from one
employment to another: but this would no
longer be the case if there were foreign commerce,
and that commerce were free. by
altering the relative value of commodities
and corn, by producing so powerful an effect
on their natural prices, we should be applying
a strong stimulus to the exportation of
those commodities whose natural prices were
lowered, and an equal stimulus to the importation
of those commodities whose natural
prices were raised, and thus such a financial
measure might entirely alter the natural distribution
of employments; to the advantage
indeed of the foreign countries, but ruinously
to that in which so absurd a policy was
adopted.
"such parts only of the produce of land,"
says adam smith, "can commonly be brought
to market, of which the ordinary price is sufficient
to replace the stock which must be
employed in bringing them thither, together
with its ordinary profits. if the ordinary
price is more than this, the surplus part of it
will naturally go to the rent of land. if it is
not more, though the commodity can be brought
to market, it can afford no rent to the landlord.
whether the price is, or is not more, depends
upon the demand."
this passage would naturally lead the reader
to conclude that its author could not have
mistaken the nature of rent, and that he must
have seen that the quality of land which
the exigencies of society might require to be
taken into cultivation would depend on "the
ordinary price of its produce," whether it were
"sufficient to replace the stock, which must be
employed in cultivating it, together with its ordinary
profits."
but he had adopted the notion that "there
were some parts of the produce of land for
which the demand must always be such as
to afford a greater price than what is sufficient
to bring them to market;" and he considered
food as one of those parts.
he says, that "land, in almost any situation,
produces a greater quantity of food than
what is sufficient to maintain all the labour
necessary for bringing it to market, in the
most liberal way in which that labour is ever
maintained. the surplus too is always more
than sufficient to replace the stock which employed
that labour, together with its profits.
something, therefore, always remains for a
rent to the landlord."
but what proof does he give of this?—no
other than the assertion that "the most desert
moors in norway and scotland produce
some sort of pasture for cattle, of which the
milk and the increase are always more than
sufficient, not only to maintain all the labour
necessary for tending them, and to pay the ordinary
profit to the farmer, or owner of the herd
or flock, but to afford some small rent to the
landlord." now of this i may be permitted
to entertain a doubt. i believe that as yet in
every country, from the rudest to the most
refined, there is land of such a quality that it
cannot yield a produce more than sufficiently
valuable to replace the stock employed upon
it, together with the profits ordinary and
usual in that country. in america we all
know that this is the case, and yet no one
maintains that the principles which regulate
rent are different in that country and in
europe. but if it were true that england
had so far advanced in cultivation, that at
this time there were no lands remaining which
did not afford a rent, it would be equally
true that there formerly must have been such
lands; and that whether there be or not is of
no importance to this question, for it is the
same thing if there be any capital employed
in great britain on land which yields only
the return of stock with its ordinary profits,
whether it be employed on old or on new
land. if a farmer agrees for land on a lease
of seven or fourteen years, he may propose
to employ on it a capital of ,l., knowing
that at the existing price of grain and raw
produce, he can replace that part of his stock
which he is obliged to expend, pay his rent,
and obtain the general rate of profit. he
will not employ ,l., unless the last
,l. can be employed so productively as
to afford him the usual profits of stock. in
his calculation, whether he shall employ it or
not, he considers only whether the price of raw
produce is sufficient to replace his expenses
and profits, for he knows that he shall have
no additional rent to pay. even at the expiration
of his lease his rent will not be raised;
for if his landlord should require rent, because
this additional l. was employed, he would
withdraw it; since by employing it he gets,
by the supposition, only the ordinary and
usual profits which he may obtain by any
other employment of stock; and therefore he
cannot afford to pay rent for it, unless the price
of raw produce should further rise, or, which
is the same thing, unless the usual and general
rate of profits should fall.
if the comprehensive mind of adam smith
had been directed to this fact, he would not
have maintained that rent forms one of the
component parts of the price of raw produce;
for price is everywhere regulated by the return
obtained by this last portion of capital,
for which no rent whatever is paid. if he
had adverted to this principle, he would have
made no distinction between the law which
regulates the rent of mines and the rent of
land.
"whether a coal mine, for example," he
says, "can afford any rent, depends partly
upon its fertility, and partly upon its situation.
a mine of any kind may be said to be either
fertile or barren, according as the quantity
of mineral which can brought from it by a
certain quantity of labour, is greater or less than
what can be brought by an equal quantity from
the greater part of other mines of the same kind.
some coal mines, advantageously situated,
cannot be wrought on account of their barrenness.
the produce does not pay the expense.
they can afford neither profit nor
rent. there are some, of which the produce
is barely sufficient to pay the labour, and replace,
together with its ordinary profits, the
stock employed in working them. they afford
some profit to the undertaker of the
work, but no rent to the landlord. they
can be wrought advantageously by nobody
but the landlord, who being himself the undertaker
of the work, gets the ordinary profit
of the capital which he employs in it.
many coal mines in scotland are wrought in
this manner, and can be wrought in no other.
the landlord will allow no body else to work
them without paying some rent, and nobody
can afford to pay any.
"other coal mines in the same country,
sufficiently fertile, cannot be wrought on account
of their situation. a quantity of mineral
sufficient to defray the expense of
working, could be brought from the mine by
the ordinary, or even less than the ordinary
quantity of labour; but in an inland country,
thinly inhabited, and without either good
roads or water-carriage, this quantity could
not be sold." the whole principle of rent
is here admirably and perspicuously explained,
but every word is as applicable to
land as it is to mines; yet he affirms that "it
is otherwise in estates above ground. the
proportion, both of their produce and of their
rent, is in proportion to their absolute, and
not to their relative fertility." but suppose
that there were no land which did not afford
a rent; then, the amount of rent on the worst
land would be in proportion to the excess of
the value of the produce above the expenditure
of capital and the ordinary profits of
stock: the same principle would govern the
rent of land of a somewhat better quality, or
more favourably situated, and therefore the
rent of this land would exceed the rent of
that inferior to it, by the superior advantages
which it possessed; the same might be said
of that of the third quality, and so on to the
very best. is it not then as certain that it is the
relative fertility of the land which determines
the portion of the produce which shall be
paid for the rent of land, as it is that the
relative fertility of mines determines the portion
of their produce, which shall be paid for
the rent of mines?
after adam smith has declared that there
are some mines which can only be worked
by the owners, as they will afford only sufficient
to defray the expense of working, together
with the ordinary profits of the capital
employed, we should expect that he would admit
that it was these particular mines which
regulated the price of the produce. if the old
mines are insufficient to supply the quantity of
coal required, the price of coal will rise, and
will continue rising till the owner of a new
and inferior mine finds that he can obtain the
usual profits of stock by working his mine.
if his mine be tolerably fertile, the rise will
not be great before it becomes his interest so
to employ his capital; but if it be less productive,
it is evident that the price must
continue to rise till it will afford him the
means of paying his expenses, and obtaining
the ordinary profits of stock. it appears,
then, that it is always the least fertile mine
which regulates the price of coal. adam
smith, however, is of a different opinion: he
observes, that "the most fertile coal mine too
regulates the price of coals at all the other
mines in its neighbourhood. both the proprietor
and the undertaker of the work find,
the one that he can get a greater rent, the
other, that he can get a greater profit, by
somewhat underselling all their neighbours.
their neighbours are soon obliged to sell at
the same price, though they cannot so well
afford it, and though it always diminishes,
and sometimes takes away altogether, both
their rent and their profit. some works are
abandoned altogether; others can afford no
rent, and can be wrought only by the proprietor."
if the demand for coal should be
diminished, or if by new processes the quantity
should be increased, the price would fall,
and some mines would be abandoned; but in
every case, the price must be sufficient to pay
the expenses and profit of that mine which is
worked without being charged with rent. it
is therefore the least fertile mine which regulates
price. indeed it is so stated in another
place by adam smith himself, for he says,
"the lowest price at which coals can be sold
for any considerable time, is like that of all
other commodities, the price which is barely
sufficient to replace, together with its ordinary
profits, the stock which must be employed
in bringing them to market. at a coal mine
for which the landlord can get no rent, but
which he must either work himself, or let it
alone all together, the price of coals must
generally be nearly about this price."
but the same circumstance, namely, the
abundance and consequent cheapness of coals,
from whatever cause it may arise, which
would make it necessary to abandon those
mines on which there was no rent, or a
very moderate one, would, if there were
the same abundance, and consequent cheapness
of raw produce, render it necessary to
abandon the cultivation of those lands for
which either no rent was paid, or a very moderate
one. if, for example, potatoes should become
the general and common food of the
people, as rice is in some countries, one fourth,
or one half of the land now in cultivation,
would probably be immediately abandoned;
for if, as adam smith says, "an acre of potatoes
will produce six thousand weight of
solid nourishment, three times the quantity
produced by the acre of wheat," there could
not be for a considerable time such a multiplication
of people, as to consume the quantity
that might be raised on the land before
employed for the cultivation of wheat; much
land would consequently be abandoned, and
rent would fall; and it would not be till the
population had been doubled or trebled, that
the same quantity of land could be in cultivation,
and the rent paid for it as high as before.
neither would any greater proportion of
the gross produce be paid to the landlord,
whether it consisted of potatoes, which would
feed three hundred people, or of wheat, which
would feed only one hundred; because, though
the expenses of production would be very
much diminished if the labourer's wages were
chiefly regulated by the price of potatoes
and not by the price of wheat, and though
therefore the proportion of the whole gross
produce, after paying the labourers, would be
greatly increased, yet no part of that additional
proportion would go to rent, but the
whole invariably to profits,—profits being at
all times raised as wages fall, and lowered as
wages rise. whether wheat or potatoes were
cultivated, rent would be governed by the
same principle—it would be always equal to
the difference between the quantities of produce
obtained with equal capitals, either on
the same land or on land of different qualities;
and therefore, while lands of the same quality
were cultivated, and there was no alteration
in their relative fertility or advantages, rent
would always bear the same proportion to the
gross produce.
adam smith, however, maintains that the
proportion which falls to the landlord would
be increased by a diminished cost of production,
and therefore, that he would receive
a larger share as well as a larger quantity,
from an abundant than from a scanty produce.
"a rice field," he says, "produces a
much greater quantity of food than the most
fertile corn field. two crops in the year,
from thirty to sixty bushels each, are said to
be the ordinary produce of an acre. though
its cultivation therefore requires more labour,
a much greater surplus remains after maintaining
all that labour. in those rice countries
therefore, where rice is the common and
favourite vegetable food of the people, and
where the cultivators are chiefly maintained
with it, a greater share of this greater surplus
should belong to the landlord than in corn
countries."
mr. buchanan also remarks, that "it is
quite clear, that if any other produce which
the land yielded more abundantly than corn,
were to become the common food of the people,
the rent of the landlord would be improved
in proportion to its greater abundance."
if potatoes were to become the common
food of the people, there would be a long
interval during which the landlords would
suffer an enormous deduction of rent. they
would not probably receive nearly so much of
the sustenance of man as they now receive,
while that sustenance would fall to a third
of its present value. but all manufactured
commodities, on which a part of the landlord's
rent is expended, would suffer no other
fall than that which proceeded from the fall
in the raw material of which they were made,
and which would arise only from the greater
fertility of the land, which might then be
devoted to its production.
when from the progress of population,
land of the same quality as before should
be taken into cultivation, to produce the food
required, and the same number of men should
be employed in producing it, the landlord
would have not only the same proportion of
the produce as before, but that proportion
would also be of the same value as before.
rent then would be the same as before; profits,
however, would be much higher, because
the price of food, and consequently of wages,
would be much lower. high profits are
favourable to the accumulation of capital.
the demand for labour would further increase,
and landlords would be permanently benefited
by the increased demand for land.
the interest of the landlord is always opposed
to that of the consumer and manufacturer.
corn can be permanently at an advanced
price, only because additional labour is
necessary to produce it; because its cost of
production is increased. the same cause
invariably raises rent, it is therefore for the
interest of the landlord that the cost attending
the production of corn should be increased.
this, however, is not the interest of the consumer;
to him it is desirable that corn should
be low relatively to money and commodities,
for it is always with commodities or money
that corn is purchased. neither is it the interest
of the manufacturer that corn should
be at a high price, for the high price of corn
will occasion high wages, but will not raise
the price of his commodity. not only then
must more of his commodity, or, which comes
to the same thing, the value of more of
his commodity, be given in exchange for
the corn which he himself consumes, but
more must be given, or the value of more,
for wages to his workmen, for which he will
receive no remuneration. all classes therefore,
except the landlords, will be injured
by the increase in the price of corn. the
dealings between the landlord and the public
are not like dealings in trade, whereby both
the seller and buyer may equally be said to
gain, but the loss is wholly on one side, and
the gain wholly on the other; and if corn
could by importation be procured cheaper,
the loss in consequence of not importing is
far greater on one side, than the gain is on
the other.
adam smith never makes any distinction
between a low value of money, and a high
value of corn, and therefore infers, that the
interest of the landlord is not opposed to that
of the rest of the community. in the first
case, money is low relatively to all commodities;
in the other, corn is high relatively to
all. in the first, corn and commodities continue
at the same relative values, in the second,
corn is higher relatively to commodities
as well as money.
the following observation of adam smith
is applicable to a low value of money, but it
is totally inapplicable to a high value of corn.
"if importation (of corn) was at all times
free, our farmers and country gentlemen
would probably one year with another, get
less money for their corn than they do at
present, when importation is at most times
in effect prohibited; but the money which
they got would be of more value, would buy
more goods of all other kinds, and would employ
more labour. their real wealth, their
real revenue, therefore, would be the same as
at present, though it might be expressed by a
smaller quantity of silver; and they would
neither be disabled nor discouraged from cultivating
corn as much as they do at present.
on the contrary, as the rise in the real value
of silver, in consequence of lowering the
money price of corn, lowers somewhat the
money price of all other commodities, it gives
the industry of the country where it takes
place, some advantage in all foreign markets,
and thereby tends to encourage and increase
that industry. but the extent of the home
market for corn, must be in proportion to
the general industry of the country where it
grows, or to the number of those who produce
something else, to give in exchange for corn.
but in every country the home market, as it
is the nearest and most convenient, so is it
likewise the greatest and most important market
for corn. that rise in the real value of
silver, therefore, which is the effect of lowering
the average money price of corn, tends
to enlarge the greatest and most important
market for corn, and thereby to encourage,
instead of discouraging its growth."
a high or low money price of corn, arising
from the abundance and cheapness of
gold and silver, is of no importance to the
landlord, as every sort of produce would be
equally affected, just as adam smith describes;
but a relatively high price of corn is at
all times greatly beneficial to the landlord, as
with the same quantity of corn it not only
gives him a command over a greater quantity
of money, but over a greater quantity
of every commodity which money can purchase.
adam smith, in his observations on colonial
trade, has shewn, most satisfactorily, the advantages
of a free trade, and the injustice
suffered by colonies, in being prevented by
their mother countries, from selling their
produce at the dearest market, and buying
their manufactures and stores at the cheapest.
he has shewn, that by permitting every
country freely to exchange the produce of
its industry when and where it pleases, the
best distribution of the labour of the world
will be effected, and the greatest abundance
of the necessaries and enjoyments of human
life will be secured.
he has attempted also to shew, that this
freedom of commerce, which undoubtedly promotes
the interest of the whole, promotes also
that of each particular country; and that the
narrow policy adopted in the countries of
europe respecting their colonies, is not less
injurious to the mother countries themselves,
than to the colonies whose interests are sacrificed.
"the monopoly of the colony trade," he
says, "like all the other mean and malignant
expedients of the mercantile system, depresses
the industry of all other countries,
but chiefly that of the colonies, without, in
the least, increasing, but on the contrary diminishing,
that of the country in whose favour
it is established."
this part of his subject, however, is not
treated in so clear and convincing a manner
as that in which he shews the injustice of this
system towards the colony.
without affirming or denying, that the
actual practice of europe with regard to their
colonies is injurious to the mother countries,
i may be permitted to doubt whether a
mother country may not sometimes be benefited
by the restraints to which she subjects
her colonial possessions. who can doubt,
for example, that if england were the colony
of france, the latter country would be benefited
by a heavy bounty paid by england on
the exportation of corn, cloth, or any other
commodities? in examining the question of
bounties, on the supposition of corn being at
l. per quarter in this country, we saw, that
with a bounty of s. per quarter, on exportation
in england, corn would have been reduced
to l. s. in france. now, if corn
had previously been at l. s. per quarter in
france, the french consumers would have
been benefited by s. per quarter on all imported
corn; if the natural price of corn in
france were before l., they would have
gained the whole bounty of s. per quarter.
france would thus be benefited by the loss
sustained by england: she would not gain a
part only of what england lost, but in some
cases the whole.
it may however be said, that a bounty
on exportation is a measure of internal policy,
and could not easily be imposed by the mother
country.
if it would suit the interests of jamaica
and holland to make an exchange of the
commodities which they respectively produce,
without the intervention of england, it is
quite certain, that by their being prevented
from so doing, the interests of holland and
jamaica would suffer; but if jamaica is
obliged to send her goods to england, and
there exchange them for dutch goods, an
english capital, or english agency, will be employed
in a trade in which it would not otherwise
be engaged. it is allured thither by a
bounty, not paid by england, but by holland
and jamaica.
that the loss sustained, through a disadvantageous
distribution of labour in two
countries, may be beneficial to one of them,
while the other is made to suffer more than
the loss actually belonging to such a distribution,
has been stated by adam smith himself;
which, if true, will at once prove that a
measure, which may be greatly hurtful to a
colony, may be partially beneficial to the mother
country.
speaking of treaties of commerce, he says,
"when a nation binds itself by treaty, either
to permit the entry of certain goods from one
foreign country which it prohibits from all
others, or to exempt the goods of one country
from duties to which it subjects those of
all others, the country, or at least the merchants
and manufacturers of the country,
whose commerce is so favoured, must necessarily
derive great advantage from the treaty.
those merchants and manufacturers enjoy a
sort of monopoly in the country, which is so
indulgent to them. that country becomes a
market both more extensive and more advantageous
for their goods; more extensive, because
the goods of other nations, being either
excluded or subjected to heavier duties, it
takes off a greater quantity of them; more
advantageous, because the merchants of the
favoured country enjoying a sort of monopoly
there, will often sell their goods for a
better price than if exposed to the free competition
of all other nations."
let the two nations, between which the
commercial treaty is made, be the mother
country and her colony, and adam smith,
it is evident, admits, that a mother country
may be benefited by oppressing her colony.
it may, however, be again remarked, that
unless the monopoly of the foreign market
be in the hands of an exclusive company, no
more will be paid for commodities by foreign
purchasers than by home purchasers; the
price which they will both pay will not differ
greatly from their natural price in the country
where they are produced. england, for
example, will, under ordinary circumstances,
always be able to buy french goods, at
the natural price of those goods in france,
and france would have an equal privilege of
buying english goods at their natural price
in england. but at these prices, goods
would be bought without a treaty. of what
advantage or disadvantage then is the treaty
to either party?
the disadvantage of the treaty to the importing
country would be this: it would bind
her to purchase a commodity, from england
for example, at the natural price of that commodity
in england, when she might perhaps
have bought it at the much lower natural
price of some other country. it occasions
then a disadvantageous distribution of the
general capital, which falls chiefly on the
country bound by its treaty to buy in the
least productive market; but it gives no advantage
to the seller on account of any supposed
monopoly, for he is prevented by the
competition of his own countrymen from selling
his goods above their natural price; at
which he would sell them, whether he exported
them to france, spain, or the west indies,
or sold them for home consumption.
in what then does the advantage of the stipulation
in the treaty consist? it consists in this:
these particular goods could not have been
made in england for exportation, but for the
privilege which she alone had of serving this
particular market; for the competition of that
country, where the natural price was lower,
would have deprived her of all chance of
selling those commodities. this, however,
would have been of little importance, if
england were quite secure that she could sell
to the same amount any other goods which she
might fabricate, either in the french market,
or with equal advantage in any other. the
object which england has in view, is, for
example, to buy a quantity of french wines
of the value of l.—she desires then to sell
goods somewhere by which she may get l.
for this purpose. if france gives her a monopoly
of the cloth market, she will readily
export cloth for this purpose; but if the trade
is free, the competition of other countries
may prevent the natural price of cloth in
england from being sufficiently low to enable
her to get l. by the sale of cloth, and to
obtain the usual profits by such an employment
of her stock. the industry of england
must be employed then on some other commodity;
but there may be none of her productions
which, at the existing value of money,
she can afford to sell at the natural price of
other countries. what is the consequence?
the wine drinkers of england are still willing
to give l. for their wine, and consequently
l. in money is exported to france for that
purpose. by this exportation of money its
value is raised in england, and lowered in
other countries; and with it the natural price
of all commodities produced by british industry
is also lowered. the advance in the
price of money is the same thing as the decline
in the price of commodities. to obtain
l., british commodities may now be exported;
for at their reduced natural price
they may now enter into competition with
the goods of other countries. more goods
are sold, however, at the low prices to obtain
the l. required, which, when obtained,
will not procure the same quantity of wine;
because, whilst the diminution of money in
england has lowered the natural price of
goods there, the increase of money in france
has raised the natural price of goods and wine
in france. less wine then will be imported
into england, in exchange for its commodities,
when the trade is perfectly free, than
when she is peculiarly favoured by commercial
treaties. the rate of profits however
will not have varied; money will have altered
in relative value in the two countries, and the
advantage gained by france will be the obtaining
a greater quantity of english, in exchange
for a given quantity of french goods,
while the loss sustained by england will consist
in obtaining a smaller quantity of french
goods in exchange for a given quantity of
those of england.
foreign trade then, whether fettered, encouraged,
or free, will always continue, whatever
may be the comparative difficulty of production
in different countries; but it can
only be regulated by altering the natural
price, not the natural value at which commodities
can be produced in those countries, and
that is effected by altering the distribution of
the precious metals. this explanation confirms
the opinion which i have elsewhere
given, that there is not a tax, a bounty, or a
prohibition on the importation or exportation
commodities which does not occasion a
different distribution of the precious metals,
and which does not therefore every where
alter both the natural and the market price
of commodities.
it is evident then, that the trade with a
colony may be so regulated, that it shall at
the same time be less beneficial to the colony,
and more beneficial to the mother country,
than a perfectly free trade. as it is disadvantageous
to a single consumer to be restricted
in his dealings to one particular shop, so is it
disadvantageous for a nation of consumers to
be obliged to purchase of one particular
country. if the shop or the country afforded
the goods required the cheapest, they
would be secure of selling them without any
such exclusive privilege; and if they did not
sell cheaper, the general interest would require
that they should not be encouraged to
continue a trade which they could not carry
on at an equal advantage with others. the
shop, or the selling country, might lose by the
change of employments, but the general
benefit is never so fully secured, as by the
most productive distribution of the general
capital; that is to say, by an universally free
trade.
an increase in the cost of production of a
commodity, if it be an article of the first necessity,
will not necessarily diminish its consumption;
for although the general power of the
purchasers to consume, is diminished by the
rise of any one commodity, yet they may relinquish
the consumption of some other commodity
whose cost of production has not risen.
in that case, the quantity supplied will be in
the same proportion to the demand as before;
the cost of production only will have increased,
and yet the price will rise, and must
rise, to place the profits of the producer of the
enhanced commodity on a level with the
profits derived from other trades.
m. say acknowledges that the cost of production
is the foundation of price, and yet in
various parts of his book he maintains that
price is regulated by the proportion which
demand bears to supply. the real and ultimate
regulator of the relative value of any
two commodities, is the cost of their production,
and neither the respective quantities
which may be produced, nor the competition
amongst the purchasers.
according to adam smith the colony trade,
by being one in which british capital only
can be employed, has raised the rate of
profits of all other trades; and as in his
opinion high profits, as well as high wages,
raise the prices of commodities, the monopoly
of the colony trade has been, according to
him, injurious to the mother country; as it
has diminished her power of selling manufactured
commodities as cheap as other countries.
he says, that "in consequence of the monopoly,
the increase of the colony trade has not
so much occasioned an addition to the trade
which great britain had before, as a total
change in its direction. secondly, this monopoly
has necessarily contributed to keep
up the rate of profit in all the different
branches of british trade, higher than it
naturally would have been, had all nations
been allowed a free trade to the british
colonies." "but whatever raises in any
country the ordinary rate of profit higher
than it otherwise would be, necessarily subjects
that country both to an absolute, and to a
relative disadvantage in every branch of trade
of which she has not the monopoly. it
subjects her to an absolute disadvantage, because
in such branches of trade, her merchants
cannot get this greater profit without selling
dearer than they otherwise would do, both
the goods of foreign countries which they
import into their own, and the goods of their
own country which they export to foreign
countries. their own country must both buy
dearer and sell dearer; must both buy less
and sell less; must both enjoy less and produce
less than she otherwise would do."
"our merchants frequently complain of
the high wages of british labour as the cause
of their manufactures being undersold in
foreign markets; but they are silent about the
high profits of stock. they complain of the
extravagant gain of other people, but they
say nothing of their own. the high profits
of british stock, however, may contribute
towards raising the price of british manufacture
in many cases as much, and in some
perhaps more, than the high wages of british
labour."
i allow that the monopoly of the colony
trade will change, and often prejudicially,
the direction of capital; but from what i
have already said on the subject of profits,
it will be seen that any change from one
foreign trade to another, or from home to foreign
trade, cannot, in my opinion, affect the
rate of profits. the injury suffered will be
what i have just described; there will be a
worse distribution of the general capital and
industry, and therefore less will be produced.
the natural price of commodities will be
raised, and therefore, though the consumer will
be able to purchase to the same money value,
he will obtain a less quantity of commodities.
it will be seen too, that if it even had the
effect of raising profits, it would not occasion
the least alteration in prices; prices being regulated
neither by wages nor profits.
and does not adam smith agree in this
opinion, when he says, that "the prices of
commodities, or the value of gold and silver,
as compared with commodities, depends upon
the proportion between the quantity of labour
which is necessary, in order to bring a certain
quantity of gold and silver to market, and
that which is necessary to bring thither a
certain quantity of any other sort of goods?"
that quantity will not be affected, whether
profits be high or low, or wages low or high.
how then can prices be raised by high profits?
adam smith constantly magnifies the advantages
which a country derives from a large
gross, rather than a large net income. "in
proportion as a greater share of the capital
of a country is employed in agriculture," he
says, "the greater will be the quantity of productive
labour which it puts into motion within
the country; as will likewise be the value
which its employment adds to the annual
produce of the land and labour of the society.
after agriculture, the capital employed
in manufactures puts into motion the greatest
quantity of productive labour, and adds
the greatest value to the annual produce.
that which is employed in the trade of exportation
has the least effect of any of the
three."
granting for a moment that this were true;
what would be the advantage resulting to a
country from the employment of a great quantity
of productive labour, if, whether it employed
that quantity or a smaller, its net
rent and profits together would be the same.
the whole produce of the land and labour
of every country is divided into three portions;
of these, one portion is devoted to
wages, another to profits, and the other to
rent. it is from the two last portions only,
that any deductions can be made for taxes,
or for savings; the former, if moderate, constituting
always the necessary expenses of
production. to an individual, with a capital
of ,l., whose profits were l. per annum,
it would be a matter quite indifferent,
whether his capital would employ a hundred,
or a thousand men, whether the commodity
produced sold for ,l., or for ,l., provided,
in all cases, his profits were not diminished
below l. is not the real interest of
the nation similar? provided its net real income,
its rent and profits be the same, it is
of no importance whether the nation consists
of ten or of twelve millions of inhabitants. its
power of supporting fleets and armies, and
all species of unproductive labour, must be
in proportion to its net, and not in proportion
to its gross income. if five millions of
men could produce as much food and clothing
as was necessary for ten millions, food
and clothing for five millions would be the net
revenue. would it be of any advantage to the
country, that to produce this same net revenue,
seven millions of men should be required,
that is to say, that seven millions should be
employed to produce food and clothing sufficient
for twelve millions? the food and clothing
of five millions would be still the net
revenue. the employing a greater number
of men would enable us neither to add a
man to our army and navy, nor to contribute
one guinea more in taxes.
it is not on the grounds of any supposed
advantage accruing from a large population,
or of the happiness that may be enjoyed by
a greater number of human beings, that adam
smith supports the preference of that employment
of capital, which gives motion to the
greatest quantity of industry, but expressly
on the ground of its increasing the power of
the country; for he says, that "the riches,
and, so far as power depends upon riches,
the power of every country must always be
in proportion to the value of its annual produce,
the fund from which all taxes must
ultimately be paid." it must however be
obvious, that the power of paying taxes, is in
proportion to the net, and not in proportion
to the gross revenue.
in the distribution of employments amongst
all countries, the capital of poorer nations will
be naturally employed in those pursuits, wherein
a great quantity of labour is supported at
home, because in such countries the food and
necessaries for an increasing population can
be most easily procured. in rich countries,
on the contrary, where food is dear, capital
will naturally flow, when trade is free, into
those occupations, wherein the least quantity
of labour is required to be maintained at
home: such as the carrying trade, the distant
foreign trade, where profits are in proportion
to the capital, and not in proportion to the
quantity of labour employed.
although i admit, that from the nature of
rent, a given capital employed in agriculture,
on any but the land last cultivated, puts in motion
a greater quantity of labour than an equal
capital employed in manufactures and trade,
yet i cannot admit that there is any difference
in the quantity of labour employed by a capital
engaged in the home trade, and an equal
capital engaged in the foreign trade.
"the capital which sends scots manufactures
to london, and brings back english
corn and manufactures to edinburgh," says
adam smith, "necessarily replaces, by every
such operation, two british capitals which
had both been employed in the agriculture or
manufactures of great britain.
"the capital employed in purchasing foreign
goods for home consumption, when this
purchase is made with the produce of domestic
industry, replaces too, by every such operation,
two distinct capitals; but one of them
only is employed in supporting domestic industry.
the capital which sends british goods
to portugal, and brings back portuguese
goods to great britain, replaces, by every
such operation, only one british capital, the
other is a portuguese one. though the returns,
therefore, of the foreign trade of consumption
should be as quick as the home
trade, the capital employed in it will give
but one half the encouragement to the industry
or productive labour of the country."
this argument appears to me to be fallacious;
for though two capitals, one portuguese
and one english, be employed, as dr.
smith supposes, still a capital will be employed
in the foreign trade, double of what
would be employed in the home trade. suppose
that scotland employs a capital of a
thousand pounds in making linen, which she
exchanges for the produce of a similar capital
employed in making silks in england.
two thousand pounds, and a proportional
quantity of labour will be employed by the
two countries. suppose now, that england
discovers, that she can import more linen
from germany, for the silks which she before
exported to scotland, and that scotland discovers
that she can obtain more silks from
france in return for her linen, than she before
obtained from england,—will not england
and scotland immediately cease trading
with each other, and will not the home trade
of consumption be changed for a foreign
trade of consumption? but although two additional
capitals will enter into this trade, the
capital of germany and that of france, will
not the same amount of scotch and of english
capital continue to be employed, and
will it not give motion to the same quantity
of industry as when it was engaged in the
home trade?
it is not my intention to detain the reader by
any long dissertation on the subject of money.
so much has already been written on currency,
that of those who give their attention to such
subjects, none but the prejudiced are ignorant
of its true principles. i shall therefore take
only a brief survey of some of the general
laws which regulate its quantity and value.
gold and silver, like all other commodities,
are valuable only in proportion to the quantity
of labour necessary to produce them, and
bring them to market. gold is about fifteen
times dearer than silver, not because there is
a greater demand for it, nor because the
supply of silver is fifteen times greater than
that of gold, but solely because fifteen times
the quantity of labour is necessary to procure
a given quantity of it.
the quantity of money that can be employed
in a country must depend on its value:
if gold alone were employed for the circulation
of commodities, a quantity would be
required, one fifteenth only of what would
be necessary, if silver were made use of for
the same purpose.
a circulation can never be so abundant as
to overflow; for by diminishing its value, in
the same proportion you will increase its
quantity, and by increasing its value, diminish
its quantity.
while the state coins money, and charges
no seignorage, money will be of the same
value as any other piece of the same metal
of equal weight and fineness; but if the state
charges a seignorage for coinage, the coined
piece of money will generally exceed the
value of the uncoined piece of metal by the
whole seignorage charged, because it will require
a greater quantity of labour, or, which
is the same thing, the value of the produce
of a greater quantity of labour, to procure it.
while the state alone coins, there can be no
limit to this charge of seignorage; for by limiting
the quantity of coin, it can be raised to
any conceivable value.
it is on this principle that paper money circulates:
the whole charge for paper money may
be considered as seignorage. though it has
no intrinsic value, yet, by limiting its quantity,
its value in exchange is as great as an
equal denomination of coin, or of bullion in
that coin. on the same principle too, namely,
by a limitation of its quantity, a debased coin
would circulate at the value it should bear,
if it were of the legal weight and fineness,
not at the value of the quantity of metal which
it actually contained. in the history of the
british coinage, we find accordingly that the
currency was never depreciated in the same
proportion that it was debased; the reason of
which was, that it never was multiplied in
proportion to its diminished value.
after the establishment of banks, the state
has not the sole power of coining or issuing
money. the currency may as effectually be
increased by paper as by coin; so that if a
state were to debase its money, and limit its
quantity, it could not support its value, because
the banks would have an equal power
of adding to the whole quantity of circulation.
on these principles it will be seen, that it
is not necessary that paper money should be
payable in specie to secure its value; it is
only necessary that its quantity should be regulated
according to the value of the metal
which is declared to be the standard. if
the standard were gold of a given weight
and fineness, paper might be increased with
every fall in the value of gold, or, which is
the same thing in its effects, with every rise in
the price of goods.
"by issuing too great a quantity of paper,"
says dr. smith, "of which the excess was continually
returning, in order to be exchanged
for gold and silver, the bank of england was,
for many years together, obliged to coin gold
to the extent of between eight hundred thousand
pounds and a million a year, or at an
average, about eight hundred and fifty thousand
pounds. for this great coinage the
bank, in consequence of the worn and degraded
state into which the gold coin had
fallen a few years ago, was frequently obliged
to purchase bullion, at the high price of four
pounds an ounce, which it soon after issued
in coin at l. s. ½d. an ounce, losing in this
manner between two and a half and three
per cent. upon the coinage of so very large a
sum. though the bank therefore paid no
seignorage, though the government was properly
at the expense of the coinage, this liberality
of government did not prevent altogether
the expense of the bank."
on the principle above stated, it appears
to me most clear, that by not re-issuing the
paper thus brought in, the value of the whole
currency, of the degraded as well as the new
gold coin, would have been raised; when all
demands on the bank would have ceased.
mr. buchanan, however, is not of this
opinion, for he says, "that the great expense
to which the bank was at this time exposed,
was occasioned, not, as dr. smith seems to
imagine, by any imprudent issue of paper, but
by the debased state of the currency, and the
consequent high price of bullion. the bank,
it will be observed, having no other way of
procuring guineas but by sending bullion
to the mint to be coined, was always forced
to issue new coined guineas, in exchange
for its returned notes; and when the currency
was generally deficient in weight, and
the price of bullion high in proportion, it
became profitable to draw these heavy
guineas from the bank in exchange for its
paper; to convert them into bullion, and
to sell them with a profit for bank paper, to
be again returned to the bank for a new
supply of guineas, which were again melted
and sold. to this drain of specie, the bank
must always be exposed while the currency
is deficient in weight, as both an easy and a
certain profit then arises from the constant
interchange of paper for specie. it may be
remarked, however, that to whatever inconvenience
and expense the bank was then exposed
by the drain of its specie, it never was
imagined necessary to rescind the obligation
to pay money for its notes."
mr. buchanan evidently thinks that the
whole currency must, necessarily, be brought
down to the level of the value of the debased
pieces; but surely by a diminution of the
quantity of the currency, the whole that remains
can be elevated to the value of the
best pieces.
dr. smith appears to have forgotten his
own principle, in his argument on colony
currency. instead of ascribing the depreciation
of that paper to its too great abundance,
he asks whether, allowing the colony
security to be perfectly good, a hundred
pounds, payable fifteen years hence, would
be equally valuable with a hundred pounds
to be paid immediately? i answer yes, if it
be not too abundant.
experience however shews, that neither a
state nor a bank ever have had the unrestricted
power of issuing paper money, without
abusing that power: in all states, therefore,
the issue of paper money ought to be
under some check and control; and none
seems so proper for that purpose, as that of
subjecting the issuers of paper money to the
obligation of paying their notes, either in
gold coin or bullion.
a currency is in its most perfect state when
it consists wholly of paper money, but of
paper money of an equal value with the gold
which it professes to represent. the use of
paper instead of gold substitutes the cheapest
in place of the most expensive medium, and
enables the country, without loss to any individual,
to exchange all the gold which it before
used for this purpose, for raw materials,
utensils, and food, by the use of which both
its wealth and its enjoyments are increased.
in a national point of view it is of no importance
whether the issuers of this well regulated
paper money, be the government or a
bank, it will on the whole be equally productive
of riches, whether it be issued by one
or by the other; but it is not so with respect
to the interest of individuals. in a country
where the market rate of interest is  per
cent., and where the state requires for a particular
expense ,l. per annum, it is a
question of importance to the individuals of
that country, whether they must be taxed to
pay this ,l. per annum, or whether they
could raise it without taxes. suppose that
a million of money should be required to fit
out an expedition. if the state issued a million
of paper, and displaced a million of coin,
the expedition would be fitted out without
any charge to the people; but if a bank issued
a million of paper, and lent it to government
at  per cent., thereby displacing a million
of coin, the country would be charged with a
continual tax of ,l. per annum: the people
would pay the tax, the bank would receive
it, and the society would in either case be as
wealthy as before; the expedition would have
been really fitted out by the improvement of
our system, by rendering capital, of the value
of a million, productive in the form of commodities,
instead of letting it remain unproductive
in the form of coin; but the advantage
would always be in favour of the issuers
of paper; and as the state represents the
people, the people would have saved the tax,
if they, and not the bank, had issued this
million.
i have already observed, that if there were
perfect security that the power of issuing paper
money would not be abused, it would be of
no importance with respect to the riches of
the country collectively, by whom it was
issued; and i have now shewn that the public
would have a direct interest that the issuers
should be the state, and not a company
of merchants or bankers. the danger, however,
is, that this power would be more likely
to be abused, if in the hands of government,
than if in the hands of a banking company.
a company would, it is said, be more under
the control of law, and although it might
be their interest to extend their issues beyond
the bounds of discretion, they would be limited
and checked by the power which individuals
would have of calling for bullion or
specie. it is argued that the same check
would not be long respected, if government
had the privilege of issuing money; that they
would be too apt to consider present convenience,
rather than future security, and might,
therefore, on the alleged grounds of expediency,
be too much inclined to remove the
checks, by which the amount of their issues
was controlled.
under an arbitrary government this objection
would have great force, but in a free
country, with an enlightened legislature, the
power of issuing paper money, under the requisite
checks of convertibility at the will of
the holder, might be safely lodged in the
hands of commissioners appointed for that
special purpose, and they might be made totally
independent of the control of ministers.
the sinking fund is managed by commissioners,
responsible only to parliament, and
the investment of the money entrusted to
their charge, proceeds with the utmost regularity;
what reason can there be to doubt
that the issues of paper money might be regulated
with equal fidelity, if placed under similar
management?
it may be said, that although the advantage
accruing to the state, and, therefore, to
the public, from issuing paper money, is sufficiently
manifest, as it would exchange a portion
of the national debt, on which interest
is paid by the public, into a debt bearing
no interest, yet it would be disadvantageous
to commerce, as it would preclude the
merchants from borrowing money, and getting
their bills discounted, the method in which
bank paper is partly issued.
this, however, is to suppose that money
could not be borrowed, if the bank did not
lend it, and that the market rate of interest
and profit depends on the amounts of the issues
of money, and on the channel through
which it is issued. but as a country would
have no deficiency of cloth, of wine, or any
other commodity, if they had the means of
paying for it, in the same manner neither
would there be any deficiency of money to
be lent, if the borrowers offered good security,
and were willing to pay the market rate of
interest for it.
in another part of this work, i have endeavoured
to shew, that the real value of a
commodity is regulated, not by the accidental
advantages which may be enjoyed by
some of its producers, but by the real difficulties
encountered by that producer who is
least favoured. it is so with respect to the
interest for money; it is not regulated by the
rate at which the bank will lend, whether it
be , , or  per cent., but by the rate of
profits, which can be made by the employment
of capital, and which is totally independent
of the quantity, or of the value of
money. whether a bank lent one million,
ten millions, or a hundred millions, they
would not permanently alter the market rate
of interest; they would alter only the value
of the money which they thus issued. in one
case  or  times more money might be required
to carry on the same business, than
what might be required in the other. the
applications to the bank for money, then,
depend on the comparison between the rate
of profits that may be made by the employment
of it, and the rate at which they are
willing to lend it. if they charge less than
the market rate of interest, there is no amount
of money which they might not lend,—if they
charge more than that rate, none but spendthrifts
and prodigals would be found to borrow
of them. we accordingly find, that when
the market rate of interest exceeds the rate
of  per cent. at which the bank uniformly
lend, the discount office is besieged with applicants
for money; and, on the contrary,
when the market rate is even temporarily
under  per cent. the clerks of that office have
no employment.
the reason then why for the last twenty
years, the bank is said to have given so much
aid to commerce, by assisting the merchants
with money, is, because they have, during
that whole period, lent money below the
market rate of interest; below that rate at
which the merchants could have borrowed
elsewhere; but i confess that to me this
seems rather an objection to their establishment,
than an argument in favour of it.
what should we say of an establishment
which should regularly supply half the clothiers
with their wool under the market price?
of what benefit would it be to the community?
it would not extend our trade, because
the wool would equally have been bought,
if they had charged the market price for it.
it would not lower the price of cloth to the
consumer, because the price, as i have said
before, would be regulated by the cost of its
production to those who were the least favoured.
its sole effect then, would be to
swell the profits of a part of the clothiers
beyond the general and common rate of profits.
the establishment would be deprived
of its fair profits, and another part of the
community would be in the same degree benefited.
now this is precisely the effect of
our banking establishments; a rate of interest
is fixed by the law below that at
which it can be borrowed in the market, and
at this rate the bank are required to lend, or
not to lend at all. from the nature of their
establishment, they have large funds which
they can only dispose of in this way; and a
part of the traders of the country are unfairly,
and for the country unprofitably, benefited
by being enabled to supply themselves with an
instrument of trade, at a less charge than those
who must be influenced only by market price.
the whole business, which the whole community
can carry on, depends on the quantity
of capital, that is, of its raw material, machinery,
food, vessels, &c., employed in production.
after a well regulated paper money
is established, these can neither be increased
nor diminished by the operations of
banking. if then the state were to issue the
paper money of the country, although it
should never discount a bill, or lend one
shilling to the public, there would be no
alteration in the amount of trade; for we
should have the same quantity of raw materials,
of machinery, food, and ships; and it
is probable too, that the same amount of money
might be lent, not at  per cent. indeed,
a rate fixed by law, but at , , or  per
cent., the result of the fair competition in the
market between the lenders and the borrowers.
adam smith speaks of the advantages derived
by merchants from the superiority of the
scotch mode of affording accommodation to
trade, over the english mode, by means of
cash accounts. these cash accounts are
credits given by the scotch banker to his
customers, in addition to the bills which he
discounts for them; but as the banker, in proportion
as he advances money, and sends it
into circulation in one way, is debarred from
issuing so much in the other, it is difficult to
perceive in what the advantage consists. if
the whole circulation will bear only one million
of paper, one million only will be circulated;
and it can be of no real importance
either to the banker or merchant, whether
the whole be issued in discounting bills, or
a part be so issued, and the remainder be issued
by means of these cash accounts.
it may perhaps be necessary to say a few
words on the subject of the two metals, gold
and silver, which are employed in currency,
particularly as this question appears to perplex,
in many people's minds, the plain and simple
principles of currency. "in england," says
dr. smith, "gold was not considered as a
legal tender for a long time after it was coined
into money. the proportion between the
values of gold and silver money was not
fixed by any public law or proclamation;
but was left to be settled by the market. if
a debtor offered payment in gold, the creditor
might either reject such payment altogether,
or accept of it at such a valuation of
the gold, as he and his debtor could agree
upon."
in this state of things it is evident that a
guinea might sometimes pass for s. or more,
and sometimes for s. or less, depending
entirely on the alteration in the relative
market value of gold and silver. all the
variations too in the value of gold, as well
as in the value of silver, would be rated in
the gold coin,—it would appear as if silver
was invariable, and that gold only was subject
to rise or fall. thus, although a guinea
passed for s. instead of s. gold might not
have varied in value, the variation might
have been wholly confined to the silver, and
therefore s. might have been of no more
value than s. were before. and on the
contrary, the whole variation might have
been in the gold: a guinea, which was
worth s. might have risen to the value of
s.
if now we suppose this silver currency to
be debased by clipping, and also increased in
quantity, a guinea might pass for s.; for the
silver in s. of such debased money might
be of no more value than the gold in one
guinea. by restoring the silver currency to
its mint value, silver money would rise; but
it would appear as if gold fell, for a guinea
would probably be of no more value than 
of such good shillings.
if now gold be also made a legal tender,
and every debtor be at liberty to discharge a
debt by the payment of  shillings, or twenty
guineas, for every l. that he owes, he will
pay in one or the other according as he can
most cheaply discharge his debt. if with
five quarters of wheat he can procure as
much gold bullion as the mint will coin into
twenty guineas, and for the same wheat as
much silver bullion as the mint will coin for
him into  shillings, he will prefer paying
in silver, because he would be a gainer of ten
shillings by so paying his debt. but if on the
contrary he could obtain with this wheat as
much gold as would be coined into twenty
guineas and a half, and as much silver only as
would coin into  shillings, he would
naturally prefer paying his debt in gold. if
the quantity of gold which he could procure
could be coined only into twenty guineas,
and the quantity of silver into  shillings, it
would be a matter of perfect indifference to
him in which money, silver or gold, it was
that he paid his debt. it is not then a matter
of chance; it is not because gold is better
fitted for carrying on the circulation of a rich
country, that gold is ever preferred for the
purpose of paying debts; but simply because
it is the interest of the debtor so to pay them.
during a long period previous to , the
year of the restriction on the bank payments
in coin, gold was so cheap, compared with
silver, that it suited the bank of england,
and all other debtors, to purchase gold in the
market, and not silver, for the purpose of
carrying it to the mint to be coined, as they
could in that coined metal more cheaply discharge
their debts. the silver currency was
during a great part of this period very much
debased, but it existed in a degree of scarcity,
and therefore on the principle which i have
before explained, it never sunk in its current
value. though so debased, it was still the
interest of debtors to pay in the gold coin.
if indeed the quantity of this debased silver
coin had been enormously great, or if the
mint had issued such debased pieces, it might
have been the interest of debtors to pay in
this debased money; but its quantity was
limited and it sustained its value, and therefore
gold was in practice the real standard of
currency.
that it was so, is no where denied; but it
has been contended that it was made so by
the law which declared that silver should not
be a legal tender for any debt exceeding l.,
unless by weight, according to the mint
standard.
but this law did not prevent any debtor
from paying any debt, however large its
amount, in silver currency fresh from the
mint; that the debtor did not pay in this metal,
was not a matter of chance, nor a matter of
compulsion, but wholly the effect of choice; it
did not suit him to take silver to the mint, it
did suit him to take gold thither. it is probable
that if the quantity of this debased
silver in circulation had been enormously
great, and also a legal tender, that a guinea
would have been again worth thirty shillings;
but it would have been the debased shilling
that would have fallen in value, and not the
guinea that had risen.
it appears then, that whilst each of the two
metals was equally a legal tender for debts of
any amount, we were subject to a constant
change in the principal standard measure of
value. it would sometimes be gold, sometimes
silver, depending entirely on the variations
in the relative value of the two metals,
and at such times the metal, which was not
the standard, would be melted, and withdrawn
from circulation, as its value would be greater
in bullion than in coin. this was an inconvenience
which it was highly desirable should
be remedied, but so slow is the progress of
improvement, that although it had been unanswerably
demonstrated by mr. locke, and
had been noticed by all writers on the subject
of money since his day, a better system was
never adopted till the last session of parliament,
when it was enacted that gold only
should be a legal tender for any sum exceeding
forty-two shillings.
dr. smith does not appear to have been
quite aware of the effect of employing two
metals as currency, and both a legal tender
for debts of any amount; for he says that "in
reality, during the continuance of any one
regulated proportion between the respective
values of the different metals in coin, the
value of the most precious metal regulates the
value of the whole coin." because gold was
in his day the medium in which it suited
debtors to pay their debts, he thought that it
had some inherent quality by which it did then,
and always would regulate the value of silver
coin.
on the reformation of the gold coin in
 a new guinea fresh from the mint would
exchange for only twenty-one debased shillings;
but in the reign of king william, when
the silver coin was in precisely the same condition,
a guinea also new and fresh from the
mint would exchange for thirty shillings.
on this mr. buchanan observes, "here, then,
is a most singular fact, of which the common
theories of currency offer no account; the
guinea exchanging at one time for thirty
shillings, its intrinsic worth in a debased
silver currency, and afterwards the same
guinea exchanged for only twenty-one of
those debased shillings. it is clear that some
great change must have intervened in the
state of the currency between these two different
periods, of which dr. smith's hypothesis
offers no explanation."
it appears to me, that the difficulty may be
very simply solved, by referring this different
state of the value of the guinea at the two
periods mentioned, to the different quantities
of debased silver currency in circulation. in
king william's reign gold was not a legal
tender, it passed only at a conventional
value. all the large payments were probably
made in silver, particularly as paper currency,
and the operations of banking, were then
little understood. the quantity of this debased
silver money exceeded the quantity
of silver money, which would have been
maintained in circulation, if nothing but
undebased money had been in use; and consequently
it was depreciated as well as debased.
but in the succeeding period when gold was
a legal tender, when bank-notes also were
used in effecting payments, the quantity of
debased silver money did not exceed the
quantity of silver coin fresh from the mint,
which would have circulated if there had
been no debased silver money; hence though
the money was debased, it was not depreciated.
mr. buchanan's explanation is somewhat different,
he thinks that a subsidiary currency is
not liable to depreciation, but that the main
currency is. in king william's reign silver
was the main currency, and hence was liable to
depreciation. in  it was a subsidiary
currency, and therefore maintained its value.
depreciation, however, does not depend on a
currency being the subsidiary or the main
currency, it depends wholly on its being in
excess of quantity.
to a moderate seignorage on the coinage
of money there cannot be much objection,
particularly on that currency which is to
effect the smaller payments. money is
generally enhanced in value to the full
amount of the seignorage, and therefore it is a
tax which in no way affects those who pay it,
while the quantity of money is not in excess.
it must, however, be remarked, that in a
country where a paper currency is established,
although the issuers of such paper should be
liable to pay it in specie on the demand of
the holder, still, both their notes and the
coin might be depreciated to the full amount
of the seignorage on that coin, which is alone
the legal tender, before the check, which
limits the circulation of paper, would operate.
if the seignorage on gold coin were  per
cent., for instance, the currency, by an abundant
issue of bank-notes, might be really
depreciated  per cent. before it would be the
interest of the holders to demand coin for
the purpose of melting it into bullion; a
depreciation to which we should never be
exposed, if either there was no seignorage on
the gold coin; or, if a seignorage were allowed,
the holders of bank-notes might demand bullion,
and not coin, in exchange for them, at the
mint price of l. s. ½d. unless then the
bank should be obliged to pay their notes in
bullion or coin, at the will of the holder, the
late law which allows a seignorage of  per
cent., or four pence per oz., on the silver coin,
but which directs that gold shall be coined
by the mint without any charge whatever, is
perhaps the most proper, as it will more
effectually prevent any unnecessary variation
of the currency.
"gold and silver, like all other commodities,"
says adam smith, "naturally seek the
market where the best price is given for them;
and the best price is commonly given for
every thing in the country which can best
afford it. labour, it must be remembered,
is the ultimate price which is paid for every
thing; and in countries where labour is equally
well rewarded, the money price of labour
will be in proportion to that of the subsistence
of the labourer. but gold and silver
will naturally exchange for a greater quantity
of subsistence in a rich than in a poor country;
in a country which abounds with subsistence,
than in one which is but indifferently
supplied with it."
but corn is a commodity, as well as gold,
silver, and other things; if all commodities,
therefore, have a high exchangeable value
in a rich country, corn must not be excepted;
and hence we might correctly say, that corn
exchanged for a great deal of money, because
it was dear, and that money too exchanged
for a great deal of corn, because
that also was dear; which is to assert that corn
is dear and cheap at the same time. no point
in political economy can be better established,
than that a rich country is prevented from
increasing in population, in the same ratio as
a poor country, by the progressive difficulty
of providing food. that difficulty must necessarily
raise the relative price of food, and
give encouragement to its importation. how
then can money, or gold and silver, exchange
for more corn in rich, than in poor
countries? it is only in rich countries, where
corn is dear, that landholders induce the legislature
to prohibit the importation of corn.
who ever heard of a law to prevent the importation
of raw produce in america or poland?—nature
has effectually precluded its
importation by the comparative facility of its
production in those countries.
how then can it be true, that "if you except
corn, and such other vegetables, as are
raised altogether by human industry, all other
sorts of rude produce—cattle, poultry, game
of all kinds, the useful fossils and minerals
of the earth, &c., naturally grow dearer as
the society advances." why should corn and
vegetables alone be excepted? dr. smith's
error throughout his whole work, lies in supposing
that the value of corn is constant;
that though the value of all other things may,
the value of corn never can be raised. corn,
according to him, is always of the same value,
because it will always feed the same number
of people. in the same manner it might be
said, that cloth is always of the same value,
because it will always make the same number
of coats. what can value have to do with
the power of feeding and clothing?
corn, like every other commodity, has in
every country its natural price, viz. that price
which is necessary to its production, and without
which it could not be cultivated: it is
this price which governs its market price,
and which determines the expediency of exporting
it to foreign countries. if the importation
of corn were prohibited in england,
its natural price might rise to l. per quarter
in england, whilst it was only at half that
price in france. if at this time, the prohibition
of importation were removed, corn
would fall in the english market, not to a
price between l. and l., but ultimately and
permanently to the natural price of france,
the price at which it could be furnished to
the english market, and afford the usual and
ordinary profits of stock in france; and it
would remain at this price, whether england
consumed a hundred thousand, or a million
of quarters. if the demand of england were
for the latter quantity, it is probable that,
owing to the necessity under which france
would be, of having recourse to land of a
worse quality, to furnish this large supply,
the natural price would rise in france; and
this would of course affect also the price of
corn in england. all that i contend for is,
that it is the natural price of commodities
in the exporting country, which ultimately
regulates the prices at which they shall be
sold, if they are not the objects of monopoly,
in the importing country.
but dr. smith, who has so ably supported
the doctrine of the natural price of commodities
ultimately regulating their market price,
has supposed a case in which he thinks that
the market price would not be regulated
either by the natural price of the exporting
or of the importing country. "diminish the
real opulence either of holland, or the territory
of genoa," he says, "while the number
of their inhabitants remains the same; diminish
their power of supplying themselves from
distant countries, and the price of corn, instead
of sinking with that diminution in the
quantity of their silver which must necessarily
accompany this declension, either as
its cause or as its effect, will rise to the price
of a famine."
to me it appears, that the very reverse
would take place: the diminished power of
the dutch or genoese to purchase generally,
might depress the price of corn for a time
below its natural price in the country from
which it was exported, as well as in the countries
in which it was imported, but it is quite
impossible that it could ever raise it above
that price. it is only by increasing the opulence
of the dutch or genoese, that you
could increase the demand, and raise the
price of corn above its former price; and that
would take place only for a very limited
time, unless new difficulties should arise in
obtaining the supply.
dr. smith further observes on this subject:
"when we are in want of necessaries,
we must part with all superfluities, of which
the value, as it rises in times of opulence and
prosperity, so it sinks in times of poverty and
distress." this is undoubtedly true; but he
continues, "it is otherwise with necessaries.
their real price, the quantity of labour which
they can purchase or command, rises in times
of poverty and distress, and sinks in times
of opulence and prosperity, which are always
times of great abundance, for they could not
otherwise be times of opulence and prosperity.
corn is a necessary, silver is only a
superfluity."
two propositions are here advanced, which
have no connexion with each other; one,
that under the circumstances supposed, corn
would command more labour, which is not
disputed; the other, that corn would sell at
a higher money price, that it would exchange
for more silver; this i contend to be erroneous.
it might be true, if corn were at the
same time scarce, if the usual supply had not
been furnished. but in this case it is abundant,
it is not pretended that a less quantity than
usual is imported, or that more is required.
to purchase corn, the dutch or genoese
want money, and to obtain this money, they
are obliged to sell their superfluities. it is
the market value and price of these superfluities
which falls, and money appears to
rise as compared with them. but this will
not tend to increase the demand for corn,
nor to lower the value of money, the only
two causes which can raise the price of corn.
money, from a want of credit, and from other
causes, may be in great demand, and consequently
dear, comparatively with corn; but
on no just principle can it be maintained,
that under such circumstances money would
be cheap, and therefore, that the price of
corn would rise.
when we speak of the high or low value of
gold, silver, or any other commodity in different
countries, we should always mention
some medium in which we are estimating
them, or no idea can be attached to the proposition.
thus, when gold is said to be
dearer in england than in spain, if no commodity
is mentioned, what notion does the
assertion convey? if corn, olives, oil, wine,
and wool, be at a cheaper price in spain than
in england; estimated in those commodities,
gold is dearer in spain. if again, hardware,
sugar, cloth, &c. be at a lower price in england
than in spain, then, estimated in those
commodities, gold is dearer in england. thus
gold appears dearer or cheaper in spain, as
the fancy of the observer may fix on the medium
by which he estimates its value. adam
smith, having stamped corn and labour as an
universal measure of value, would naturally
estimate the comparative value of gold by the
quantity of those two objects for which it
would exchange: and, accordingly, when he
speaks of the comparative value of gold in
two countries, i understand him to mean its
value estimated in corn and labour.
but we have seen, that, estimated in corn,
gold may be of very different value in two
countries. i have endeavoured to shew that
it will be low in rich countries, and high in
poor countries; adam smith is of a different
opinion: he thinks that the value of gold estimated
in corn is highest in rich countries.
but without further examining which of these
opinions is correct, either of them is sufficient
to shew, that gold will not necessarily be
lower in those countries which are in possession
of the mines, though this is a proposition
maintained by adam smith. suppose england
to be possessed of the mines, and adam
smith's opinion, that gold is of the greatest
value in rich countries, to be correct: although
gold would naturally flow from england
to all other countries in exchange for
their goods, it would not follow that gold was
necessarily lower in england, as compared
with corn and labour, than in those countries.
in another place, however, adam smith
speaks of the precious metals being necessarily
lower in spain and portugal, than in other
parts of europe, because those countries happen
to be almost the exclusive possessors of
the mines which produce them. "poland,
where the feudal system still continues to
take place at this day as beggarly a country
as it was before the discovery of america.
the money price of corn, however, has risen;
the real value of the precious metals
has fallen in poland, in the same manner
as in other parts of europe. their quantity,
therefore, must have increased there as in
other places, and nearly in the same proportion to
the annual produce of the land and labour. this
increase of the quantity of those metals, however,
has not, it seems, increased that annual
produce, has neither improved the manufactures
and agriculture of the country, nor
mended the circumstances of its inhabitants.
spain and portugal, the countries which
possess the mines, are, after poland, perhaps,
the two most beggarly countries in europe.
the value of the precious metals, however,
must be lower in spain and portugal than in
any other parts of europe, loaded, not only
with a freight and insurance, but with the
expense of smuggling, their exportation being
either prohibited, or subjected to a duty. in
proportion to the annual produce of the land
and labour, therefore, their quantity must be
greater in those countries than in any other
part of europe: those countries, however,
are poorer than the greater part of europe.
though the feudal system has been abolished
in spain and portugal, it has not been succeeded
by a much better."
dr. smith's argument appears to me to
be this:—gold, when estimated in corn, is
cheaper in spain than in other countries, and
the proof of this is, not that corn is given by
other countries to spain for gold, but that
cloth, sugar, hardware, are by those countries
given in exchange for that metal.
m. say greatly magnifies the inconveniences
which result if a tax on a manufactured commodity
is levied at an early, rather than at
a late period of its manufacture. the manufacturers,
he observes, through whose hands
the commodity may successively pass, must
employ greater funds in consequence of
having to advance the tax, which is often
attended with considerable difficulty to a
manufacturer of very limited capital and
credit. to this observation no objection can
be made.
another inconvenience on which he dwells
is, that in consequence of the advance of the
tax, the profits on the advance also must be
charged to the consumer, and that this additional
tax is one from which the treasury derives
no advantage.
in this latter objection i cannot agree with
m. say. the state, we will suppose, wants
to raise immediately l. and levies it on a
manufacturer, who will not, for a twelve-month,
be able to charge it to the consumer
on his finished commodity. in consequence
of such delay, he is obliged to charge for his
commodity an additional price, not only of
l. the amount of the tax, but probably
of l., l. being for interest on the l.
advanced. but in return for this additional
l. paid by the consumer, he has a real benefit,
inasmuch as his payment of the tax
which government required immediately, and
which he must finally pay, has been postponed
for a year; an opportunity, therefore, has been
afforded to him of lending to the manufacturer,
who had occasion for it, the l. at  per
cent., or at any other rate of interest which
might be agreed upon. eleven hundred pounds
payable at the end of one year, when money
is at  per cent. interest, is of no more value
than l. to be paid immediately. if government
delayed receiving the tax for one
year till the manufacture of the commodity
was completed, it would, perhaps, be obliged
to issue an exchequer bill bearing interest,
and it would pay as much for interest as
the consumer would save in price, excepting,
indeed, that portion of the price which
the manufacturer might be enabled, in consequence
of the tax, to add to his own real
gains. if, for the interest of the exchequer
bill, government would have paid  per
cent., a tax of l. is saved by not issuing it.
if the manufacturer borrowed the additional
capital at  per cent., and charged the consumer
 per cent., he also will have gained
 per cent. on his advance over and above his
usual profits, so that the manufacturer and
government together gain, or save, precisely
the sum which the consumer pays.
m. simonde, in his excellent work, de la
richesse commerciale, following the same line
of argument as m. say, has calculated that a
tax of  francs, paid originally by a manufacturer,
whose profits were at the moderate rate
of  per cent., would, if the commodity manufactured
only passed through the hands of five
different persons, be raised to the consumer to
the sum of  francs. this calculation
proceeds on the supposition, that he who first
advanced the tax, would receive from the
next manufacturer  francs, and he again
from the next,  francs; so that at each
step  per cent. on its value would be added
to it. this is to suppose that the value of the
tax would be accumulating at compound interest,
not at the rate of  per cent. per annum,
but at an absolute rate of  per cent.,
at every step of its progress. this opinion of
m. de simonde would be correct if five years
elapsed between the first advance of the tax,
and the sale of the taxed commodity to the
consumer; but if one year only elapsed, a remuneration
of  francs, instead of ,
would give a profit at the rate of  per cent.
per annum, to all who had contributed to
the advance of the tax, whether the commodity
had passed through the hands of five manufacturers
or fifty.
it is the cost of production which must ultimately
regulate the price of commodities, and
not, as has been often said, the proportion
between the supply and demand: the proportion
between supply and demand may, indeed,
for a time affect the market value of a
commodity, until it is supplied in greater or
less abundance, according as the demand
may have increased or diminished; but this
effect will be only of temporary duration.
diminish the cost of production of hats,
and their price will ultimately fall to their
new natural price, although the demand
should be doubled, trebled, or quadrupled.
diminish the cost of subsistence of men, by
diminishing the natural price of the food and
clothing, by which life is sustained, and
wages will ultimately fall, notwithstanding
that the demand for labourers may very greatly
increase.
the opinion that the price of commodities
depends solely on the proportion of supply to
demand, or demand to supply, has become
almost an axiom in political economy, and
has been the source of much error in that
science. it is this opinion which has made
mr. buchanan maintain that wages are not
influenced by a rise or fall in the price of provisions,
but solely by the demand and supply
of labour; and that a tax on the wages of
labour would not raise wages, because it
would not alter the proportion of the demand
of labourers to the supply.
the demand for a commodity cannot be
said to increase, if no additional quantity of
it be purchased or consumed; and yet under
such circumstances its money value may rise.
thus, if the value of money were to fall, the
price of every commodity would rise, for
each of the competitors would be willing to
spend more money than before on its purchase;
but though its price rose  or  per
cent. if no more were bought than before, it
would not, i apprehend, be admissible to
say, that the variation in the price of the commodity
was caused by the increased demand
for it. its natural price, its money cost of
production, would be really altered by the
altered value of money; and without any increase
of demand, the price of the commodity
would be naturally adjusted to that new
value.
"we have seen," says m. say, "that the
cost of production determines the lowest
price to which things can fall: the price below
which they cannot remain for any length
of time, because production would then be
either entirely stopped or diminished. vol.
ii. p. .
he afterwards says that the demand for
gold having increased in a still greater proportion
than the supply, since the discovery
of the mines, "its price in goods, instead of
falling in the proportion of ten to one, fell
only in the proportion of four to one;" that
is to say, instead of falling in proportion as
its natural price had fallen, fell in proportion
as the supply exceeded the demand. "the
value of every commodity rises always in a direct
ratio to the demand, and in an inverse ratio to
the supply."
the same opinion is expressed by the earl
of lauderdale.
"with respect to the variations in value, of
which every thing valuable is susceptible, if
we could for a moment suppose that any substance
possessed intrinsic and fixed value, so as
to render an assumed quantity of it constantly,
under all circumstances, of an equal value,
then the degree of value of all things, ascertained
by such a fixed standard, would vary
according to the proportion betwixt the quantity
of them, and the demand for them, and
every commodity would of course be subject
to a variation in its value, from four different
circumstances.
. "it would be subject to an increase of
its value, from a diminution of its quantity.
. "to a diminution of its value, from an
augmentation of its quantity.
. "it might suffer an augmentation in its
value, from the circumstance of an increased
demand.
. "its value might be diminished by a
failure of demand.
"as it will, however, clearly appear that
no commodity can possess fixed and intrinsic
value, so as to qualify it for a measure of
the value of other commodities, mankind are
induced to select, as a practical measure of
value, that which appears the least liable to
any of these four sources of variations, which
are the sole causes of alteration of value.
"when in common language, therefore,
we express the value of any commodity, it may
vary at one period from what it is at another,
in consequence of eight different contingencies.
. "from the four circumstances above
stated, in relation to the commodity of which
we mean to express the value.
. "from the same four circumstances, in
relation to the commodity we have adopted
as a measure of value."
this is true of monopolized commodities,
and indeed of the market price of all other
commodities for a limited period. if the
demand for hats should be doubled, the price
would immediately rise, but that rise would
be only temporary, unless the cost of production
of hats, or their natural price, were raised.
if the natural price of bread should fall 
per cent. from some great discovery in the
science of agriculture, the demand would
not greatly increase, for no man would desire
more than would satisfy his wants, and as
the demand would not increase, neither would
the supply; for a commodity is not supplied
merely because it can be produced, but because
there is a demand for it. here then
we have a case where the supply and demand
have scarcely varied, or if they have increased
they have increased in the same proportion;
and yet the price of bread will have fallen
 per cent. at a time too when the value of
money had continued invariable.
commodities which are monopolized, either
by an individual, or by a company, vary
according to the law which lord lauderdale
has laid down: they fall in proportion as the
sellers augment their quantity, and rise in
proportion to the eagerness of the buyers to
purchase them; their price has no necessary
connexion with their natural value: but the
prices of commodities, which are subject to
competition, and whose quantity may be increased
in any moderate degree, will ultimately
depend, not on the state of demand
and supply, but on the increased or diminished
cost of their production.
although the nature of rent has in the former
pages of this work been treated on at
some length; yet i consider myself bound to
notice some opinions on the subject, which
appear to me erroneous, and which are the
more important, as they are found in the
writings of one to whom, of all men of the
present day, some branches of economical
science are the most indebted. of mr. malthus's
essay on population, i am happy in
the opportunity here afforded me of expressing
my admiration. the assaults of the opponents
of this great work have only served
to prove its strength; and i am persuaded
that its just reputation will spread with the
cultivation of that science of which it is so
eminent an ornament. mr. malthus too—has
satisfactorily explained the principles of rent,
and shewed that it rises or falls in proportion
to the relative advantages, either of fertility or
situation, of the different lands in cultivation,
and has thereby thrown much light on many
difficult points connected with the subject of
rent, which were before either unknown, or
very imperfectly understood; yet he appears
to me to have fallen into some errors, which his
authority makes it the more necessary, whilst
his characteristic candour renders it less unpleasing
to notice. one of these errors lies
in supposing rent to be a clear gain and a
new creation of riches.
i do not assent to all the opinions of mr.
buchanan concerning rent; but with those
expressed in the following passage, quoted
from his work by mr. malthus, i fully agree;
and therefore i must dissent from mr. malthus's
comment on them.
"in this view it (rent) can form no general
addition to the stock of the community, as
the neat surplus in question is nothing more
than a revenue transferred from one class to
another; and from the mere circumstance of
its thus changing hands, it is clear that no
fund can arise, out of which to pay taxes.
the revenue which pays for the produce of
the land, exists already in the hands of those
who purchase that produce; and, if the price
of subsistence were lower, it would still remain
in their hands, where it would be just
as available for taxation as when, by a higher
price, it is transferred to the landed proprietor."
after various observations on the difference
between raw produce and manufactured commodities,
mr. malthus asks, "is it possible
then, with m. de sismondi, to regard rent as
the sole produce of labour, which has a value
purely nominal, and the mere result of that
augmentation of price which a seller obtains
in consequence of a peculiar privilege; or,
with mr. buchanan, to consider it as no
addition to the national wealth, but merely
transfer of value, advantageous only to the
landlords, and proportionably injurious to the
consumers?"
i have already expressed my opinion on
this subject in treating of rent, and have now
only further to add, that rent is a creation of
value, as i understand that word, but not
a creation of wealth. if the price of corn,
from the difficulty of producing any portion
of it, should rise from l. to l. per quarter, a
million of quarters will be of the value of
,,l. instead of ,,l., and as this
corn will exchange not only for more money
but for more of every other commodity, the
possessors will have a greater amount of value;
and as no one else will in consequence have a
less, the society altogether will be possessed of
greater value, and in that sense rent is a creation
of value. but this value is so far nominal
that it adds nothing to the wealth, that
is to say, to the necessaries, conveniences,
and enjoyments of the society. we should
have precisely the same quantity, and no
more of commodities, and the same million
quarters of corn as before; but the effect of
its being rated at l. per quarter, instead of
l., would be to transfer a portion of the value
of the corn and commodities from their
former possessors to the landlords. rent
then is a creation of value, but not a creation
of wealth; it adds nothing to the
resources of a country, it does not enable it
to maintain fleets and armies; for the country
would have a greater disposable fund if its
land were of a better quality, and it could
employ the same capital without generating
a rent.
in another part of mr. malthus's "inquiry"
he observes, "that the immediate cause of
rent is obviously the excess of price above the
cost of production at which raw produce sells
in the market," and in another place he says,
"that the causes of the high price of raw
produce may be stated to be three:—
"first, and mainly, that quality of the
earth, by which it can be made to yield a
greater portion of the necessaries of life than
is required for the maintenance of the persons
employed on the land.
"dly. that quality peculiar to the necessaries
of life of being able to create their own
demand, or to raise up a number of demanders
in proportion to the quantity of necessaries
produced.
"and dly. the comparative scarcity of
the most fertile land." in speaking of the
high price of corn, mr. malthus evidently
does not mean the price per quarter or per
bushel, but rather the excess of price for
which the whole produce will sell, above the
cost of its production, including always in
the term "cost of production," profits as well
as wages. one hundred and fifty quarters of
corn at l. s. per quarter, would yield a
larger rent to the landlord than  quarters
at l., provided the cost of production were in
both cases the same.
high price, if the expression be used in this
sense, cannot then be called a cause of rent;
it cannot be said "that the immediate cause
of rent is obviously the excess of price above
the cost of production, at which raw produce
sells in the market," for that excess is itself
rent. rent, mr. malthus has defined to be
"that portion of the value of the whole produce
which remains to the owner of the land,
after all the outgoings belonging to its cultivation,
of whatever kind, have been paid, including
the profits of the capital employed,
estimated according to the usual and ordinary
rate of the profits of agricultural stock at the
time being." now whatever sum this excess
may sell for, is money rent; it is what mr.
malthus means by "the excess of price above
the cost of production at which raw produce
sells in the markets;" and therefore in an
inquiry into the causes which may elevate
the price of raw produce, compared with the
cost of production, we are inquiring into the
causes which may elevate rent.
in reference to the first cause of the rise of
rent, mr. malthus has the following observations:
"we still want to know why the consumption
and supply are such as to make the
price so greatly exceed the cost of production,
and the main cause is evidently the fertility
of the earth in producing the necessaries of
life. diminish this plenty, diminish the
fertility of the soil, and the excess will diminish;
diminish it still further, and it will
disappear." true, the excess of necessaries
will diminish and disappear, but that is not
the question. the question is, whether the
excess of their price above the cost of their
production will diminish and disappear, for it
is on this, that money rent depends. is mr.
malthus warranted in his inference, that because
the excess of quantity will diminish and
disappear, therefore "the cause of the high
price of the necessaries of life above the cost of
production is to be found in their abundance,
rather than in their scarcity; and is not only
essentially different from the high price
occasioned by artificial monopolies, but from
the high price of those peculiar products of
the earth, not connected with food, which
may be called natural and necessary monopolies?"
are there no circumstances under which
the fertility of the land, and the plenty of its
produce may be diminished, without occasioning
a diminished excess of its price above the
cost of production, that is to say, a diminished
rent? if there are, mr. malthus's proposition
is much too universal; for he appears to me
to state it as a general principle, true under
all circumstances, that rent will rise with the
increased fertility of the land, and will fall
with its diminished fertility.
mr. malthus would undoubtedly be right, if,
in proportion as the land yielded abundantly,
a greater share of the whole produce were
paid to the landlord; but the contrary is the
fact: when no other but the most fertile land
is in cultivation, the landlord has the smallest
share of the whole produce, as well as the
smallest value, and it is only when inferior
lands are required to feed an augmenting
population, that both the landlord's share of
the whole produce, and the value he receives,
progressively increase.
suppose that the demand is for a million of
quarters of corn, and that they are the produce
of the land actually in cultivation.
now, suppose the fertility of all the land
to be so diminished, that the very same
lands will yield only , quarters. the
demand being for a million of quarters, the
price of corn would rise, and recourse must
necessarily be had to land of an inferior
quality sooner than if the superior land had
continued to produce a million of quarters.
but it is this necessity of taking inferior land
into cultivation which is the cause of the rise
of rent. rent, it must be remembered, is not
in proportion to the absolute fertility of the
land in cultivation, but in proportion to its
relative fertility. whatever cause may drive
capital to inferior land, must elevate rent; the
cause of rent being, as stated by mr. malthus
in his third proposition, "the comparative
scarcity of the most fertile land." the price
of corn will naturally rise with the difficulty
of producing the last portions of it; but as the
cost of production will not increase, as wages
and profits taken together will continue always
of the same value, it is evident that the excess
of price above the cost of production, or, in
other words, rent, must rise with the diminished
fertility of the land, unless it is counteracted
by a great reduction of capital, population,
and demand. it does not appear then that mr.
malthus's proposition is correct: rent does not
immediately and necessarily rise or fall with
the increased or diminished fertility of the
land; but its increased fertility renders it
capable of paying at some future time an
augmented rent. land possessed of very
little fertility can never bear any rent; land of
moderate fertility may be made, as population
increases, to bear a moderate rent; and land
of great fertility a high rent; but it is one
thing to be able to bear a high rent, and another
thing actually to pay it. rent may be
lower in a country where lands are exceedingly
fertile than in a country where they yield
a moderate return, it being in proportion
rather to relative than absolute fertility—to
the value of the produce, and not to its abundance.
mr. malthus says, that the "cause of
the excess of price of the necessaries of life
above the cost of production, is to be found
in their abundance rather than their scarcity,
and is essentially different from the high price
of those peculiar products of the earth, not
connected with food, which may be called
natural and necessary monopolies."
in what are they essentially different?
would not the abundance of those peculiar
products of the earth cause a rise of rent, if the
demand for them at the same time increased?
and can rent ever rise, whatever the commodity
produced may be, from abundance
merely, and without an increase of demand?
the second cause of rent mentioned by
mr. malthus, namely, "that quality peculiar
to the necessaries of life, of being able to
create their own demand, or to raise up a
number of demanders in proportion to the
quantity of necessaries produced," does not
appear to me to be any way essential to it. it
is not the abundance of necessaries which
raises up demanders, but the abundance of
demanders which raises up necessaries.
we are under no necessity of producing
permanently any greater quantity of a commodity
than that which is demanded. if
by accident any greater quantity were produced,
it would fall below its natural price,
and therefore would not pay the cost of production,
together with the usual and ordinary
profits of stock: thus the supply would be
checked till it conformed to the demand, and
the market price rose to the natural price.
mr. malthus appears to me to be too much
inclined to think that population is only increased
by the previous provision of food,—"that
it is food that creates its own demand,"—that
it is by first providing food that
encouragement is given to marriage, instead of
considering that the general progress of population
is affected by the increase of capital,
the consequent demand for labour, and the
rise of wages; and that the production of food
is but the effect of that demand.
it is by giving the workman more money,
or any other commodity in which wages are
paid, and which has not fallen in value, that
his situation is improved. the increase of
population, and the increase of food will generally
be the effect, but not the necessary
effect of high wages. the amended condition
of the labourer, in consequence of the increased
value which is paid him, does not necessarily
oblige him to marry and take upon
himself the charge of a family—he may, if it
please him, exchange his increased wages for
any commodities that may contribute to his
enjoyments—for chairs, tables, and hardware;
or for better clothes, sugar, and tobacco.
his increased wages then will be attended
with no other effect than an increased demand
for some of those commodities; and as
the race of labourers will not be materially
increased, his wages will continue permanently
high. but although this might be the consequence
of high wages, yet so great are the
delights of domestic society, that in practice
it is invariably found that an increase of population
follows the amended condition of the
labourer; and it is only because it does so, that
a new and increased demand arises for food.
this demand then is the effect of an increase
of population, but not the cause—it is only
because the expenditure of the people takes
this direction, that the market price of necessaries
exceeds the natural price, and that the
quantity of food required is produced; and it
is because the number of people is increased,
that wages again fall.
what motive can a farmer have to produce
more corn than is actually demanded, when
the consequence would be a depression of its
market price below its natural price, and
consequently a privation to him of a portion
of his profits, by reducing them below the
general rate? "if," says mr. malthus, "the
necessaries of life, the most important products
of land, had not the property of creating
an increase of demand proportioned to
their increased quantity, such increased quantity
would occasion a fall in their exchangeable
value. however abundant might be
the produce of a country, its population might
remain stationary. and this abundance without
a proportionate demand, and with a very
high corn price of labour, which would naturally
take place under these circumstances,
might reduce the price of raw produce, like
the price of manufactures, to the cost of production."
"might reduce the price of raw produce
to the cost of production?" is it ever for any
length of time either above or below this
price? does not mr. malthus himself, state
it never to be so? "i hope," he says, "to
be excused for dwelling a little, and presenting
to the reader in various forms the doctrine,
that corn, in reference to the quantity
actually produced, is sold at its necessary price
like manufactures, because i consider it as a
truth of the highest importance, which has
been overlooked by the economists, by adam
smith, and all those writers, who have represented
raw produce as selling always at a
monopoly price."
"every extensive country may thus be
considered as possessing a gradation of machines
for the production of corn and raw
materials, including in this gradation not only
all the various qualities of poor land, of
which every territory has generally an abundance,
but the inferior machinery which may
be said to be employed when good land is
further and further forced for additional produce.
as the price of raw produce continues
to rise, these inferior machines are successively
called into action; and as the price of
raw produce continues to fall, they are successively
thrown out of action. the illustration
here used serves to shew at once the
necessity of the actual price of corn to the actual
produce, and the different effect which would
attend a great reduction in the price of any
particular manufacture, and a great reduction
in the price of raw produce."
how are these passages to be reconciled
to that which affirms, that if the necessaries
of life had not the property of creating an
increase of demand proportioned to their increased
quantity, the abundant quantity produced
would then, and then only, reduce the
price of raw produce to the cost of production?
if corn is never under its natural price,
it is never more abundant than the actual
population require it to be for their own consumption;
no store can be laid up for the
consumption of others; it can never then by
its cheapness and abundance be a stimulus
to population. in proportion as corn can be
produced cheaply, the increased wages of the
labourers will have more power to maintain
families. in america, population increases
rapidly, because food can be produced at a
cheap price, and not because an abundant
supply has been previously provided. in europe
population increases comparatively slowly,
because food cannot be produced at a
cheap value. in the usual and ordinary course
of things, the demand for all commodities
precedes their supply. by saying, that corn
would, like manufactures, sink to its price
of production, if it could not raise up demanders,
mr. malthus cannot mean that all
rent would be absorbed; for he has himself
justly remarked, that if all rent were given
up by the landlords, corn would not fall in
price; rent being the effect, and not the cause
of high price, and there being always one
quality of land in cultivation which pays
no rent whatever, the corn from which replaces
by its price, only wages and profits.
in the following passage, mr. malthus has
given an able exposition of the causes of the
rise in the price of raw produce in rich and
progressive countries, in every word of which
i concur; but it appears to me to be at variance
with some of the propositions maintained by
him in some parts of his essay on rent. "i
have no hesitation in stating, that, independently
of the irregularities in the currency of a
country, and other temporary and accidental
circumstances, the cause of the high comparative
money price of corn is its high comparative
real price, or the greater quantity of capital
and labour which must be employed to
produce it; and that the reasons why the
real price of corn is higher, and continually
rising in countries which are already rich,
and still advancing in prosperity and population,
is to be found in the necessity of resorting
constantly to poorer land, to machines
which require a greater expenditure to work
them, and which consequently occasion each
fresh addition to the raw produce of the country
to be purchased at a greater cost; in short,
it is to be found in the important truth, that
corn in a progressive country, is sold at the
price necessary to yield the actual supply;
and that, as this supply becomes more and
more difficult, the price rises in proportion."
the real price of a commodity is here properly
stated to depend on the greater or less
quantity of labour and capital (that is, accumulated
labour) which must be employed to
produce it. real price does not, as some have
contended, depend on money value; nor, as
others have said, on value relatively to corn,
labour, or any other commodity taken singly,
or to all commodities collectively; but, as mr.
malthus justly says, "on the greater (or less)
quantity of capital and labour which must be
employed to produce it."
among the causes of the rise of rent, mr.
malthus mentions, "such an increase of population
as will lower the wages of labour."
but if, as the wages of labour fall, the profits
of stock rise, and they be together always of
the same value, no fall of wages can raise
rent, for it will neither diminish the portion,
nor the value of the portion of the produce
which will be allotted to the farmer and
labourer together, and therefore will not leave
a larger portion, nor a larger value for the
landlord. in proportion as less is appropriated
for wages, more will be appropriated
for profits, and vice versa. this division will
be settled by the farmer and his labourers,
without any interference of the landlord; and
indeed it is a matter in which he can have no
interest, otherwise than as one division may
be more favourable than another, to new accumulations,
and to a further demand for
land. if wages fall, profits, and not rent,
would rise. if wages rose, profits, and not
rent, would fall. the rise of rent and wages,
and the fall of profits, are generally the inevitable
effects of the same cause—the increasing
demand for food, the increased quantity of
labour required to produce it, and its consequently
high price. if the landlord were to
forego his whole rent, the labourers would
not be in the least benefited. if the labourers
were to give up their whole wages, the landlords
would derive no advantage from such a
circumstance; but in both cases the farmer
would receive and retain all which they relinquished.
it has been my endeavour to
shew in this work, that a fall of wages would
have no other effect than to raise profits.
another cause of the rise of rent, according
to mr. malthus, is "such agricultural improvements,
or such increase of exertions, as
will diminish the number of labourers necessary
to produce a given effect." this would
not raise the value of the whole produce, and
would therefore not increase rent. it would
rather have a contrary tendency, it would
lower rent; for if in consequence of these improvements,
the actual quantity of food required
could be furnished either with fewer
hands, or with a less quantity of land, the price
of raw produce would fall, and capital would
be withdrawn from the land. nothing can
raise rent, but a demand for new land of an
inferior quality, or some cause which shall
occasion an alteration in the relative fertility
of the land already under cultivation. improvements
in agriculture, and in the division
of labour, are common to all land; they increase
the absolute quantity of raw produce
obtained from each, but probably do not
much disturb the relative proportions which
before existed between them.
mr. malthus has justly commented on an
error of adam smith, and says, "the substance
of his (dr. smith's) argument is, that
corn is of so peculiar a nature, that its real
price cannot be raised by an increase of its
money price; and that, as it is clearly an increase
of real price alone, which can encourage
its production, the rise of money price,
occasioned by a bounty, can have no such
effect."
he continues: "it is by no means intended
to deny the powerful influence of the price
of corn upon the price of labour, on an average
of a considerable number of years; but
that this influence is not such as to prevent
the movement of capital to, or from the land,
which is the precise point in question, will
be made sufficiently evident by a short inquiry
into the manner in which labour is
paid, and brought into the market, and by a
consideration of the consequences to which
the assumption of adam smith's proposition
would inevitably lead."
mr. malthus then proceeds to shew, that
demand and high price will as effectually encourage
the production of raw produce, as
the demand and high price of any other commodity
will encourage its production. in
this view it will be seen, from what i have said
of the effects of bounties, that i entirely concur.
i have noticed the passage mr.
malthus's "observations on the corn laws,"
for the purpose of shewing in what a different
sense the term real price is used here, and in his
other pamphlet, entitled "grounds of an opinion,
&c." in this passage mr. malthus tells
us, that "it is clearly an increase of real price
alone which can encourage the production of
corn," and by real price he evidently means
the increase in its value relatively to all other
things, or in other words, the rise in its market
above its natural price, or the cost of its production.
if by real price this is what is meant,
mr. malthus's opinion is undoubtedly correct;
it is the rise in the market price of
corn which alone encourages its production,
for it may be laid down as a principle uniformly
true, that the only encouragement to
the increased production of a commodity, is
its market value exceeding its natural or necessary
value.
but this is not the meaning which mr.
malthus, on other occasions, attaches to the
term, real price. in the essay on rent, mr.
malthus says, by "the real growing price of
corn, i mean the real quantity of labour and
capital, which has been employed to produce
the last additions which have been made to
the national produce." in another part he
states "the cause of the high comparative
real price of corn to be the greater quantity
of capital and labour, which must be employed
to produce it." suppose that in the foregoing
passage we were to substitute this definition
of real price, would it not then run
thus?—"it is clearly the increase in the
quantity of labour and capital which must be
employed to produce corn, which alone can
encourage its production." this would be to
say, that it is clearly the rise in the natural or
necessary price of corn, which encourages
its production—a proposition which could not
be maintained. it is not the price at which
corn can be produced, that has any influence
on the quantity produced, but the price at
which it can be sold. it is in proportion to
the degree of the excess of its price above the
cost of production, that capital is attracted to
or repelled from the land. if that excess be
such as to give to capital so employed, a
greater than the general profit of stock, capital
will go to the land; if less, it will be
withdrawn from it.
it is not then by an alteration in the real
price of corn that its production is encouraged,
but by an alteration in its market price.
it is not "because a greater quantity of capital
and labour must be employed to produce
it," mr. malthus's just definition of real
price, that more capital and labour are attracted
to the land, but because the market
price rises above this its real price, and, notwithstanding
the increased charge, makes the
cultivation of land the more profitable employment
of capital.
nothing can be more just than the following
observations of mr. malthus, on adam
smith's standard of value. "adam smith
was evidently led into this train of argument,
from his habit of considering labour as the
standard measure of value, and corn as the
measure of labour. but that corn is a very
inaccurate measure of labour, the history of
our own country will amply demonstrate;
where labour, compared with corn, will be
found to have experienced very great and
striking variations, not only from year to
year, but from century to century; and for
ten, twenty, and thirty years together. and
that neither labour nor any other commodity can
be an accurate measure of real value in exchange,
is now considered as one of the most incontrovertible
doctrines of political economy;
and, indeed, follows from the very definition
of value in exchange."
if neither corn nor labour are accurate
measures of real value in exchange, which
they clearly are not, what other commodity
is?—certainly none. if then the expression
real price of commodities, have any meaning,
it must be that which mr. malthus has stated,
in the essay on rent—it must be measured
by the proportionate quantity of capital and
labour necessary to produce them.
in mr. malthus's "inquiry into the nature
of rent," he says, "that, independently of
irregularities in the currency of a country,
and other temporary and accidental circumstances,
the cause of the high comparative
money price of corn, is its high comparative
real price, or the greater quantity of capital and
labour which must be employed to produce it.
this, i apprehend, is the correct account
of all permanent variations in price, whether
of corn or of any other commodity. a commodity
can only permanently rise in price,
either because a greater quantity of capital
and labour must be employed to produce it,
or because money has fallen in value; and on
the contrary, it can only fall in price, either
because a less quantity of capital and labour
may be employed to produce it, or because
money has risen in value.
a variation arising from the latter of either
of these alternatives, an altered value of
money, is common at once to all commodities;
but a variation arising from the
former cause, is confined to the particular
commodity requiring more or less labour in
its production. by allowing the free importation
of corn, or by improvements in agriculture,
raw produce would fall; but the
price of no other commodity would be affected,
except in proportion to the fall in the real
value, or cost of production, of the raw produce
which entered into its composition.
mr. malthus, having acknowledged this
principle, cannot, i think, consistently maintain
that the whole money value of all the
commodities in the country must sink exactly
in proportion to the fall in the price of
corn. if the corn consumed in the country
were of the value of ten millions per annum,
and the manufactured and foreign commodities
consumed were of the value of twenty
millions, making altogether thirty millions, it
would not be admissible to infer that the annual
expenditure was reduced to  millions,
because corn had fallen  per cent., or from
 to  millions.
the value of the raw produce which entered
into the composition of these manufactures
might not, for example, exceed  per
cent. of their whole value, and, therefore, the
fall in the value of manufactured commodities,
instead of being from  to  millions,
would be only from  to  millions; and
after the fall in the price of corn of  per
cent., the whole amount of the annual expenditure,
instead of falling from  to 
millions, would fall from  to  millions.
instead of thus considering the effect of a fall
in the value of raw produce; as mr. malthus
was bound to do by his previous admission;
he considers it as precisely the same thing with
a rise of  per cent. in the value of money,
and, therefore, argues as if all commodities
would sink to half their former price.
"during the twenty years, beginning with
," he says, "and ending with , the
average price of british corn per quarter was
about eighty-three shillings; during the ten
years ending with , ninety-two shillings;
and during the last five years of the twenty,
one hundred and eight shillings. in the
course of these twenty years, the government
borrowed near five hundred millions of
real capital; for which, on a rough average,
exclusive of the sinking fund, it engaged to
pay about five per cent. but if corn should
fall to fifty shillings a quarter, and other
commodities in proportion, instead of an interest
of about five per cent., the government
would really pay an interest of seven,
eight, nine, and, for the last two hundred
millions, ten per cent.
"to this extraordinary generosity towards
the stockholders, i should be disposed to
make no kind of objection, if it were not
necessary to consider by whom it is to be
paid; and a moment's reflection will shew us,
that it can only be paid by the industrious
classes of society, and the landlords, that is,
by all those whose nominal income will vary
with the variations in the measure of value.
the nominal revenues of this part of the society,
compared with the average of the last
five years, will be diminished one half, and
out of this nominally reduced income, they
will have to pay the same nominal amount of
taxes."
in the first place, i think, i have already
shewn, that the nominal income of the whole
country will not be diminished in the proportion
for which mr. malthus here contends;
