as regarded the exchange or transactions among members of the same
community, the effect would be merely nominal, of no advantage to
any one, and of little disadvantage beyond the enormous public expense
needed to prevent people cheating each other by smuggling and bringing
in the cheaper foreign article;—but such a community must forego
all notion or idea of a foreign trade;—they must have no desires to be
gratified beyond themselves, and they must have within themselves the
independent means of supplying every want. for even if the law be
strong enough to maintain an artificial high price at home, it has no
power of making other countries pay that price; and if everything
we possessed commanded a higher price at home than other countries
could supply the same for, we should have nothing which we could
exchange for the produce of other countries, and thus no more
foreign trade could exist, than in a poor country which had no surplus
produce. it is therefore essential that every country should bear in
mind, in adopting a system of protection to manufactures or other
produce, that they thereby effectually debar themselves from all foreign
trade to neutral countries in such articles; for if they require high
duties at home to protect them from the produce of other countries,
which could only come at considerable expense to compete with them
at home, how can they withstand that competition when they meet on
the same terms in every respect in a neutral market? how effectually
has france stayed her export linen trade by raising the duties and
the price of linen yarn, and by that act, intended as a blow to english
trade, given the linen manufacturers of this country a greater
advantage over france in the markets of the world than ever. how
idle are the efforts of the belgian government to establish depôts and
factories for the sale of their manufactures in st thomas add other
places, while the manufacturers in ghent are only able to maintain
their home trade, by high protective duties, against english, french,
and german goods, and still cry out for greater protection!
it is, however, abundantly plain, that the state of a country above
described could not long exist, when industry and intelligence were in the
course of producing wealth; for if there be one law in nature
more distinct than another, it is, that while the productions of every
country are less or more limited to particular things, the wants of
man extend to every possible variety of products over the whole
world, as soon as his means can command them. as a country
advances in wealth, it will have more and more surplus produce,
which under wise laws would always consist of such things as
it could produce with greatest facility and profit, whether from the
loom or the soil. this surplus produce would be exchanged for the
productions of other climates, but it must be quite clear, as soon as
we arrive at this stage, that the power of the law to protect price
altogether ceases. the surplus exported must sell in the markets[pg ]
of the world, in competition with the same article produced under
the cheapest circumstances, and that article in the home market can
command only the same price.
thus the whole attempt to protect all interests equally would immediately
fail; every article produced in excess, and exported, would
command only the lowest prices of open markets, and the fancied
protection of the law would be void; while everything produced in
deficiency, and of which we required to import a portion to make up
the needful supply, would continue to be protected above the natural
price of the world to any extent of import duty that the law imposed
upon the quantity required to make up the deficiency.
thus, for example, we export a large portion of the woollen, and
the largest portion of the cotton goods which we manufacture, to all
parts of the world, which we must sell at least as cheap as they
can be bought in any other country. the same articles can only
command the same price in the home market, and though the law
imposed an import duty, by way of pretended protection, to any
extent, upon similar foreign goods, it would not have the effect of
raising the price one fraction. on the other hand, we do not produce
as much wool or food as we consume, and have every year to import
large quantities of each to make up the deficiency. whatever duty,
therefore, is put on the import of the quantity thus required, will
enable the producers at home to maintain their price so much
above the natural level of the world. by this state of things the
country at large is injured in two distinct and prominent ways:—first,—those
articles which we can make in excess, and export, must
ever be the chief means of absorbing the increasing capital and labour
of the country; and the impediment thrown in our way, of importing
those things which we have in deficiency, must necessarily check our
power of extending the demand for the produce of such increasing
labour and capital; and, secondly,—the price of such articles as we
produce in deficiency, will always be maintained much above the
level of the world, to the great disadvantage of the other great class of
producers, the price of whose labour, and whose profits, will be
regulated by competition with those who have food, &c., at the lowest
price.
so much as to the effect on the community at large. we will now
shortly consider the effect on individual interests, which are thought
to enjoy protection, and we believe we can show that there never was
a condition so fraught with mischief and disappointment, with such
unmitigated delusion, deception, and exposure to ruin, than is to be
found in every case where protection operates. we think it can be
clearly shown that such occupations can never be more profitable; that they
must usually be less profitable; and that they are always more exposed to
vicissitudes than any other class.
they never can be more profitable, because capital and enterprise
will always be attracted to any occupation which offers a larger
profit than the usual rate, till it is reduced to a level with others;
they will usually be less profitable, indeed always in a community of
increasing numbers, because the price being maintained by restriction
above the price of the world, prevents an extension of such trades in
the same proportion as those who naturally belong to them, and look
to them for occupation, increase in numbers: they will be exposed to
greater vicissitudes, because, being confined to the supply of only one
market, any accidental circumstance, which either increases the
usual supply, or diminishes the usual demand, will cause an infinitely
greater depression than if they were in a condition to avail themselves
of the markets of the whole world, over which they could spread an
accidental and unusual surplus.
thus, previous to , the silk manufacturers of this country were
protected to a greater extent than any other trade, and the price of
silk goods was maintained much above the rate of other countries;
our silk trade was therefore necessarily confined almost exclusively to
the home market and our colonies, and though they had a monopoly
of those markets, it was at the cost of exclusion (on account of higher
price) from all other markets.
notwithstanding this monopoly, the silk manufacturers could never
command at any time larger profits than other trades; for had they
done so, competition would have increased until the rate was reduced
to the common level of the country: on the contrary, the tendency
was for profits and rates of wages to be smaller than in other great
manufacturing branches, requiring equal capital and skill; because,
with the increasing numbers who belonged to the silk trade,—the sons
of manufacturers and of weavers, who naturally, in the first instance,
look to the trade of their parents for their occupation,—the trade did
not proportionably increase, from the fact of our being unable to
extend our exports; and, lastly, it was exposed to much greater
vicissitudes than other trades; for when, either from a temporary
change of fashion or taste, or from a temporary stagnation of trade
in this country, the accustomed demand was lessened, the silk manufacturers
were unable to obtain any relief by extending their trade in
the great neutral markets of the world, being excluded by price, and
the whole surplus quantity remained a dead weight on this market
only; whereas other branches of manufactures, practically enjoying
no protection, in the case of depressed trade at home, had an opportunity
of immediate relief, by spreading the surplus thereby created,
at a very trifling sacrifice, over the wide markets which they supplied.
in this way the extent and duration of the vicissitudes and depressions
in the silk trade were without parallel in any other; but
since , since this trade has been placed in a natural position by
the removal of monopoly, the whole aspect of it has changed, and these
peculiar evils have all disappeared.
then again with regard to the products of land, which the law
attempts to protect more highly than any other. here again, though
the price to the community is maintained much above the prices of
other countries, no one person connected with raising the produce
can command a higher rate of profit, or higher wages for labour,
than other trades having no protection whatever; for if they did,
competition would soon reduce them to the same level; but, on the
contrary, the wages, of agricultural labourers, and the profits of
farmers, are always rather below than above the common rate, and simply
from this fact, that the children of farm labourers, and of
farmers, who first naturally look to the pursuits of their parents for
a trade or occupation, increase in numbers without any corresponding
extension of the means of employment, and the competition among
them is therefore always greater than in other trades which have
the power of extension; and the vicissitudes to which the farmer is
exposed are notoriously greater than any other trade. his rent and
expenses throughout are fixed by an artificial price of produce, which
price can only be maintained as long as a certain scarcity exists;
but the moment the markets are plentifully supplied, either from a
want of demand owing to a depression of trade, or from the result
of a good harvest, he finds that plenty takes out of his hand all
control of price, which quickly sinks to the natural rate.
with a free trade the farmer would never be exposed to such
reverses. in that state, if the demand and price increased, it would
be checked by an increase of imports from other countries; if the
demand and price diminished, that would also be checked by a reduction
or cessation of the usual imports, and, if necessary, by an export
of any surplus which pressed upon the market;—and, if our space
allowed, it would not be difficult to show that, with prices at the
natural rate, all parties connected with land would not only be in
a safer but a much better condition.
no cautious man who well understands the subject will ever hazard
his capital in any trade exposed to so many evils and to so much
uncertainty as restriction and protection infallibly introduce into it:—but
the great error which misleads all men in cherishing such trades
is, that they mistake high prices for high profits, which usually, instead
of being synonymous terms, are quite the reverse.
no. ii.
(continued from no. .)
these three signs, viz., colour, consistence, and vegetation, are
named by the royal agricultural society as being pre-eminently indications
of the value of lands; yet there are others of equal if not of
greater consequence. for example:—
a knowledge of the geology of the land is of the first importance; that
is, not only a knowledge of the range and extent of each formation
and its subdivisions, which may be called geographical geology, but
also how far and to what extent the various lands do depend upon the
substratum for their soil, and the local variations in the chemical or
mineralogical character of the substrata themselves, and which may
be called the differential geology of soils. for not only do the qualities
of land vary from one formation to another, but upon the same formation
there is frequently considerable difference in the quality of land
depending upon chemical difference in the substratum, or upon an
intermixture of foreign debris derived from other strata.
a chemical investigation of the soil and subsoil will frequently afford
most useful indications respecting the value of land. it may be laid
down as an axiom that a soil to be fertile must contain all the chemical
ingredients which a plant can only obtain from the soil, and chemistry
ought to be able to inform us in unproductive soils what ingredients
are wanting. it also is able to inform us if any poisonous substance
exists in the soil, and how it may be neutralized; when lime, marl, and
chalk are to be used, &c.[]
[pg ]the royal agricultural society say that chemistry is unable to explain
the productiveness of soils. but why is it unable? one reason
is, that supposing everything required by the plant to be present in the
soil, yet if the soil be either too wet, or too dry, too cohesive, or loose, the
plant will not flourish; and chemical analysis does not declare this, for
it affords no information respecting the mechanical division in which
substances exist in the soil. again, the chemical analysis of soils, to be
worth anything, must be conducted with more rigid accuracy than
those published by english writers. to detect one cwt. of gypsum in
an acre there would be only one quarter of a grain in a pound of soil, or
in  grains only three and a half thousandth of a grain (⁄ or,
grs.), or to discover if sufficient alumina existed in a field for the production
of red clover there must be ascertained if it contained (one
hundred thousandth), per cent. the analyses even by sprengel
do not afford us the quantity of nitrogen in each soil, or the capacity
of the soil for this substance; while it is well known that most manures,
as well as the different kinds of food, are valuable in proportion to the
quantity contained by them, and it is highly probable, ceteris paribus,
that the quantity of nitrogen found existing in soil, and the soil's
capacity for containing that substance, would afford an easy indication
of its immediate fertility, and also of its requiring great or small quantities
of nitrogenous manures in its future cultivation.[]
chemistry, however, outsteps her province when it is attempted to
explain how vegetable productions are formed in the plants by chemical
forces; for the recent discoveries of schwann, henle, and schleiden,
prove that all the functions of the plant are performed by the means
of simple vesicles and cells—that absorption, assimilation, fixation of
carbon from the atmosphere, respiration, exhalation, secretion, and
reproduction are all effected by single cells, of which the lower plants
almost entirely consist—that the cell absorbs alimentary matters
through the spongioles of the root, and that the fluid received thus
undergoes the first steps of the organizing process—that the inorganic
elements are changed into the simplest proximate principles
by cells—so also are the further changes into the regular secretions
of the plant, the result of cell-life—that gum and sugar are converted
into the organizable portion of the nutritious sap by the
cells of the leaves. the starchy fluid in the grains of corn is
rendered capable of nutrition to the embryo by the development
of successive generations of cells, which exert upon it their peculiar
vitalizing influence. albumen is converted into fibrine by the vital
agency of cell life—i.e., cells are produced which do not form an integral
part of any permanent structure in the plant, but which, after
attaining a certain maturity, reproduce themselves and disappear;
hence it may be stated that all the vegetable productions which are
formed in the plant are effected by a series of vital actions through
the agency of cells.
from the different transformations which these undergo all the
different tissues in vegetables are formed; for instance, the spiral and
dotted ducts, woody fibre, and so on. schwann showed that the
formation of tissues in animals went through exactly the same progress,
a fact which has been confirmed by the microscopic observations
of valentin and barry. thus vessels, glands, the brain, nerves, muscles,
and even bones and teeth are all formed from metamorphosed
cells. dr bennett says—"if this be true, and there can be little
doubt, it obliges us to modify our notions of organization and
life. it compels us to confess that vegetables and animals are not
simple beings, but composed of a greater or less number of individuals,
of which thousands may exist in a mass not larger than a
grain of sand, each having a vital centre and separate life, independent
of those around it. each of these individuals, or organized cells,
should be regarded as a living being, which has its particular vital
centre of absorption, assimilation, and growth, and which continues
to vegetate, to increase, and undergo transformations as if it were an
isolated individual. at all events, a knowledge of the existence of
the cell-life of plants will explain several phenomena respecting the
vegetation, growth, and ripening of corn, and may hereafter lead to
some valuable practical results."
the climate, elevation, and exposure are not to be neglected. upon
the higher portions of the wolds crops suffer, much from elevation
and exposure, while in the western portion of yorkshire, upon the
moor edges, the harvest is usually a month later than in the central
parts of the island.
a moderate depth of soil in general is a favourable sign, although
some of shallow soils on the new red sandstone and on the wolds are
very good; to these signs are to be added locality, as respects markets,
facilities of obtaining a supply of lime, or other tillage, the rates
and outpayments peculiar to the district, &c. &c., all of which are to be
taken into account when considering the value of any particular farm.
i shall now briefly apply these indications of fertility over the different
geological formations of yorkshire, and it will be found that
each lends aid to the other, and that a person will be able to ascertain
the value of land in proportion as he is able to appreciate the collective
evidence afforded by them.
(to be continued.)
[] mr brakenridge, of bretton lodge, who has extensive practice in
land valuing, informs me that a mechanical analysis of the soil affords him
much assistance; and he has found that in soils, whenever free from stagnant
water, that in a mechanical analysis the larger the proportion which
remains suspended in the water, the greater its powers of production will
be found, and the less manure it will require. that the best soils
are those which, when diffused and well stirred in water and allowed
to stand for three minutes, from  to , say , per cent. is carried off
with the water of decantation. when  per cent. and upwards is decanted
off, the soil becomes retentive of water and consequently wet. when less
than  per cent., say only  per cent. and under, is carried off, it becomes
too porous; water passes through it too rapidly; its soluble matter is washed
off into the substratum, and it has a strong tendency to become thin and
sterile.
[] the celebrated black earth of russia contains , per cent. of
nitrogen.
the queen and prince albert, on their return on thursday week from
the chateau d'eu, were accompanied by the prince de joinville, who
remained to dine with the royal party, and then returned in the evening
on board his yacht, for the coast of france. after a few days' repose, her
majesty and the prince started on another marine excursion. they
sailed from brighton on tuesday morning, passed dover, and arrived off
deal about three o'clock, where the royal yacht anchored, in order to
receive the duke of wellington, who came from walmer castle, and dined
with her majesty on board, a large number of vessels, gaily decked with
flags, as well as crowds on shore, giving animation to the scene. the
duke remained with her majesty and prince albert upwards of two
hours, and during the time he was on board, the wind, which throughout
the day had been blowing rather fresh from the northward and eastward,
had considerably increased, and her majesty, upon the duke's taking his
leave, evinced very great anxiety respecting the safe landing of his grace.
everybody who knows this coast is aware that when the wind is blowing
at all from the eastward that there is a very heavy surf on the beach, and
consequently great difficulty in landing. his grace, however, on thanking
her majesty for the concern she evinced on his account, made light of the
matter, and returned on board the ariel, which brought him as near the
shore as possible; here he got into the barge and rowed towards the
beach. the swell was too great to admit of his landing at the pier, from
which he had started, and the boat was pulled towards the naval yard,
where the surf was not so great as at any other part of the shore. here
the duke landed, but not without a thorough drenching, for no sooner had
the bows of the boat touched the shore than a heavy sea broke right over
her stern, and completely saturated his grace's apparel. the duke, upon
landing, all wet as he was, immediately mounted his horse, and rode off to
walmer castle. a numerous assemblage of persons had congregated on
the beach when the duke came on shore, and loudly and enthusiastically
cheered him.
at an early hour on wednesday morning the squadron got their steam
up, and made preparations for taking their departure. the weather had
moderated, and the day was fine. about seven o'clock the royal yacht
got under way, and stood out to sea, and was followed by the other
steamers, and also by the penelope, which had been ordered to form one of
the royal squadron.
about two o'clock on wednesday the royal yacht entered the port of
ostend, taking the authorities somewhat by surprise, who did not expect
it quite so soon. the king and queen of belgium, and the official personages
of ostend, were, however, on the pier to await the landing; and
the populace displayed the most lively enthusiasm. in the evening there
was a grand banquet at the hotel de ville, and ostend was brilliantly
illuminated, in a style far surpassing ordinary occasions.
the king of hanover.—a correspondent writes that his majesty,
while in conversation with a noble friend, expressed the determination,
should divine providence spare him health, to visit this country again
next summer, and he purposed then to come earlier in the season.
visit of the regent of spain to greenwich hospital.—on wednesday,
about twelve o'clock, general espartero paid a visit to the royal
hospital at greenwich.
sir robert peel arrived in town by the london and birmingham railway
on saturday afternoon, from his seat, drayton manor, staffordshire,
and immediately proceeded from the euston-square terminus to the residence
of the earl of aberdeen, in argyll street, to pay a visit to his
lordship. soon, after the arrival of the right hon. baronet, sir james
graham arrived in argyll street from the home office, and had an interview
with sir robert peel.
sir r. peel left his colleagues at a quarter-past four o'clock for the terminus
at london bridge, and travelled by the london and brighton railway
to brighton, to dine with her majesty and prince albert, remaining
at the pavilion, on a visit to her majesty.
manchester musical festival.—this great festival—one of the
greatest and finest musical events that ever occurred in manchester—was
held in the magnificent hall of the anti-corn-law league, the length of
which is  feet, the breadth  feet, inclosing an area of about ,
square feet. the services of all our principal vocal artists were secured.
the soprani were miss clara novello and miss rainforth; the alto or mezzo
soprano, mrs alfred shaw; the tenori, mr braham and mr james bennett;
and the basso, mr henry phillips. the choir was the most complete and
efficient one ever collected in manchester, and consisted of nearly the
whole of the vocal members of the manchester choral society and the
hargreaves choral society, with some valuable additions from the choirs
of bury and other neighbouring towns, and from gentlemen amateurs,
conversant with handel. the messiah was the performance of monday
night; and, on the whole, was executed in a style worthy of that great
work of art, the conductor being sir henry bishop, who wore his robes as
a musical bachelor of the university of oxford. on tuesday there was
a grand miscellaneous concert, the hall being even more numerously attended
than on the preceding evening, there not being fewer than ,
persons present. this went off with very great satisfaction to the very
numerous auditory; and the manchester guardian says, "as to the general
impression produced by this festival, we believe we do not err in saying
that there is but one opinion,—that it has been throughout an eminently
successful experiment. sir henry bishop, we understand, said that he
never heard choruses sung with better effect in his life; and that he considered
the festival, as a musical performance, most creditable to every one
connected with it. as to the capabilities of the hall for singing, we are
informed that miss clara novello has declared that she never sang with
more ease in any place in her life; and we think the ease with which she
did sing was obvious to all who could see her countenance. we have
asked many persons who sat in different parts of the hall, especially in
distant corners, and all concur in saying that they heard most distinctly
miss novello's softest and faintest notes."
musical intelligence.—rubini is about to establish an opera at st
petersburg, and has engaged his old colleague, tamburini, to assist him in
the enterprize. he has also engaged signor pisani, a young tenor of great
promise. lablache will not appear at the opening of the italian opera in
paris. he has gone to naples, where he will remain for two months, and
where he is to be joined by his son-in-law, thalberg. a grand musical
festival, which was to have taken place in paris on thursday next, has
been postponed till the beginning of october. it is said that this festival
will rival those of germany in splendour.
the hereford musical festival, which was held on tuesday, wednesday,
and thursday, in all saints church, in consequence of the repairs going[pg ]
on at the cathedral, was on a much smaller scale than of late years has
been usual with the three choirs, and the attendances at the various performances
were by no means so numerous as had been generally expected;
still, as the expenses had been studiously kept down, it is to be hoped the
receipts may cover them, or nearly so. the collections after the three
services amounted to l., being l. less than in , but l. more than
in .—cheltenham looker-on.
rossini has just left paris without its having been possible to procure
a note from him. every effort has been fruitless. unwilling to hear one
word said of music, rossini has not even been to the opera. he is returning
to bologna, cured of a painful disease by doctor civiale, who, with
reason, seemed to him a far more important personage than duprez. it
is said that rossini replied to the great tenor, who asked him for a part,
"i have come too early, and you too late."—french print.
the aldermanic gown of bread-street ward.—it is supposed
that there will be a hard contest for the aldermanic gown of bread street,
vacant by the resignation of alderman lainson, who on thursday last
addressed a letter to the lord mayor, announcing his determination to
retire, in consequence of ill health.
metropolitan improvements.—the works are now about to commence
in good earnest for forming victoria park. great progress is being
made by the commissioners of the metropolis improvements in the formation
of the new street at the west-end. the new street leading from
oxford street to holborn has been marked out by the erection of poles
along the line. last week several houses were disposed of by auction, for
the purpose of being taken down. some delay has arisen in respect to the
purchase of the houses which have formed the locality known as little
ireland. among the buildings to be removed is the chapel situated at the
top of plumtree street. in this street the whole of the houses on the west
side will be shortly removed, for the new street which will lead from
waterloo bridge. in belton street, in the line for this intended street, the
inmates of several houses received notice to quit yesterday. the occupiers
of the several houses forming the clump at the end of monmouth street, in
holborn, have also received similar notices. similar progress has been
made with the new street communicating between coventry street and
long acre. the line has been cleared from castle street to long acre
on the east. on the west side the inmates of the houses, it is expected,
will in a few days have notice to quit. improvements will also be
made between long acre and st giles's; and in upper st martin's lane the
whole of the houses on the west side will be removed, the greater part of
which are already taken down.
report on the model prison.—the commissioners appointed to superintend
the management of the pentonville prison have just presented
their report for the approval of the secretary of state. the report states,
that it is the intention of the secretary of state to appropriate the prison
to the reception of convicts between eighteen and thirty-five years, under
sentence of transportation not exceeding fifteen years; and that the convicts
so selected shall undergo a term of probationary discipline for
eighteen months in the prison, when they will be removed to van diemen's
land under their original sentences.
returns of the royal mint.—the master of the mint has issued
his annual return of the work done in the refinery of the mint, and of the
assays made during the past year on other accounts than those of government,
and of public and private bodies, in conformity with an order of the
house on a motion made by mr hume. the return estimates the amount
of bullion refined in the year , under this head, at  lbs  oz.  dwts.
of gold, and , lbs.  oz. of silver, the amount received by the refiner
being about l. the number of assays made in the same period is put
down at ,, at a rate of charge of s. for each assay.
post-office law.—it may be interesting at this season, when so many
persons who are out of town have their letters forwarded to them in the
country, to see the answer to an inquiry whether a letter forwarded after
delivery at one address to another in the country is liable to second postage:—"general
post office, sept. , .—sir,—i am commanded by the
postmaster-general to inform you, in reply to your communication of the
th ultimo, that a letter re-directed from one place to another is legally
liable to additional postage for the further service. i am, sir, &c. &c."
singular employment of the police.—under an order recently
issued by the commissioners of the metropolitan police, a number of the
officers of each division have been actively engaged in collecting information
and making out a return of all new houses completed since the year
, in which year the police force was established; all new houses commenced
but not finished; all new churches, new chapels, new schools, and
other public buildings; all new streets and squares formed since that
period, with their names and the name of the neighbourhood.
sanitary state of liverpool.—a mr henry laxton has published
a very thin pamphlet, in the shape of a letter to dr lyon playfair, who
has been appointed, under the commission of inquiry, to examine and
report upon the unhealthy state of liverpool. but though mr laxton's
pamphlet is very small, it exposes evils too complicated and large to be
remedied without vigorous, continuous, steadily-applied exertion. groups
of houses packed together, with scarcely room for the inhabitants to stir;
open cesspools continually sending up their poisonous exhalations, and in
hot or wet weather so infesting the air as to render it almost insupportable;
smoke from the factories and steam-vessels, which, when the wind is
westerly, covers the town, blackening the buildings, soiling goods, and,
mixing with the other gases already generated, forming one general conglomeration
of deleterious vapours; the state of the inhabited cellars; the
neighbourhood of which exhibits scenes of barbarism disgraceful for any
civilised state to allow; an inefficient supply of that great necessity of life—water;
inefficient drainage, which is only adapted to carry off the surface
water;—these are but a sample of the general state of liverpool, and at
the same time very distinct and efficient causes of its excessive mortality.
sheffield.—it is now understood that there will be no immediate
vacancy for sheffield, and that both mr ward and mr parker will retain
their seats.
henry damar, esq.—the dorset chronicle publishes a long account of
the festivities which took place at milton abbey, in dorsetshire, on the
th instant, on the occasion of the coming of age of the proprietor, henry
damar, esq.
proposed public meeting in birmingham.—on monday a deputation
waited on the mayor of birmingham, with the requisition requesting
him to call a public meeting to petition the queen to dismiss her present
ministers. the requisition was signed by nearly one thousand merchants,
manufacturers, and shopkeepers of the town. there was not the name of
a working man attached to it. the mayor, however, declined calling the
meeting, observing, that although he might not act in accordance with
the wishes of many most respectable individuals in the town, he had made
up his mind not to call the meeting.
attendance of the lancashire members of the house of commons
in the session of .—the total number of divisions in the
house of commons, during the session of , was , in which there
voted—
times.
joseph brotherton
salford
dr bowring
bolton
lord stanley
n. lancashire
william sharman crawford
rochdale
thomas greene
lancaster
charles hindley
ashton
sir howard douglas
liverpool
john wilson patten
n. lancashire
john ireland blackburne
warrington
viscount sandon
liverpool
john fielden
oldham
john hornby
blackburn
peter greenal
wigan
thomas milner gibson
manchester
sir george strickland
preston
hon. richard bootle wilbraham
s. lancashire
edward cardwell
clitheroe
william fielden
blackburn
peter ainsworth
bolton
general johnson
oldham
george marton
lancaster
mark philips
manchester
sir peter hesketh fleetwood
preston
richard walker
bury
lord francis egerton
s. lancashire
charles standish
wigan
destructive fire at halifax.—we regret to learn that a fire broke
out early on saturday morning, in the warehouse of messrs james acroyd
and son, worsted manufacturers, bowling dyke, near halifax, when the
building, together with a large quantity of goods, was entirely destroyed.
we understand that messrs acroyd were insured to the extent of six or
seven thousand pounds, but that the loss considerably exceeds that amount.
chester cheese fair.—at this fair on wednesday last, the first of
the season for this year's make, about  tons of new cheese were piled
for sale. early in the morning several dairies went off briskly, but as the
day advanced sales became heavy. prices ranged from s. to s. per
cwt., according to quality. we hear that the make this season has been
above an average one.
new college, near oxford.—a correspondent states that it is
intended to establish at littlemore, near oxford, a college, in which young
men holding tractarian views may be trained for missionary labour in
connexion with the established church. the right rev. dr coleridge,
formerly bishop of barbadoes, will be the principal of the institution.
chatham.—a general court-martial was held on wednesday, the th
inst., in the general court-martial-room, chatham barracks, for the
purpose of trying lieutenant j. piper, of the th cameronian regiment.
the trial lasted four days, terminating on saturday, the th inst. the
charges alleged ungentlemanly and improper conduct. the prisoner's
defence being closed, the court broke up. the sentence of the court
will not be known until the evidence has been laid before the commander-in-chief
at the horse guards. the prisoner is about  years of age.
the trial excited the greatest interest throughout the garrison.
it is said that there are at present upwards of , visitors congregated
at harrogate; and all the other watering places in the north of england,
scarborough, seaton, carew, redcar, tynemouth, shotley bridge, gilsland,
as well as the lakes, are teeming with gay and respectable company.
repeal association.—on monday the usual weekly meeting of the
repeal association was held at the corn exchange, dublin. the week's
"rent" amounted to l., of which l. was from mr baldwin, a paper
manufacturer of birmingham, who is of opinion that ireland would be of
greater benefit to england with a domestic legislature than she was at
present.
repeal meetings.—a repeal meeting was held on sunday last at
loughrea, a town in the county of galway, about ninety miles from
dublin. it was attended by mr o'connell, who as it was raining in
torrents, addressed the people from under the shelter of an umbrella.
amongst other things in his speech, he said,—"believe me, my friends,
that if you follow my advice, the day is not far distant when you shall
have your parliament restored in ireland. i am working the plan
out. i have it in detail. i will have this protective society of 
sitting before christmas, and i hope to be able to give you, as a new
year's gift, a parliament in college green. (cheers.) people of ireland,
you deserve it. brave, noble-minded people of ireland, you deserve it.
faithful, religious, moral, temperate people of ireland, you deserve to be
a nation, and you shall be a nation. (much cheering.) the saxon
stranger shall not rule you. ireland shall belong to the irish, and the
irish shall have ireland." (hurrah.) there was a dinner in the evening,
at which about  persons were present.
branding of arms in ireland.—government has entered into a
contract with mr grubb, the scientific and very able mechanist of the
bank of ireland, for the construction of the machine intended to be
used in marking the arms under the new law—they are not to be subjected
to the operation of punching, still less, as some strangely supposed, to the
notion of fire. the letters, or figures, will be marked by cutting; and,
so simple and ingenious is the method employed, that the most unskilful
workman, even an ordinary person unpractised in any trade, can effect
the process with the most perfect ease. four figures and two letters are
expected to suffice for designating the county or riding of a county, and
the number of the piece; the time occupied in the engraving will be one
minute. the expense will be extremely moderate; the cost of each
machine being, we understand, only twenty-five guineas, one-half of
which, by law, will be defrayed out of the consolidated fund, the other
half by the county.—evening mail.
scene at the phœnix park.—an extraordinary scene took place on
saturday, at the viceregal lodge, between the military on duty and a
person named thomas campbell, who is, it would appear, insane. thomas
campbell, it appears, is a very powerful young man, about thirty years of
age, and a native of the north road, drogheda. at the lodge, in the phœnix
park, he asked to see the lord lieutenant; but, being armed with a
pitchfork and a hammer, he was not considered an eligible visitor, and
after a desperate struggle with the guard, whom he kept at bay, he was
knocked down and secured by a police constable.
[pg ]the meeting of tuesday of the repeal association, adjourned over
from monday, was enlivened by the presence of mr o'connell, without
whom all its proceedings would be "stale, flat, and unprofitable." it
again adjourned till wednesday; and, on that day, mr o'connell read an
address to the people of great britain, setting forth the grievances of the
people of ireland. after the reading of this document, which is long,
and certainly ably drawn up, the association adjourned till monday.
military defences.—before the winter sets in every barrack in
ireland will be in a state of defence, fit to hold out against an insurgent
assault. in fact, everything will be prepared, excepting the insurrectionary
force; and certainly there does not at present appear to be much
chance that the strength of the fortifications will be tested.
repeal demonstration in liverpool.—some days ago public announcements
were made that two days' "demonstration" would be made
in this town, in favour of the repeal of the union, and that mr daniel
o'connell, jun., youngest son of the liberator, and one or two others of inferior
note would attend. the meeting took place on tuesday night last, in
the amphitheatre, which was crowded, by not less than between , and
, persons. shortly after the doors were opened it appeared evident
that a considerable body of orangemen were dispersed in different parts,
from partial sounds of the "kentish fire," and other circumstances. mr
o'connell, and the gentlemen accompanying him, arrived about half-past
seven, and the chair was taken by mr james lennon, who was described
as an "inspector of repeal wardens in liverpool." he delivered a
short speech in favour of repeal, during which he was repeatedly interrupted
by the orangemen, and some confusion followed.—mr fitzgerald
moved the first resolution, which was supported by mr daniel o'connell,
jun. his retirement was the signal for the commencement of an uproar
which almost defies description. there appeared an evident determination
that the proceedings should be stopped; for fights commenced in
different parts, many of the benches were torn up, and a sort of attack was
made upon the stage by a few orangemen who were in the pit. the
police were very active in endeavouring to secure the assailants, several
of whom were seriously hurt; and a few of them having been removed
from the building, order was eventually restored, and, with a few trifling
exceptions, it was preserved to the end of the proceedings.
the working of the measure of the past session, denominated the
church of scotland benefices act, will soon be tested, and is now undergoing
the ordeal of proof, in consequence of objections lodged by
the parishioners of banff, with the presbytery of fordyce, against the
presentation, induction, and translation of the rev. george henderson,
now incumbent of the church and parish of cullen, to the cure and
pastoral charge of the church and parish of banff.
the rev. mr grant, formerly parochial minister of banff, ceased to
hold his status in the established church of scotland, having signed
the famous deed of secession, and voluntarily resigned his living with
his brethren of the non-intrusion clergy. a large portion of his congregation
left the establishment along with him, and a free church is
now in course of being built for their accommodation. the patronage
of the vacant benefice is in the gift of the earl of seafield. the rev.
mr henderson, of cullen, has accepted the presentation to the parish
church of banff.
on the day appointed for "moderating on the call," very few names
were given in, in favour of the presentee, and the presbytery having
fixed a day for receiving objections, a series of reasons and objections
was lodged in the hands of that reverend body, and published at length
in the aberdeen herald, against proceeding with the collation of mr
henderson. the objections are set forth under no less than fourteen
different heads. "the approaches and manners" of the reverend
gentleman are not considered such "as to attach and endear his congregation
to him." he is reported to be subject "to an occasional
exuberance of animal spirits, and at times to display a liveliness of
manner and conversation which would be repugnant to the feelings of
a large portion of the congregation of banff." others of the objections
assert, that his illustrations in the pulpit do not bear upon his text—that
his subjects are incoherent and ill deduced; and the reverend
gentleman is also charged with being subject to a natural defect of
utterance—a defect which it is said increases as he "extends his
voice," which is of a "very harsh and grating description," and
renders it difficult to hear or follow what he says in the church of
banff, which we are informed "is very large, and peculiarly constructed,
with an unusually high pulpit, to suit the high galleries;" and
moreover, "the said rev. george henderson is considered to be
destitute of a musical ear, which prevents the correct modulation of his
voice!"
argyllshire election.—- the election of a member of parliament
for the county of argyll, in the room of alexander campbell, esq., of
monzie, who has accepted the chiltern hundreds, took place at inverary
on friday week. the lord advocate (mr duncan m'neill), the only candidate
in the field, was accompanied to the hustings by a great number of
the county gentlemen; and no other candidate having been brought forward,
a show of hands was consequently taken, which being perfectly
unanimous, he was, of course, declared duly elected.—glasgow saturday
post.
the speaker of the house of commons, mr shaw lefevre, has been
on a visit at glenquoich, the shooting quarters of edward ellice, esq.,
m.p., in this county. the right hon. edward ellice, m.p. for coventry,
the baron james de rothschild, and other members of the rothschild
family, were also at glenquoich.—inverness courrier.
the disturbances in wales still continue, though the apprehension of
some of the rioters who destroyed the pontardulais gate has had some
effect. the following distressing scene is reported in the times:—
"outrage in south wales.—on the road from llanelly to pontardulais,
and within five hundred yards of the latter place, is a turnpike-gate
called hendy gate. this gate was kept by an old woman upwards
of seventy years of age, who has received frequent notices that if she did
not leave the gate, her house should be burnt down. about three o'clock
on sunday morning, a party of ruffians set fire to the thatch of the toll-house.
the old woman, on being awakened, ran into the road and to a
neighbouring cottage within twenty yards of the toll-house, shouting to
the people who lived in it, 'for god's sake to come out and help her to
put out the fire; there was not much.' the occupier of this cottage, a
stout able man, was afraid to go out, and begged the old woman to come
into his cottage, which she refused, and went back to try and save some
of her furniture. it appears her exclamation had been overheard, for the
villains returned and set fire to the thatch again. the old woman then
ran across the road, and shouted out, 'she knew them;' when the brutes
fired at her, and shot her dead."
an inquest was held on the body of the unfortunate woman, and the
jury returned the following astounding verdict:—"that the deceased died
from the effusion of blood into the chest, which occasioned suffocation,
but from what cause is to this jury unknown."
meetings of the magistrates, in relation to the turnpike trusts, have
been held, and measures taken to mitigate the heaviest tolls.
louis philippe has had a remarkable history; but it has been distinguished
to an extraordinary degree by its vicissitudes, amongst which we
must not forget his involuntary exile, and his residence in this country,
where he lived for many years as duke of orleans. a worse man than
his father it would be difficult to imagine. he was a vain, ambitious, and
cowardly voluptuary, who gratified his personal passions at the expense of
his sovereign and his country; but his son was reared in a different school,
and to that accident, conjoined with a better nature, he probably owes the
high position which he now occupies as a european monarch. misfortune
is a stern teacher, and its effects on louis philippe may be exemplified by
a little story that was told of him and lord brougham some years ago:—"i
am the most independent crowned head in europe," said he, "and the
best fitted for my office of all my brethren." the praise might be deserved,
but it seemed strange to the ex-chancellor that it should come from his
own mouth—he, therefore, bowed assent, and muttered some complimentary
phrases about his majesty's judgment, firmness, and the like. "pooh,
pooh, my lord," he observed, laughing heartily, "i do not mean that—i
do not mean that, but that i can—brush my own boots!" this was
practical philosophy, and indicated a clear perception of the constitution
of modern society, particularly on the part of one who is known to be by
no means indifferent to the fortunes of his race. we believe, also, that
louis philippe has been happy beyond most men of regal rank in the possession
of an admirable woman for a wife, the present queen of the french
being, in all respects, a lady of superior intelligence and virtue; properties
which are luckily confined to no condition of life, and to no country
or creed. she has shared in all her husband's troubles during the last
eventful forty years, and now adorns that throne which the exigencies of
the times demanded that he should fill if the french monarchy was to be
preserved. her attention to her children has been unremitting, and the
result is, that high though their position be, a more united household nowhere
exists.
the ministry has been on the point of dissolution. general serrano,
angered at the contempt shown to his denunciations and lists of conspirators,
by the home minister, caballero, gave in his resignation. general
serrano demanded the dismissal from madrid of more suspected persons.
senors olozaga and cortina intervened, however, and made up the quarrel,
ordering the gazette to declare that the most perfect harmony reigned
in the cabinet. this the gazette did. mr aston has demanded his audience
of leave, and quits madrid on the th.
grenada has blotted the name of martinez de la rosa from its lists of
candidates, though he had formerly been elected for that place. m. toreno
is expected at madrid. senor olozaga sets out for paris, to try and
persuade christina to be patient, for that her presence previous to the
elections would rather militate against her party.
at madrid the anniversary of the revolution of , which drove queen
christina from the regency, was celebrated by a te deum, chanted in the
church of san isidro, on the st, and at which assisted the ayuntamiento
and provincial deputation.
barcelona has been in open insurrection, and a sanguinary conflict commenced
on the evening of the rd, which continued with intermissions till
the th. later intelligence stated that the town still held out. on the
th the state of things at barcelona was nearly the same.
one of the great accusations of mm. prim, olozaga, and the french
party, against the regent was, that instead of carrying barcelona and
other towns by storm, he fired upon them with muskets and with cannon.
generals arbuthnot and prim have pursued precisely the same course,
and we see montjuich again throwing bullets upon barcelona, and with all
this making no progress in its reduction.
accounts from barcelona of the th, mention that several mansions were
damaged. three cannon shots had traversed the apartments of the british
consul. prim's own volunteers of reus had taken part against him, and
many of the towns had declared for the central junta. a rural junta of
prim's had been surprised at sarria, and several of its members slain.
a central junta had been formed at girona.
madrid letters of the th state that government were about to dismiss a
great many superior officers and functionaries opposed to them. the partisans
of don francisco have decidedly joined the esparterists.
the siècle says that austria was much alarmed at the state of italy.
"the necessity which austria finds to defend her italian possessions by
arms is highly favourable to the projects of russia against the danubian
provinces of the ottoman empire."
the national german gazette of the th instant states, that the fortifications
of verona are being considerably strengthened. the heights surrounding
the town are to be crowned with towers à la montalembert, so
that the city will become one of the strongest fortresses in italy. the
hungarian infantry, of which the greater part are cantoned in upper italy,
are actively employed in the construction of the fortifications.
constantinople, august .—petroniewitch and wulchitch have at
length consented to leave servia, and are probably at this time in widin,
on their way, it is said, to constantinople. the province has been confided
to the care of baron lieven and m. vashenko, who are the actual
governors. but the most important feature in the question is a note which
the ex-prince michael has addressed to the porte. he declares that the
election of alexander kara georgewitch was brought about by violence
and intimidation, and that he and his ministers are the only faithful servants
of the porte, and, consequently, the only persons fit to govern
servia. it is generally believed that the russians have been privy to this
step, and that it is their intention to put forward michael a second time in
opposition to alexander.
a daughter was born to the sultan on the th. she has been named
jamileh, or the beautiful. the event has been celebrated by the usual
illuminations and rejoicings. the sultan has been the father of nine
children, seven of whom, two sons and five daughters, are now living.
[pg ]
it is said that a misunderstanding exists between mehemet pacha and
his son ibrahim, relative to the succession to the throne of egypt; mehemet
proposing that abbas pacha, his grandson, should succeed after the
death of ibrahim, whilst the latter would wish his own son to succeed him.
arrival of the "hibernia" at liverpool, on wednesday.—great
interest has been excited here for some days past respecting the
voyage of the great western and the hibernia, the former leaving new
york on the st ult., and the latter, boston on the st. the betting has
been in favour of the hibernia, and she has again beaten her great rival.
on tuesday, at midnight, her lights were seen off the port, and at one
o'clock she entered the river, after another rapid passage of nine days from
halifax, and eleven from boston. the news by this arrival is from new
york to the st, boston to the st, and halifax to the rd; sixteen days
later than previously received by the new york packet ship, liverpool.
the new york american, in its summary for the packet, says:—our
commercial and money markets continue without sensible change,
both abounding in supply without any corresponding demand. the trade
of the interior is prosecuted cautiously, and for money in hand.
political affairs are exceedingly dull and uninteresting; even the irish
repeal speakers are quiet.
the progress of the pacification between mexico and texas, and mexico
and yucatan, is slow and somewhat uncertain. the president of texas,
general houston, has dismissed commodore moore and captain sothorp
from the naval service for disobedience of orders. indeed, the texan navy
may be said to have been disbanded. the people of galveston thereupon
gave moore a public dinner, and burnt their president in effigy! the
mexican government has formally complained to the united states
minister at mexico, of the inroads of certain citizens of illinois, missouri,
and arkansas, into the mexican territory. advices from buenos ayres
to the end of june, describe monte video as still holding out; and it was
reported in buenos ayres that the british commodore would at length
allow commodore brown, the buenos ayrean commander, to prosecute
the siege of monte video by sea, in conjunction with oribe by land.
a new constitution has been agreed upon by the republic of ecuador,
establishing the roman catholic religion as the state religion, "to the
exclusion of all other worship," and the bishop of quito, in an address to
which the people responded favourably, proposed that "ecclesiastics
should be henceforth made sole judges in all questions of faith; and be
invested with all the powers of the extinct tribunal of the inquisition!"
the bishop then published a "pastoral lecter," to "make known the
glad tidings." and yet the people of ecuador, without religious freedom,
call their country a free republic!
philadelphia.—the president has returned from his country seat to
washington, and although some alterations in the cabinet are spoken of, still
the results of the august elections, showing that a majority in the united
states senate will be whig, have produced a pause in the contemplated
changes. indeed, people are beginning to complain, and not without reason,
of such frequent changes in important offices. for example, within three years
there have been three secretaries of state, three of war, three of the
treasury, three of the navy, three attorneys-general, and three postmasters-general.
some of them have really not had time to learn their
duties, and they have been succeeded by others who knew still less of the
duties and responsibilities of office.
sir c. metcalfe has returned to the seat of his government at montreal.
the emigrants from great britain arrived this season at quebec,
up to the th ult., were ,; same time last year, ,. a few days
ago, a party of irish labourers, who had received, as they supposed, some
offence from a few canadians, at beauharnois, attacked and nearly killed
two respectable old inhabitants, who had nothing to do with the affair.
another great fire at toronto has burnt about twenty houses; and the
methodist meeting at waterloo has been burnt down by some incendiary.
the crops in both the canadas are abundant. american coarse cottons
are sold there in great quantities, at a lower price than european goods of
the same class.
arrival of the emperor of russia at berlin.—the emperor of
russia arrived on the th instant at berlin.
the disturbances at bologna.—a letter from bologna, september ,
in the debats, says:—"notwithstanding the nomination of a military commission,
and the display of numerous forces, some armed bands have again
appeared, as is reported, in our province. one was commanded by a
priest at castel-bolognese (district of ravenna). this state of things
does injury to trade and business of every description. the greatest number
of depositors have withdrawn their funds from the savings' banks.
a circular has been sent round to all the mayors of the province, giving a
description of eight persons, for the arrest of each of whom a sum of 
crowns (,f.) is offered."
emigration during the last seventeen years.—from a return
furnished by the emigration board, it appears that the number of emigrants
from england and wales, in the seven years from  to ,
were ,, or an average of , yearly; in the ten years from 
to , ,, or , per annum. total number in the last seventeen
years, ,; or an average for that period of ,. but the rate of
emigration has greatly increased of late years, as is shown by the fact,
that while the emigration of the seven years ending  averaged only
, per annum, that of the last ten years (ending ) averaged nearly
, per annum.
new south wales.—the monetary and commercial disasters which
have afflicted this important colony are most serious, and they are thus
alluded to by the colonial press:—"our next mail to england will
carry home the tidings of fresh disasters to this once flourishing colony.
the fast growing embarrassments of , and the  insolvencies of
, have been crowned in the first third of the year , by the explosion
of the bank of australia, then by the minor explosion of the sydney
bank, and, last of all, by the run on the savings bank. these three
latter calamities have come in such rapid succession, that before men's
minds recovered from the stunning effect of one shock, they were astounded
by the sudden burst of another; and we are convinced that at
the present moment there is a deeper despondency and a more harrowing
anticipation of ruin to the colony than ever existed before since the landing
of governor philip, in ."—the run upon the savings bank at
sydney originated, it is said, from malice against mr george miller, the
accountant, whose exertions had been very useful in exposing the mismanagement
of the bank of australasia. reports were circulated that
the governor had gone suddenly down to the savings bank and demanded
a sight of all the bills under discount and mortgages, and that his excellency
declared that he would not give three straws for all the securities
put together; but this statement regarding his excellency is flatly contradicted.
many of the largest holders of land and stock in the colony
are said to be so irretrievably embarrassed, by reason chiefly of the high
prices at which their investments were made, that their property must go
to the hammer without reserve. the present time is, therefore, held out
as a favourable opportunity for emigrants, with moderate capital, to make
their purchases. it is broadly declared that l. would go as far now in
new south wales, in the purchase of land and live stock, as would ,l.
four or five years ago.
australia has been, in some respects, unlucky in its colonization. new
south wales has hitherto flourished from its abundant supply of convict
labour, at the expense of those higher interests which constitute the true
strength and security of a state. western australia was planted with a
sound of trumpets and drums, as if another el dorado were expected.
but the sudden disaster and discredit into which it fell, linked the name
of swan river with associations as obnoxious as those which were once
inspired by the south sea or missisippi. south australia, again, planned
on principles which are universally recognised as containing the elements
of sound and successful colonization, has also proved a failure. one of
the newest and most enterprising of our australian settlements, that of
port philip has been sharing with sydney in the recent commercial distress
and calamity; and though it is already getting over its troubles, it
must undergo a painful process before it can lay an unquestioned claim to
its title—australia felix. land jobbing; banking facilities at one time
freely afforded, and at another suddenly withdrawn; ventures beyond the
means of those engaged in them; imprudent speculations, in which useful
capital was either rashly risked or hopelessly sunk—these unquestionably
have been amongst the causes which have brought on the commercial disasters
of new south wales. it is seldom advantageous for an emigrant,
newly arrived, to become a proprietor of land in any part of australia,
unless his capital be considerable; but the eager desire to become possessed
of the soil overcame all prudential considerations; land at port
philip was eagerly bought, at prices varying from s. to l. in 
the influx of moneyed immigrants from england and van diemen's land,
to a newly-discovered and extensive territory, produced a land fund exceeding
the sum of ,l., and engagements were entered into by the
colonial government, on the faith that the land fund would produce annually
a large amount, but in  it fell down to ,l.; and though in
 as much as l. s. per acre was given for building ground in the
town of brisbane, district of moreton bay, it was impossible for this to
continue; and even for valuable lands in the neighbourhood of sydney, in
the very same year, wholly inadequate prices were obtained. the colonial
government became embarrassed by the expenditure exceeding the revenue;
and in , sir george gipps, in an official despatch, says, "pecuniary
distress, i regret to state, still exists to a very great, and even
perhaps an increased, degree in the colony, though it at present shows
itself more among the settlers (agriculturists or graziers) than the merchants
of sydney. when, however, i consider the vast extent to which
persons of the former class are paying interest, at the rate of from  to
 per cent., on borrowed money, i can neither wonder at their embarrassments,
nor hope to see an end to them, except by the transfer of a large
portion of the property in the colony from the present nominal holders of
it to other hands, that is to say, into the hands of their mortgagees or creditors,
who, in great part, are resident in england." this official prophecy
is now in the act of fulfilment; and when the storm has spent itself,
the colony may be prosperous again.
cape of good hope.—the want of government protection which is
felt by the british resident at the cape of good hope is well illustrated
by the following extract from a letter addressed by the writer to his family
at home:—"i am sure i shall be able to get on well in this country if the
caffres are only prevented from doing mischief, but if they go on in the
present way, i shall not be able to keep a horse or an ox, both of which are
indispensable to a farmer. now i can never assure myself that when i let
my horses go i shall see them again. it is a disgrace to our government
that we are not protected. as it is, all our profits may be swept away in
one night by the marauders."
new zealand.—we understand a box of specie was placed on board the
thomas sparkes, in charge of the captain, for mr chetham. on the owner
opening the box, he discovered to his great surprise that, by some unaccountable
process on the voyage, the money—gold, had been turned into
one of the baser metals—iron. it is stated that the steward left at plymouth,
and the first and second mates whilst the vessel was detained at the
cape, but whether they had any agency in the transmogrification of gold
into iron remains to be proved.—new zealand gazette, feb. , .
the abortive commercial negotiations with spain.—senor
sanchez silva, known for his speeches in the cortes, as deputy for cadiz,
has published, in an address to his constituents, an account of the negotiations
between the spanish and british governments relative to a treaty of commerce.
the effect of this publication will be to undeceive the minds of
spaniards from the idea that the regent's government was about to sacrifice
the interests of spain, or even of catalonia, to england. the terms
proposed by the spanish commissioner were, indeed, those rather of hard
bargainers than of men eager and anxious for a commercial arrangement.
senor silva says that england, in its first proposals, demanded that its cottons
should be admitted into spain on paying a duty of  per cent., england
offering in return to diminish its duties on spanish wines, brandies,
and dried fruits. but england, which offered in  to reduce by one-third
its duty on french wines, did not make such advantageous offers to
spain; and the spanish negotiators demanded that  per cent. ad valorem
should be the limit of the import duty of spanish wines and brandies into
england, as it was to be the limit of the duty on english cottons into
spain. this demand nearly broke off the negotiation, when spain made
new proposals; these were to admit english cottons at from  to  per
cent. ad valorem duty, if england would admit spanish brandies at  per
cent. ad valorem duty, sherry wines at  per cent., and other wines at 
per cent., exclusive of the excise. moreover, that tobacco should be prohibited
from coming to gibraltar, except what was necessary for the wants
of the garrison. the english government, in a note dated last month,
declared the spanish proposals inadmissible. if the spanish government
did not admit the other articles of english produce, the duty on spanish
wines could not be reduced. english cottons were an object of necessity
for the spanish people, and came in by contraband; whereas spanish
wines were but an article of luxury for the english. senor sanchez silva
concludes, that it is quite useless to renew the negotiations, the english
note being couched in the terms of an ultimatum.
[pg ]
london, september , .
sir,—i have read your preliminary number and prospectus, and the first number
of your new periodical, the economist, and it gives me pleasure to see the appearance
of so able an advocate of free trade, the carrying out the principles of which is
so necessary for the future welfare and prosperity of the country, and the relief of the
distress which is more or less felt in all the different departments of industry.
i belong to the class who have their sole dependence in the land, and have no
direct interest in trade or manufactures; and feel as strong a wish for the prosperity
of agriculture as the duke of buckingham, or any other of the farmer's friends; but
i consider the interests of all classes of the community so intimately connected, and
so mutually dependent on one another, that no one can rise or prosper upon the ruins
of the others. like your northumberland correspondent i am fully convinced of the
impolicy and inefficiency of "restrictive corn laws," and of the benefit of "the free-trade
system" for the relief of the agricultural, as well as of the manufacturing, the shipping,
or any other interest in the country; and i should also be glad if i could in any
way assist "in dispelling the errors respecting the corn trade that have done so much
harm for the last twenty (eight) years."
the intention of the corn law of  was to prevent the price of wheat from
falling below s. per quarter; and it was the opinion of farmers who were examined
on the subject, that less than s. or s. would not remunerate the grower, and that if
the price fell under these rates, the wheat soils would be thrown out of cultivation.
prices, however, fell, and though they have fallen to one half, land has not been
thrown out of cultivation. various modifications have since been made in the scale
of duties, but always with a view to arrest the falling prices in their downward course;
but all these legislative attempts have been in vain; and so far as the farmer trusted
to them, they have only misled him by holding out expectations that have not been
realized.
but though the corn laws failed in keeping up the price of corn as high as their
framers and supporters wished, they succeeded so far as to enhance the price of this
first necessary of life, and make it perhaps  or  per cent. dearer than it otherwise
would have been to all the consumers, even the poorest tradesman or labourer in the
country.
if the difference which the agriculturists were enabled, by this monopoly, to
obtain at the expense of the other classes, had all been pure gain, without any drawback,
they must have been in a comparatively flourishing condition; but we find this
is not the case, and what is the reason? let us hear sir robert peel's answer to the
question. in his speech in parliament on mr villiers's motion, when replying to the
accusations that had been made by mr blackstone and other members on his own
side of the house, that he had deceived the agriculturists, as the government measures,
instead of affording them the protection that was promised, had brought down prices
and rendered their situation worse than before, sir robert says, it was not the
government measures that had brought down prices and occasioned the agricultural
distress, but that this arose from the condition of the manufacturing districts, and the
general distress from bad trade and want of employment, which rendered the people
unable to consume.
if this, then, is the true cause of the agricultural distress,—if the corn, sugar,
and other monopolies are so injurious to the manufacturing and commercial classes,
who are the agriculturists' best, and, indeed, their only customers, as to render them
unable to consume, it is not to class legislation that we can look for relief. in order
to relieve the agricultural distress there is no other way than to relieve the distress of
those on whom they depend for a market for their productions.
were the farmer (or rather the landed proprietor) to gain all that the consumer
loses by the corn monopoly,—if it were only taking from one, and giving to another—without
any national loss; though this of itself would be bad enough,—it is perhaps
the smallest part of the loss which the manufacturer sustains; for the same law which
hinders him from going to the best and cheapest market to purchase his food, at the
same time necessarily excludes him from a market for the produce of his industry;
and by diminishing the demand for his labour, lowers his wages or throws him out of
employment.
but one abuse leads to another. those who are interested in the corn monopoly,
or think themselves so, cannot well oppose the sugar monopoly while they require
the aid of the west india planters to enable them to obtain this advantage at their
country's expense; and so it is with all the other monopolists, they naturally unite
together, and it requires their mutual aid and all their combined power and influence
to preserve a system which they know stands upon rather an insecure foundation,
and if once broken in upon would soon fall to pieces; and thus it is that we are subjected
to the sugar monopoly, and though it is manifestly our interest to buy this
important necessary of life (as well as every other) in any quarter of the globe where
we can find it best and cheapest, we are restricted to a small portion of the earth's
surface, and have to pay a third part more than we might obtain the article for without
any loss to the revenue. by this narrow-minded system of buying, we deprive
ourselves of valuable markets for our manufactures, as you have shown is likely
to be the case with the brazils on the expiry of the commercial treaty with that country
if the matter is left in the hands of ministers, "and no effort made to avert so
great an evil." the agriculturists have to pay directly for this monopoly in common
with all the other classes in the addition to the price of the sugar they consume; but
the manufacturers suffer the still greater disadvantage of having the market for the
produce of their labour narrowed, and thus the agriculturist will also suffer indirectly
by their customers being thereby still farther disabled to consume.
but these and all other monopolies and restrictions in trade not only lessen the
demand for our manufactures abroad, but they diminish the consumption at home,
to an extent greater perhaps than we are aware of; for there can be no doubt that the
more the consumer has to pay for his bread, sugar, and other articles of food, the less
he will have to spare for cottons, woollens, and other manufactured commodities.
the demand for his labour is thus lessened both at home and abroad. the weaver
of cloth may be unable to obtain a coat even of his own manufacture, however necessary
it may be for his health and comfort; he must have food, in the first place, being
more indispensibly necessary to his existence,—no doubt he may have to content himself
with a less quantity than he could have wished, and have to substitute oatmeal
and potatoes, or some other inferior food for wheaten bread and butchers meat; still,
it is less in his power to curtail the consumption of agricultural produce than of
manufactures, so that the manufacturing classes suffer from the general distress which
renders the people unable to consume in a greater degree than the agriculturist.
darlaston, september , .
sir,—twelve months ago the editor of the morning chronicle allowed a letter of
mine, referring to the distress then prevailing in this town, to appear in that journal;
in it i stated that for our annual wake only twenty-four cows had been killed, when
but a few years previously ninety-four had been slaughtered on a similar occasion.
perhaps you will permit me to state in your columns that this year the festival, in this
particular, has afforded as melancholy and unquestionable proof of distress as the last,
while it bore other evidence, which though trivial in itself, is not unworthy of notice.
last year two theatrical shows visited us, displaying their "red barn" tragedies, and
illuminated ghosts, at threepence per head, at which they did well; as also did a tremendous
giantess, a monstrously fat boy, and several other "wonderful works of
nature:" this year only one show of any description attended, and that, with kings
and queens, and clowns, as well dressed and efficient, and ghosts, as white and awe-inspiring
as ever paraded before an audience, has reaped but an indifferent harvest at the
"low charge of one penny each;" while the swing boats and wood horses, patronized
with such glee by the miniature men and women attending and enjoying wakes and
fairs, only worked half time. the physical-force majority in the house, and their
aiders and abettors, were they to see this, would perhaps laugh at the petty details,
but their doing so would not in the least detract from their truth, or render questionable
for a moment the deductions i make from them,—that poverty is so wide
spread and bitter that the poor are compelled to make a stern sacrifice of innocent
amusements; that the parent cannot exercise the holiest affections of his nature, by
adding to the pleasures of his lisping little ones; that the landowners' corn law, by its
paralyzing influence, is rapidly withering the great mass of the industry of the country
into idle, dispiriting pauperism.
from inquiries i have made i learn that through the country generally the wakes,
and fairs, and races, have presented similar features to those i have described above,
so far as money goes. and in face of the distress, of which these things bear glaring
witness, the prime minister says "that the distress has been produced by over-production."
can sir robert be serious when he talks of "over-production?" if he be, and
will condescend to honour me with a visit during his stay at drayton manor, which is
only a short drive of sixteen miles from here, i will show him that the opinion is fallacious.
he shall dispense with his carriage for a short time, and i will walk him
through all the streets of darlaston, wednesbury, willenhall, bilstow, &c., and, forsaking
the thoroughfares frequented by the gay and well-to-do, he shall visit the back
streets—in which carriage passengers never deign to go—of birmingham, wolverhampton,
and walsall, and what he will witness in the course of the short ramble will
"change the spirit of his dream." in darlaston, as a sample of what he would see,
there are hundreds of men and women whose clothes, made of the coarsest materials,
are patched, and threadbare, and valueless; hundreds of houses without anything in
them deserving the name of furniture; hundreds of beds without clothing, and hundreds
of children whose excuses for clothes are barely sufficient, with every contrivance
decent poverty can suggest, to cover the body as civilized society demands.
in the towns i have enumerated, in fact, if the least reliance may be placed in newspaper
reports, in every town and village in the country the same want prevails to a
much greater extent than can be conceived by such as sir robert, "who fare sumptuously
every day,"—aye, even to a much greater extent than is generally supposed by
the above-want dwellers in large towns whom business may frequently bring in contact
with those who toil. with the millions, then, who in this country must be next to
naked, without furniture in their houses, without clothes to cover their straw beds, is
it not the nonsense of nonsense to talk of "over-production." enable these men to
satisfy the wants of themselves and families, enable them to make their homes comfortable,
and that alone would find employment for a goodly number, while those so
employed would also be enabled to purchase the articles others are engaged in manufacturing.
to produce so desirable a result, nothing is wanted but free trade
repeal the corn and provision laws, and the shadow of "over production" could not
exist: in three months there is not a man in the kingdom who would not have full
work. and when we had supplied the physical wants of our population (a greater
task than it appears at the first view), we should have introduced from every corner of
the world the luxuries which refine civilization; the artisan building himself a house
would then make it more comfortable and healthy, with wood floors, carpets, better
furniture, &c.; and the master manufacturer erecting a house would have marble
stairs and floor in his entrance hall, doors, &c. of mahogany, furniture, of rarer woods,
and ornaments of marble, paintings, plate glass, &c.; and when all these things were
procured, "over-production" would be still as far behind us as during their acquisition,
as we would then work but three days a week instead of six, as with so much labour
we should be able to procure the necessaries and luxuries of life.
and all nations would be compelled to minister to our real and created wants, for
england is the only nation in the world incapable of internally supplying its inhabitants
with food, and therefore, under free trade, has the command of the markets of
the whole world. then the english merchant going to, say america, to dispose of
manufactures need not fear the merchant of france, belgium, germany, &c., he may
meet there with similar goods; for the american asking each what he requires for the
articles offered, is told by the former, "i will take your surplus corn in exchange, we
want every year from six to ten millions of quarters;" and this latter answers, "we
have more corn at home of our own growth than we can consume, i must have cash;"
the american, preferring barter, will turn on his heel and trade with the englishman;
the unsuccessful applicant takes back his goods, or visits the market no more, and
confines his future operations to the home supply of his own country, which in a short
time, from competition and want of a foreign outlet, fail to realise a remunerating
profit; trade is gradually relinquished; the people turn again to the more extensive
cultivation of the land, and england obtains another customer. this is no "castle
building," if there be the least affinity between the results of great things and small
ones. if a grocer want a coat he will have it from the tailor who will take sugar and
tea in payment, in preference to patronising one who requires pounds shillings and
pence, and the owners of land in all countries will take right good care that they derive
some sort of revenue from their possessions. i say, i think my premises are no "castle
buildings;" neither do i think i am indulging in aerial erections when i predict that,
under free trade, england, with her capital, and energy, and enterprise, would
shortly become the world's granary, profitably supplying from her accumulated stores
the deficiencies resulting from bad harvests, or other casualties of her continental
neighbours.
your obedient servant,
we are much obliged to j. livesay, of preston, for his suggestion, which,
however, if he compare the economist with other weekly papers he will perceive
to be unnecessary. we presume we are indebted to mr livesay for copies forwarded
of his excellent little paper the struggle.
r.b., bristol.—from the great press of room last week we were obliged to omit
everything that did not appear of very pressing haste. in the preliminary
number we have used no statistics but such as we have derived from official
sources, and we shall always be glad to give the authority on which any
statistical statement is made. the statement of the quantity of sugar exported
from java and madeira, page  of the preliminary number, will be
found in part viii, , page , of the tables of population, revenue,
commerce, &c., presented by the board of trade to both houses of
parliament, from  to ;—and the quantities, from  to , are
derived from the dutch official accounts.
h.h., s—— court, london.—the returns showing the quantity of flax imported
up to the th of august, viz., , cwts., are official, but do not[pg ]
distinguish the ports from which it was shipped. the latest year for which
such distinction has been made to this time is for the year ; for which, or
any preceding year back to , we shall be glad to furnish the particulars:
for example, in  the imports of flax and tow were—from
cwts.
russia
denmark
prussia
germany
holland
belgium
france
gibraltar
italy and the italian islands
the morea
turkey
egypt
united states
guernsey, &c.
total - ,,
c.d.f.——, near rochdale.—the question connected with the new customs
amendment bill has engaged our best attention, but its investigation has
raised two or three very nice points of international law, on which we are
now taking the best opinion which can be obtained, and before our next number
we shall be able to give a reply as satisfactory as can possibly be obtained
from any quarter on this important but very nice question. we have now
before us the whole of the particulars of the treaties in question, but we wish
to make our reply valuable by giving the best legal construction on some disputable
points. this, however, is only another of those daily evidences which
we have of the absurdity and inconvenience of a great commercial country
like this attempting to regulate its laws and transactions by treaties, which,
however convenient they may be when made, may, by the ordinary course of
events, be rapidly changed.
london, saturday morning, september , .
stock exchange, half-past eleven o'clock.
there is little or no variation in english stock: mexican, which left off
yesterday at ⁄ to ⁄, is now ⁄ to . brazilian, which left at  to ,
is now  to . in other foreign stocks there is no alteration worth
notice.
liverpool, friday evening, september , .
an active demand has been constantly kept up all the week, and a large
business has been done daily. so far, however, it has been freely met by
the holders; and the speculators and spinners have had an abundant choice
of all qualities.
in american descriptions there is but little change in prices; the tendency,
has been and still is in favour of holders; and it has been thought necessary
to raise the quotations of "fair" uplands and mobile to -⁄d.; but there
is so little actual change, that for the most part, the quotations remain as
before. brazils, egyptian, and long stapled generally, have been more in
demand, and may be considered ⁄d. higher. sea islands also within the
fortnight are ⁄d. higher, making an advance in the ordinary to fair qualities
from the very lowest point of ⁄d. to d. per lb.
a considerable part of the speculative business of this week has been
prompted by the accounts from the united states, brought by the
hibernia and great western, the tenor of which is to confirm the previous
impression as to short crops.
, american,  egyptian, and  surat have been taken on
speculation; and , american,  pernam, and  surat for export.
the following is the statistical review of our cotton market:—
taken for consumption:from st jan. to th sept.
for export:
whole import:
, bales.
, bls.
, bls.
, bls.
,, bls.
,, bls.
computed stock.th sept.
average weekly consumption.st jan. to th sept.
, bls.
, bls.
, bls.
, bls.
for sugar there is rather more inquiry, at steady prices.—coffee; the
sales of plantation trivial without change of price.—indigo, price firm at
the advance of d. to d., established at public sale yesterday.—tea; the
market remains rather firm, and a moderate business has been done at
previous rates. in other articles of produce a fair amount of business has
been done, without any particular features to remark.
grain.—there has been rather more demand for old wheat, and prices
for this and all other articles in the trade are supported. duty has been
paid on nearly the whole of the bonded stock, and the rate is now on the
advance.
the papers of this morning do not contain any intelligence of the slightest
novelty or interest. her majesty and prince albert are enjoying
themselves at ostend in the society of their august relatives, the king and
queen of the belgians. to-day (saturday) the royal party go to bruges;
on monday to brussels; on tuesday to antwerp; and on wednesday
return to england.
barcelona is still in a state of insurrection; and though madrid is tranquil,
the state of spain, as the times remarks, is one of "simple confusion."
the malta correspondent of the morning chronicle says that a report
had been current at bombay that it was the intention to order the next
steamer for the overland mail to keep her direct course, in spite of the
monsoon. the monsoon had, no doubt, driven her back.
wales continues in a distracted state, and acts of incendiarism are common.
the extraordinary verdict given by the inquest jury on the body
of the unfortunate old woman who was shot, is the subject of general
remark, as strikingly evincing the terrorism which prevails. there is even
talk of the necessity of putting the country under martial law!
the very remarkable meeting held by messrs cobden and bright, at
oxford, on wednesday last, is the theme of general conversation in society.
it is, indeed, a very striking evidence of the progress of free-trade principles
amongst the agriculturists.
the leeds mercury of this morning, and other provincial organs of public
opinion, in the great seats of our commerce and manufactures, all speak
in cheerful terms of the decidly-improving prospects of trade.
free trade—aug. th.
the corn-law controversy.—a friend has placed in our hands
numbers of the tracts which the corn-law reformers of england circulate
among the people. they are about the size and length of the religious
tracts of this country, and are put up in an envelope, which is stamped
with neat and appropriate devices. these little publications comprise
essays on all the topics involved in the corn-law controversy, sometimes
in the form of dialogues, sometimes of tales, and sometimes of extracts from
famous books and speeches. the arguments are arranged so as to be
easily comprehended by the meanest capacities.
the friend to whom we are indebted for these is well informed on the
subject, and says that a more advanced state of opinion prevails among
the people of england, in relation to the operation of tariffs, than in
this nation generally so much more enlightened. it is a singular spectacle
which is thus presented to the eyes of the civilized world. while the
tendency of opinion, under an aristocratic monarchy, is towards the
loosening of the restraints under which the labour of the people has long
suffered, a large and powerful party in a nation, whose theory of government
is nearly a century in advance of the world, is clamouring for their
continuance and confirmation. monarchical england is struggling to break
the chains that an unwise legislation has forged for the limbs of its trade;
but democratic america is urged to put on the fetters which older but
less liberal nations are throwing off. the nations of europe are seeking
to extend their commercial relations, to expand the sphere of their mutual
intercourse, to rivet the market for the various products of their soil
and skill, while the "model republic" of the new world is urged to stick to
the silly and odious policy of a semi-barbarous age.
we look upon the attempt which is making in great britain to procure
a revision of the tariff laws, as one of the most important political movements
of the age. it is a reform that contemplates benefits, whose effects
would not be confined to any single nation, or any period of time. should
it be successful, it would be the beginning of a grand and universal scheme
of commercial emancipation. let england—that nation so extensive in
her relations, and so powerful in her influences—let england adopt a more
liberal policy, and it would remove the only obstacles now in the way of a
complete freedom of industry throughout the globe. it is the apparent
unwillingness of nations to reciprocate the advantages of mutual trade,
that has kept back this desirable reform so long. the standing argument
of the friends of exclusiveness—their defence under all assaults, their
shelter in every emergency—has been that one nation cannot pursue a free
system until all others do, or, in other words, that restriction is to be met
by restriction. it is a flimsy pretence, but such as it is, has answered the
purposes of those who have used it, for many centuries.
the practice of confining trade by the invisible, but potent chains of law,
has been a curse wherever it has prevailed. in england, more dependent
than other nations on the extent of its commercial intercourse, it may be
said to have operated as a scourge. the most terrible inflictions of natural
evil, storms, famine, and pestilence, have not produced an equal
amount of suffering. indeed, it has combined the characteristics of the
worst of those evils. it has devastated, like the storm, the busy hives
of industry; it has exhausted, like famine, the life and vital principle of
trade; and, like the pestilence, it has "walked in the darkness and wasted
at noon-day." when we read of thousands of miserable wretches, in all
the cities and towns of a great nation, huddled together like so many
swine in a pen; in rags, squalor, and want; without work, bread, or hope;
dragging out from day to day, by begging, or the petty artifices of theft,
an existence which is worthless and a burden; and when, at the same
time, we see a system of laws, that has carefully drawn a band of iron
around every mode of human exertion; which with lynx-eyed and omniscient
vigilance, has dragged every product of industry from its retreat
to become the subject of a tax, can we fail in ascribing the effect to
its cause, or suppress the utterance of our indignation at a policy so heartless
and destructive?
yet, this is the very policy that a certain class of politicians in this
country would have us imitate. misled by the selfish and paltry arguments
of british statesmen, but unawed by the terrible experience of the
british people, they would fasten upon us a system whose only recommendation,
in its best form, is that it enriches a few, at the cost of the lives
and happiness of many. they would assist a constrictor in wrapping
his folds around us, until our industry shall be completely crushed.
st olave's church.—the rebuilding of this church in the early part
of the last century cost the parishioners a less sum than the organ. the
old church having fallen down, the new one (that recently destroyed by
fire) was erected by raising an annuity of l., and the granter died after
receiving the first half year's payment of l. the organ was the most
ancient instrument in the metropolis.
[pg ]
as we stated last week, announcing the intention, mr cobden and mr
bright visited oxford on wednesday, for the purpose of addressing the
freeholders and farmers of the county on the subject of the corn laws.
very considerable excitement had prevailed in the city and the surrounding
districts in consequence of the proposed visit of mr cobden, but
it does not appear that the landowners on the present occasion, through
the medium of the farmers' clubs and agricultural associations, thought
fit to get up an organised opposition, similar to that at colchester, or
interfere to prevent their tenants from attending, as at reading. the
consequence was a very large number of farmers were present at the
meeting, although it is well known that the harvest is not in such a state
of forwardness as to allow them to absent themselves from their ordinary
occupations without considerable inconvenience.
it is a circumstance worthy of notice, and strongly indicative of the
present state of public feeling upon the subject, that in a purely agricultural
district, at a county meeting regularly convened by the high sheriff,
the whole of the county members being present, two of whom spoke in
favour of protection, supported by many influential men of their own
party, no person ventured to propose a resolution in favour of the present
corn law, and that even the resolution for a low fixed duty made by two
of the most popular men and largest landed proprietors in oxfordshire,
lord camoys and mr langston, was supported by only three or four individuals
out of a meeting of nearly , persons.
early in the morning, a protectionist champion presented himself, not
in the guise either of a freeholder or farmer of the county, but in the
person of a good-humoured, though somewhat eccentric printer, named
sparkhall, who had come from the celebrated locale of john gilpin—cheapside,
and who having armed himself with a large blue bag fitted
with elaborate treatises upon the corn laws, and among other pamphlets
a recent number of punch, forthwith travelled to oxford, and by the kind
permission of the meeting was permitted to essay a speech, about what
nobody could divine, and in a manner truly original. it is, however, due
to the monopolists of oxfordshire to state that they did not accredit their
volunteer champion, and even went so far as to request that he would
"bottle up" his eloquence for some future opportunity.
at two o'clock, the hour appointed for the proceedings to commence,
the county hall, which is capable of containing , persons, was nearly
filled.
mr cobden and mr bright, who had been dining at the farmers' ordinary,
held at the roebuck hotel, arrived shortly after two, and were accompanied
to the place of meeting by a large number of influential farmers
and leading agriculturists, who had met the honourable members at the
market table. they at once proceeded to the gallery, where, among others
at this time, were lord camoys, of stonor hall, oxon; the three members
for the county, lord norreys, mr harcourt, and mr henley; mr langston,
m.p. for the city of oxford; mr thomas robinson, banker; mr
charles cottrell dormer, mr j.s. browning, mr w. dry, mr w. parker,
captain matcham, rev. dr godwin, rev. w. slatter, mr richard goddard,
mr h. venables, messrs grubb, sadler, towle, weaving, harvey, &c.
on the motion of lord cambys, seconded by mr langston, m.p., mr
samuel cooper, of henley-on-thames, under-sheriff for the county, was,
in the absence of the high sheriff, called to the chair.
the chairman said he regretted very much that the high sheriff was
prevented from attending the meeting, which had been convened in consequence
of a requisition presented to the sheriff by several freeholders of
the county. having read the requisition, he introduced
mr cobden, who proceeded for some time to address the meeting on the
fallacy of the present corn law as a protection to the farmer, amid
frequent cries for adjournment, in consequence of the crowded state of the
hall, and
mr sadler having intimated that several hundred persons were waiting
at the castle green, at which place it had been generally expected the
meeting would ultimately be held, moved its adjournment to that spot,
which was immediately agreed to.
several waggons had been brought to the green, for the purpose of
forming a temporary platform, and the meeting being again formed,
mr cobden resumed, and, in his usual powerful manner, explained the
influence of the corn law upon the tenant, farmer, and farm-labourer,
urging the necessity of free trade as the only remedy for agricultural as
well as manufacturing distress. the honourable member was loudly
cheered during the delivery of his address, which evidently made a deep
impression on the large proportion of his auditory.
mr sparkhall then came forward. mr cobden having kindly interceded
to obtain him a hearing, and having duly arranged his books and papers,
he at once commanded the serious attention of the meeting, by stating
broadly as the proposition he was about to prove—that the repeal of the
corn laws would plunge the nation into such a state of depression as must
ultimately terminate in a national bankruptcy. after quoting from the
honourable and reverend baptist noel, mr gregg, and other passages,
the relevancy of which to his proposition no one could discover, he bewildered
himself in a calculation, and gladly availed himself of a slight
interruption to make his bow and retire.
lord camoys next addressed the meeting. he said mr cobden came
among them either as a friend or an enemy. if he came as a friend, it was
the duty of all to receive him as such; but if as an enemy, then it behoved
the farmers of oxfordshire to meet him boldly, and expose the fallacy of
his arguments. for himself he (lord camoys) believed mr cobden came
as a friend. he was not one of those who were afraid of the anti-corn-law
league; but he was afraid of that class who designated themselves the
farmers' friends. he thought if they were to give the anti-corn-law
league ,l. a year for fifty years, it would never do half the mischief
to agriculture that the farmers' friends themselves had done. (hear,
hear.) it was this impression that had induced him to sign the requisition
that had been laid before him, for he was anxious that the farmers of
oxfordshire should have the benefit of any information that could be given
to them on the subject. there were three courses open for discussion.
the first was the sliding scale (cries of "no, no"); the second a low fixed
duty; and the third, a total and immediate repeal of the corn law. (hear,
hear.) he believed the sliding scale was already on its last legs; indeed,
it was only defended by a few country gentlemen and fortunate speculators,
who had by a lucky chance contrived to realise large fortunes. he
was himself for a low fixed duty, and mr cobden advocated free trade.
there was not so much difference, after all, between them; but he considered
that to apply the principles of free trade to england, would be to
apply the principles of common sense to a deranged country, suffering
under the pressure of an enormous debt. he thought the english farmer
should be placed on a level with the continental corn-grower; but he did
not think the mere expense of transit would have the effect of securing
this as argued by mr. cobden. with this view he should propose to the
meeting the following resolution:—"that the agricultural interest being
the paramount interest in this country, to depress that interest would be
injurious to the entire community; that suddenly to adopt free trade in
corn must produce that effect, and that, therefore, it is the opinion of this
meeting that a moderate fixed duty upon the importation of foreign grain
is the one best adapted to the present position of the agricultural interest
and the welfare of the country."
this resolution was seconded by mr langston, m.p., but this gentleman
gave way for
mr bright, who, upon presenting himself, was received with load cheering.
in an eloquent address he clearly demonstrated that the only way in
which the corn laws could benefit the farmer was by making food dearer,
which could only be done by making it more scarce. that the advantage
of such high prices invariably went to the landlord in the shape of rent, in
consequence of the immense competition for farms, arising from the increase
in the agricultural population, and the difficulty of providing for
them in commerce and manufactures, owing to the depressed condition to
which they had been reduced by the operation of the corn laws. high
prices could only be obtained by the farmer from the prosperity of his
customers. in reply to the resolution of lord camoys, the honourable
gentleman stated, that with regard to agriculture being the paramount interest
of the country, there could be no doubt in every country there must
be land for the people to live on, and so far it was the paramount interest;
but he denied that anything like half the population of england were engaged
in agricultural pursuits. the agricultural interest would not be
depressed, nor would the community be injured by free trade. he would
put it to the meeting whether they would have a low duty or no duty at
all. (loud cries of "no duty.") a fixed duty of s. would raise the price
that amount, and the whole would go into the pockets of the landlord.
the honourable gentleman concluded his address amid loud cheers.
lord norreys next spoke in favour of the existing corn laws, attributing
the distress under which all classes at present laboured to the over-production
of the manufacturers.
mr langston, m.p., having replied to his lordship,
mr henley, m.p., addressed the meeting at some length, in favour of
the present restrictive duties on the importation corn. the honourable
member concluded by observing that he had attended the meeting because
it had been convened by the high sheriff; and he thanked them for the
patience with which they had listened to his observations, though neither
he nor his colleagues considered it to be properly designated as a farmers'
meeting, the majority present being composed of other classes.
mr cobden briefly replied; and
mr towle (a tenant farmer) moved the following amendment, "that in
the opinion of this meeting the principles of free trade are in accordance
with the laws of nature and conducive to the welfare of mankind, and that
all laws which interfere with the free intercourse of nations, under the
pretence of protection to the agricultural, colonial, or manufacturing interests,
ought to be forthwith abolished."
the motion having been seconded, was put, and declared to be carried,
with only three dissentients.
mr henley then proposed, and mr cobden seconded, a vote of thanks to
the chairman, who briefly acknowledged the compliment, and three cheers
having been given for free trade the meeting separated, having lasted
nearly five hours.
public dinner to r. walker, esq., m.p., bury.—on wednesday
week a public dinner was given, in the free-trade pavilion, paradise
street, bury, by the electors of bury, to the above-named gentleman,
for his constant advocacy of liberal principles in the house of commons.
the meeting, though called to do honour to the worthy representative
of bury, was emphatically a gathering of the friends of free trade, mr
bright, dr bowring, mr brotherton, &c., being present.
dr bowring's visit to his constituents.—dr bowring arrived
in bolton, on his annual visit, on thursday week. in the course of
the afternoon he called upon several of the leading reformers and free-traders
of the borough; and in the evening, according to public
announcement, he attended at the temperance hall, little bolton, to
address the inhabitants generally. the doors of the hall were opened at
seven o'clock, and hundreds immediately flocked in. at half-past seven,
the hall was crowded to excess in every part. on dr bowring's entrance,
he was greeted with loud cheers. the chief portion of the proceedings
consisted in the speech of the learned and honourable member, who, as
might be expected, dwelt with great power on the question of questions—free
trade. we have only room for the following eloquent passage: "the
more i see of england, the prouder i am to recognise her superiority—not
alone in arms—about that i care little, but in manufacturing arts, the
peaceful arts, which really reflect glory on her people. (cheers.) give
us fair play and no favour, and we need not fear the strength of the whole
world. (hear.) let us start in an honest rivalry—let us get rid of the
drawbacks and impediments which are in the way of our progress, and sure
i am that the virtues, the energies, the industry, the adventurous spirit of
the manufacturers and merchants of england, which have planted their
language in every climate and in every region, would make them known
as benefactors through the wide world. they are recognised by the black
man as giving him many sources of enjoyment which he had not before;
by the red man as having reached his fields and forests, and brought to
him in his daily life enjoyments of which his ancestors had no notion; by
all tribes and tongues throughout the wide expanse of the earth, as the
allies of improvement, and the promoters of happiness. sure i am that
england—emancipated england—the labourers—the artisans of england,
may do more for the honour and reputation of our country than was ever
done by all the nelsons and wellingtons of the day. (loud cheers.) i
was struck very much, the other day, by the remark of one of the wisest
and best men of our times, from the other side of the atlantic, who said,
'i am not dazzled by the great names which i see recorded in high
places; i am not attracted by the statues which are raised to the men
whom you call illustrious, but what does strike me, what does delight me,
what does fascinate me, is to trace the working man of england to his
home; to see him there labouring at his loom unnoticed and unknown,
toiling before the sun rises, nor ceasing to toil when the sun has descended
beneath the mountain. it is that man, the missionary of peace, who forms
the true link of alliance between nation and nation, making all men of one
kindred and of one blood,—that man upon whose brow the sweat is falling,—that
man whose hands are hardened by labour,—that is the man of
whom england has a right to be proud—(hear)—that is the man whom
the world ought to recognise as its benefactor.' (cheers.) and, gentlemen,
in such sentiments i cordially agree, and the time will come when
the names of men who are called illustrious, at whose feet we have been
rolling out torrents of wealth, whom we have been crowning with dazzling[pg ]
honours—those men will pass away into the realms of forgetfulness, while the
poor and industrious labourer, who has been through the world a herald
and apostle of good, will be respected and honoured, and upon him future
times will look as the real patriot, the real philanthropist, the real honour
of his country and of his countrymen." the proceedings were closed by
the unanimous thanks of the meeting being given to dr bowring.
free trade.—we are glad to learn, from a correspondence in the
liverpool albion, that w. brown, esq., the head of the eminent house of
brown, shipley, and co., of liverpool, has declared his adherence to the
cause of perfect freedom of trade, contributing, at the same time, l. to
the funds of the liverpool anti-monopoly association.
corn trade of france.—the moniteur publishes the return of the
corn trade in france during the month of july, from which it appears that
the imports were—wheat, , metrical quintels; other grain, ,;
and flour, . the exports—wheat, ,; other grain, ,; and
flour, ,. the quantities lying in the government bonding stores on
the first of august were—wheat, , metrical quintals; other grain,
,; and flour, ,.
anti-corn-law meeting at hampstead.—the opponents of the
corn laws resident at hampstead assembled on tuesday night, in crowded
meeting, at the temperance hall of that locality, to hear mr sidney
smith deliver an address on the evils of the corn laws. the meeting was
the first of the kind since the formation of the new association, and there
were several of the respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood present.
mr smith entered at length into the whole question of the monopolies
from which the people of this country suffer. he showed, conclusively,
and by a reference to facts and comparisons with other countries, that
"protective" duties were injurious to the best interests of the community,
as they were productive of abridgment of the people's comfort, and of
taxation on everything that they could see or touch. he illustrated the
advantages that would arise from free trade, by a reference to the great
increase of consumption of the article of coffee since the reduction of the
duty of half a crown on the pound weight to ninepence; the consumption
at that period () having been but eight millions of pounds weight,
while at present, it was twenty-eight millions. the learned gentleman,
who spoke for upwards of two hours, concluded amid loud cheers. three
cheers which were proposed for the charter proved a decided failure;
while, on the other hand, three were proposed for a repeal of the
corn laws, which were responded to by nearly the whole of the crowded
meeting.
mr ewart and his constituents.—william ewart, esq., the indefatigable
member for the dumfries district of burghs, is at present paying
his respects to his constituents, after the recess of what has been to him a
laborious session of parliament, however little may have been effected
during its course by the government and the legislature. on thursday
evening he addressed a large meeting in this town. on friday he
visited lochmaben, and on saturday sanquhar, and addressed the inhabitants
of both these burghs.—dumfries courier.
state of trade.—owing to the continued absence of the overland
mail, the demand for manufactured goods, and especially for shirtings, has
been limited; but, as stocks are low, prices remain tolerably steady. for
yarn the demand continues good, and prices very firm, but the spinners
are so generally engaged, that no great amount of business has been
done.—manchester guardian of wednesday.
commercial intercourse between england and the united
states.—the circumstances of america are such as to require, for the
furtherance of its own interests, a large and extended commercial relationship
with england. there is nothing wanting but a movement on our
part for the speedy establishment of an unbounded trade. both countries
are so situated that they need never become rivals, provided they consent
to co-operate with each other. it is because they have not been permitted
hitherto so to do that we now hear of an embryo manufacturing system in
america. we have already built lowell in new england, and pittsburg
in western pennsylvania; and will yet, unless we change our system,
drive the enterprising republican to efforts which may be more generally
and more permanently successful.—morning chronicle.
travelling between england and france.—the number of persons
who passed from england to france, by boulogne, in the week from st to
th september inclusive, was ,, and by calais, . it appears that
the opening of the southern and eastern railway as far as folkestone has
increased the number of travellers between england and france by nearly
one-half. the number in august, , was ,, while during the past
month it has been no less than ,, showing an increase of ,.
steam v. water.—owing to the birmingham and gloucester railway
company having reduced their charge for all kinds of goods to s. per ton
between gloucester and cheltenham; most of the carriers in this city will
be compelled to avail themselves of this mode of conveyance, it being impossible
for them to compete with the railway company. the consequence
will be that some thirty or forty boats will speedily be "laid up in
ordinary," to the sorrow of three or four times the number of boatmen,
who will of course be thrown out of employ.—worcester chronicle.
the new tariff.—"the imports of foreign beasts since monday last
(one week) have been confined to twenty-five into london by the batavier
steamer from rotterdam." (london markets report, september .)
can any clever master of fractions calculate the effect of this importation
on the smithfield market, and the benefit thence accruing to the citizens
of london as a set-off to the payment of their income-tax?
improvement of trade—rochdale.—the piece market has been
uncommonly brisk to-day, and all the goods on hand have been
cleared off. at present all the workmen are in full employment, though
at very low wages; but a few markets of this kind will have a tendency
to get up wages. the ready sale of goods has given a buoyancy to the
wool market, and the dealers in the raw material have not been so eager
to sell at former prices.
state of trade—paisley.—so far as ample employment to all engaged
in the staple manufactures of the town is concerned, trade still
continues favourable for the workman, but the manufacturers generally
complain that, for the season, sales are late of commencing, and many of
them are already rather slackening their operations to keep their stocks
down. the unexpected procrastination in the commencement of the fall
trade is reasonably accounted for by the fineness of the weather.
"a merchant of twenty-five years' standing, and an old subscriber,"
calls attention to the unusual state of things now so long existing in the
money market, by the fall in the rate of interest to ⁄ and  per cent. upon
the first class commercial bills. he states that a friend of his has lately
lent ,l. at ⁄ to  per cent., being the highest rate he could obtain.
this condition of the money market he attributes to the large amount of
paper money in circulation, compared with the demands of commerce.
our correspondent favours us with some figures, illustrative of his views,
from november, , to the present month, taken from the gazette returns,
and observing that there has been a serious fall in the value of merchandise
equal to one-fifth or one-sixth, with some exceptions during the
last year and a half, he accounts by the juxtaposition of his figures, denoting
the amount of paper in circulation, and this assumed fall in the price
of merchandise for the present anomalous condition of the money market,
and for the apparent worthlessness of capital. we cannot agree, however,
with our correspondent to the full extent, because the very low prices of
commodities, with a minimum rate of interest for money, proves that there
is no fictitious or inflated excess of paper money. the anomalous state of
the money market proceeds, we believe, from a redundancy, not of mere
paper, but of capital which cannot find investment, superinduced by stagnation
of trade, and the want of commercial enterprise, occasioned by the
restrictive nature of our duties on imports.—morning chronicle.
the accounts from the united states mention that the greatest activity
prevails among the manufacturers in their purchases of the raw material
for the year's consumption.
extraordinary charge.—captain, william tune, the commander of
a steam packet called the city of boulogne, the property of the new
commercial steam-packet company, on monday appeared at the mansion
house to answer the complaint of the directors of that company, by
whom he was charged with being privy to the abstraction of four packages,
each containing gold, checks on bankers, bank-notes, and bills of
exchange, which had been previously booked at the company's office in
boulogne, and paid for according to the rates agreed upon by the company,
and which, with others, had been entrusted to his care. after evidence
had been adduced, mr wire requested that captain tune should
be remanded for a week, and stated that the directors being anxious that
he should receive as much accommodation as might be consistent with the
respectability of his character and the nature of the difficulty in which
he was at present involved, were desirous that bail should be taken for
his appearance on the next day of investigation.—alderman gibbs: i
shall require two respectable securities for l. each, and captain tune
to be bound himself in the sum of ,l.—the captain was then remanded
for a week. a curious fact came out on the inquiry as to the value of
each package. they were all, it appeared, entered and paid for as containing
a sum of money much inferior to what each package really contained.
matrimonial advertisements.—an unlucky man, who, in order to
get a family by a deceased wife taken care of, had been induced to marry
a worthless drunken woman, through the medium of a matrimonial advertisement,
applied at union hall for advice, but, of course, nothing could
be done for him.
awkward predicament.—a man advanced in years, named david
simms, who was claimed by two wives, and nearly torn in pieces by them,
was committed from union hall, on a charge of bigamy.
singular detection of an extensive swindler.—a man named
william cairnes, alias thomas sissons, with a host of other aliases, was
placed before the magistrates at the borough court, manchester, charged
with one of the most singular attempts at fraud we ever remember to have
heard. the prisoner, who was a respectable-looking old man, gave his
name william carnes. under the pretence of giving employment to a
labouring man, on getting specimens of his handwriting, he got him to
write his name across two blank bills, in the form of acceptance. he has
been remanded for further inquiry.
embezzlement.—theodore grumbrecht, a confidential clerk in the
extensive india house of messrs huth and co., was arrested on board the
bucephalus, bound for new zealand, whither he was going. the charge
against him is extensive embezzlement.
singular accident.—an accident occurred at outwell on the th
ult. a child, three years old, went to play in a donkey cart, in which a
rope coiled and knotted had been placed to dry. the rope was doubled
the greater part of the way; and, being knotted, was full of steps or
meshes; in one of these the child got his head and unfortunately falling at
the same time from the cart, which was propped up as if the donkey
were between the shafts, the rope caught on the hook in front of the cart,
and held the child suspended a short distance from the ground. he was
found quite dead. an inquest was held on the body of the child, and the
jury returned a verdict of accidental death.—bury post.
affray with soldiers.—on tuesday the greatest excitement prevailed
throughout westminster in consequence of repeated outbreaks
between the military and the lower, or perhaps we might with propriety say
the lowest order of inhabitants of this populous district. the tumult
having continued during the whole of the day it was anticipated, and
justly, that when night came on, it would increase rather than diminish,
although during the whole of the afternoon various parties of the military
were seen searching for and escorting to the barracks, the delinquent
and disorderly soldiers engaged in the affray.
fires in the metropolis.—on saturday night the greater portion
of the extensive premises of messrs cleaseley, floor-cloth manufacturers,
grove street, walworth common, were destroyed by fire.—on monday
morning the shop of mr crawcour, a tobacconist, surrey place, old kent
road, was burnt to the ground.—on tuesday morning, about a quarter to
four o'clock, a city police constable discovered fire in the lower part of the
extensive premises, nearly rebuilt, of the religious tract society, paternoster
row, through some unslacked lime having been left by the workmen
among some timber the previous night. to the vigilance of the officer
may justly be attributed the saving of much valuable property from destruction.
fire at bristol.—the old castle tavern, bristol, was burned on
thursday, the th inst., and the landlord, who was an invalid, perished in
the flames. the fire was caused by the carelessness of a niece, in attendance
on the invalid, who set fire to the bed furniture accidentally with a
candle. the little girl lydia groves, who so courageously attempted to
extinguish the bed curtains, has sunk under the shock she then experienced.
doncaster meeting.—this much-talked-of meeting commenced on
monday, sept. , at two o'clock precisely. the regulations, in every
minor detail, answered the purposes for which they were respectively intended;
particularly the one affecting those persons who have proved
themselves "defaulters," as such were refused admission to the stands, the
ring, the betting-rooms, and every other place under the jurisdiction of[pg ]
of the stewards. many improvements and alterations have been made,
and no expense spared towards securing the comfort of all. the different
stands have undergone a complete renovation, and present a very striking
and handsome appearance, very unlike their neglected condition in former
years. on sunday evening a tremendous storm came on, accompanied
with hail and extraordinarily vivid lightning; in fact, it was truly awful
to witness—the rain literally pouring down in torrents, and the flashes of
lightning following each other in rapid succession. happily the storm
was not of very long continuance, commencing about half-past six, and
terminating about seven o'clock; but, during that short period, it was
sufficient nearly to drown the "unfortunates," who were travelling outside
per coach from sheffield, york, leeds, &c., and who, on alighting,
presented a most wretched appearance. the morning of monday was
dark and lowering, but towards eleven or twelve o'clock the weather
cleared up and remained very fine. the course, notwithstanding the
rain, was in the very best possible order, the attendance large, beyond any
former example on the first day, punctuality as to the time of starting
was very strictly observed, and the sport was first rate. the great event
of these races is the st leger stakes, which on this occasion were run for in
three minutes and twenty seconds. mr bowes's "cotherstone," the winner
of the derby, was the favourite, and was confidently expected to gain the
st leger. but it only came in second, being beaten by mr wrather's
nutwith, and only gained by a neck on lord chesterfield's prizefighter,
which was third.
woolwich garrison races.—the officers of the garrison at woolwich
having resolved on testing the value and quality of their horses by
races, the first day's sport came off on wednesday; and owing to
the great number of spectators, of whom there were upwards of ,,
on the ground, and the fineness of the weather, the scene was more
animated than on any former occasion. a spacious booth was erected on
the ground and was well filled throughout the day. upwards of  carriages,
containing families, were drawn up along both sides of the course,
and hundreds of gentlemen on horseback occupied various parts of the common
where the races took place; presenting altogether an enlivening and
interesting spectacle. the band of the royal artillery attended in front
of the booth, and played, with very little intermission, some of the finest
airs from one o'clock to seven o'clock, p.m.
on thursday, the second day, a slight shower of rain, about one o'clock,
p.m. prevented the races from being so well attended by spectators as they
were yesterdy, yet the attendance was numerous in the afternoon, and
great interest existed amongst the officers of the garrison, and many
sporting gentlemen, to witness the result.
the best home market.—the norwich mercury of last saturday
contains no less than seventy advertisements relating to the sale of farming
stock; and a majority of these are cases in which the tenant of the
farm on which a sale is announced is described as one "quitting the occupation,"
or "retiring from business." we should like to know how many
of those parties have managed to amass a fortune, or even to acquire a
moderate competency, under that protective system which, as they have
always been taught to believe, was devised for their especial benefit.
from the ominous newspaper paragraphs, announcing the liberality of
landlords to their tenants, which have lately become so numerous, we
rather suspect that most of those farmers who are retiring from business
do so to avoid greater evils. it is worthy of remark, however, that, amidst
all this agricultural depression, which has now lasted some twelve months
at least, the "home trade"—which the advocates of the corn law always
describe as entirely dependent on the farmers obtaining high prices for
their grain—is in a healthier state than it has been for several years past.
the standard lately stated, on the authority of a mr spackman, that the
united kingdom contained ,, individuals dependent on agriculture,
and only ,, individuals dependent on manufactures; and, as
we have frequently seen the same absurd statement brought forward at
farmers' clubs as "agricultural statistics," it is possible enough that many
persons may have been led to believe it. those who do so, however,
would find it rather difficult to explain, under such a division of the population,
the fact, that during four or five years of high prices, which the
duke of buckingham designated "agricultural prosperity," the ,,
souls should have been unable to create a brisk demand for manufactures;
while a single year of cheap provisions has done so much to improve trade,
and relieve the pressure from the shoulders of the labouring classes. who
that looks at these two facts can have the slightest doubt in his mind as to
what it is that makes the best home market?—manchester guardian.
curious agricultural experiment.—the following novel and interesting
experiment has lately been successfully made by mr a. palmer,
of cheam, surrey:—in july, , he put one grain of wheat in a common
garden-pot. in august the same was divided into four plants, which in
three weeks were again divided into twelve plants. in september these
twelve plants were divided into thirty-two, which in november were divided
into fifty plants, and then placed in open ground. in july, ,
twelve of the plants failed, but the remaining thirty-eight were healthy.
on the th august they were cut down, and counted , stems, with an
average of fifty grains to a stem, giving an increase of ,. now, if
this be a practicable measure of planting wheat, it follows that most of the
grain now used for seed may be saved, and will infinitely more than cover
the extra expense of sowing, as the wheat plants can be raised by the
labourer in his garden, his wife and children being employed in dividing
and transplanting them. one of the stems was rather more than six feet
long, and stout in proportion.
cultivation of waste lands.—employment of labourers.—a
paper was recently laid before the council of the royal agricultural
society of england, by lord portman, which we think deserves a much
greater degree of attention than we believe it has yet received, in that it
shows to what a considerable extent waste lands may, without any very
heavy expenditure of money, be brought into profitable cultivation, and
at the same time, under a well-regulated system of spade husbandry, yield
abundant employment to agricultural labourers and their families. the
following is the substance of the document referred to:—his lordship,
who has large estates in dorsetshire, found that a tract of land, called
shepherd's corner, about  acres in extent, was wholly unproductive,
yielding a nominal rent of s. d. per acre. about fifteen years
ago his lordship resolved to make an experiment with this land. he
accordingly gave directions to his steward that it should be laid out in six
divisions, representing so many small farms, in the cultivation of which
such of the labourers as could not obtain full work from the neighbouring
farmers were occasionally employed. for the three first years there were
no returns, the ground having been merely broken up with the spade, and
the surface soil exposed. in subsequent years this land was sown chiefly
with turnips, fed off by sheep, until it was found in sufficient heart for the
reception of grass and corn seeds, the crops from which were at first scanty
and indifferent, but sufficient, however, to pay for cultivation. at the
expiration of fifteen years the expenditure upon the whole, inclusive of
allowance for rent, at the original rate of s. d. per acre, together with all
charges on account of tithes and taxes, amounted to a little more than
,l.; the returns by crops sold and sheep fed exceeding that sum by
l., independent of the crops now in the ground, which will come to the
landlord in september. this may appear to be an inadequate return for
the fifteen years' experiment; but, as lord portman justly observes, "as
a farmer he has lost nothing, whilst as landlord he is a considerable gainer,
the land being now fully equal to any of the neighbouring farms." two
objects, both of great importance, have thus been obtained. these 
acres have been fertilized, which would otherwise have been of no present
or prospective value; and in the process of cultivation employment has,
during that long period, been provided for several hundreds of labourers
who, but for that resource, must, at some seasons at least, have become a
burden to the parish.
the budget; a series of letters, published at intervals, addressed to lord
john russell, sir robert peel, lord stanley, and lord eliot, on import
duties, commercial reform, colonization, and the condition of england.
by r. torrens, esq., f.r.s.
the edinburgh review. no. clvii. article, free trade and retaliation.
the westminster review. no. lxxviii. article, colonel torrens
on free trade.
our readers are not, in general, unacquainted with the public
character and literary reputation of colonel torrens. he is, we
believe, a self-taught political economist; and, like colonel thompson,
early achieved distinction in a branch of moral science not considered
particularly akin to military pursuits. but in his recent labours, he
has very seriously damaged his reputation, by attempting to bolster
up a policy whose influence on the welfare of the nation has been of
the most deadly and pernicious kind; and we therefore advert to the
letters called the budget, more with the view of showing that they
have been analysed, and their mischievous principles thoroughly
refuted, than with any intention of entering at large into the discussion.
it was, we believe, in the autumn of , immediately following
the accession of the present government to office, that colonel torrens
commenced the publication of his letters called the budget. the two
first were addressed to lord john russell, and professed to show that
the commercial propositions of the late whig government would, if
adopted, have altered the value of money, increased the pressure of
taxation, and aggravated the distress of the people. the third letter
was on commercial reform, addressed to sir robert peel. the remainder
of the series were on colonization and taxation, on the expediency
of adopting differential duties, &c.; concluding with one on the
condition of england, and on the means of removing the causes of
distress; which was afterwards followed by a postscript, in which the
author, addressing sir robert peel, said—
"i would beg to submit to your consideration what appears to me to
amount to a mathematical demonstration, that a reduction of the duties
upon foreign production, unaccompanied by a corresponding mitigation
of the duties imposed by foreign countries upon british goods, would
cause a further decline of prices, of profits, and of wages, and would
render it doubtful whether the taxes could be collected, and faith with
the public credit or maintained."
opinions like these, coming from a man considered to be of some
little authority in economical science, were certainly important. the
time was serious—the crisis really alarming. a new government had
come into power, and it was thought and expected were about to effect
great changes. even the quarterly review, alarmed by the aspect of
affairs, came round, in the winter of , to advocate commercial
reform. at this critical period colonel torrens stepped forward.
what his motives were we do not know; though we know that men
neither harsh nor uncharitable, and with some opportunities of judging,
considered that colonel torrens, soured by political disappointments
and personal feeling, had permitted himself to be biassed by hopes of
patronage from the new government. the pamphlets composing the
budget only appeared at intervals: but so far as they were then published,
did attract considerable attention; the mere supporters of pure
monopoly did not, of course, understand them: but that body who may
be appropriately enough termed middle men, were not unaware of the
value of such support as that afforded by colonel torrens, in staring
off changes which seemed inevitable. sir robert peel, too, was then
in the very midst of his lesson-taking; and as he deeply studied mr
hume's import duties report, before he brought out his new tariff,
we need not consider it to be very discreditable to him, that he read
the pamphlets of colonel torrens before he tried his diplomatic commercial
policy.
at all events, one of the chief arguments with which sir robert
peel and mr gladstone justified the great omissions of the new tariff,
was the fact that the government was engaged in negotiations with
other countries in order to obtain treaties of reciprocity. the utter
failure of these efforts sir robert peel has repeatedly confessed, accompanied
with a sigh over the inutility of the attempt; and the last time
that he adverted, in the house of commons, to the authority of colonel[pg ]
torrens (he was citing the postscript to the letter addressed to himself)
it was with the kind of manner which indicated want of confidence
in the guide who had misled him. whether or no, however, he
had relied on that authority in his negotiations with other countries
during his futile attempts to obtain commercial treaties, this much is
certain enough, that colonel torrens did what he could to strengthen
the old notion, that it was of no use for us to enlarge our markets
unless other countries did so also at the same time and in the same
way; and in condemning all reduction of import duties that was not
based on "reciprocity," he certainly added all the weight of his authority
to prop up a system whose injurious influence has affected the
very vitality of our social state, and whose overthrow will yet require
no small amount of moral force to effect.
we are far indeed, from undervaluing treaties of reciprocity; but
to make them a sine qua non in the policy of a country whose condition
is that of an overflowing population, a deficient supply of the first
necessaries of life, and a contracted market for its artificial productions,
is an error of the first magnitude. therefore, though not
attaching primary importance to the budget of colonel torrens, or
believing that it could ultimately have any great effect in retarding
the effectual settlement of the great question, it was not without some
feeling of satisfaction that we perused the able article in the last
edinburgh review, in which his delusions are completely set at rest.
we quite agree with the writer (mr senior, it is said) that "if the
budget were to remain unanswered, it would be proclaimed in all the
strongholds of monopoly to which british literature penetrates—in
parliament, in congress, in the algemeine zeitung, and in the
councils of the zollverein—that adam smith and the modern economists
had been refuted by colonel torrens; that free trade is good
only where reciprocity is perfect; that a nation can augment its wealth
by restraining a trade that was previously free; can protect itself
against such conduct on the part of its neighbours only by retaliation:
and if it neglect this retaliatory policy, that it will be punished for its
liberality by a progressive decrease of prices, of wages, and of profits,
and an increase of taxation."
the identity of colonel torrens's propositions with the exploded
"mercantile theory" is very satisfactorily established by the edinburgh
reviewer; and it is certainly humbling to see a man of his
ability coming forward to revive doctrines which had well nigh gone
down to oblivion. on the subject where colonel torrens conceives
himself strongest, the distribution of the precious metals, the reviewer
has given a very able reply, though some points are left for future
amplification and discussion; and, as a whole, if there be any young
political economist whose head the budget has puzzled, the article
in the edinburgh review will be found a very sufficient antidote.
with this, and another able article on the same subject in the last
westminster review (in fact, two articles of the westminster relate to
the subject—one is on colonel torrens, the other on free trade and
colonization), we may very safely leave the budget to the oblivion
into which it has sunk; and, meantime, the novice will not go far
astray who adheres to the "golden rule" of political economy, propounded
by the london merchants in , and re-echoed by sir
robert peel in : "the maxim of buying in the cheapest market,
and selling in the dearest, which regulates every merchant in his individual
dealings, is strictly applicable as the best rule for every nation.
as a matter of mere diplomacy, it may sometimes answer to hold out
the removal of particular prohibitions or high duties as depending on
corresponding concessions; but it does not follow that we should maintain
our restrictions where the desired concessions cannot be obtained;
for our restrictions would not be the less prejudicial to our capital
and industry, because other governments persisted in preserving impolitic
regulations."
all the newspapers have quoted an account from the literary gazette of
the antarctic expedition, under the command of captain james ross. it
was composed of two vessels, the erebus, captain ross, and the terror,
captain crozier, and left england on the th of september, . during
the outward voyage to australia, scientific observation was daily and
sedulously attended to; experiments were made on the temperature and
specific gravity of the sea; geological and geographical investigations
were made at all available points, especially at kerguelen's land; and
both here, as well as during the expedition, magnetic observation and
experiment formed a specific subject of attention. this was a main object
during , the expedition remaining at the auckland islands for this
purpose; and it was not till the st of january, , that it entered the
antarctic circle. their subsequent adventures, deeply interesting as they
are from the perils which they encountered, and the spirit and perseverance
with which they were met, come hardly within our sphere to report. after
an absence of four years, the expedition, as mentioned in last week's
economist, has returned to england, and the acquisitions to natural
history, geology, geography, but above all towards the elucidation of the
grand mystery of terrestrial magnetism, raise this voyage to a pre-eminent
rank among the greatest achievements of british courage, intelligence, and
enterprise.
religious worship.—church property.—the following parliamentary
return has just been printed, entitled, "a return of the amount applied
by parliament during each year since , in aid of the religious
worship of the church of england, of the church of scotland, of the church
of rome, and of the protestant dissenters in england, scotland, and ireland,
respectively, whether by way of augmentation of the income of the
ministers of each religious persuasion, or for the erection and endowment
of churches and chapels, or for any other purposes connected with the
religious instruction of each such section of the population of the united
kingdom, with a summary of the whole amount applied during the above
period in aid of the religions worship of each of the above classes." the
abstract of sums paid to the established church shows that the total was
,,l. which is divided in the following manner:—church of england,
,,l.; church of scotland, ,l.; church of ireland, ,,l.
church of rome.—the total sum paid to the church of rome is set forth
at ,l. s. d. comprised in the following two items;—augmentation
of incomes (including maynooth college), ,l. s. d.; erection and
repairs of chapels, ,l. s. d. protestant dissenters.—the total sum
is ,,l. s. d. in england and ireland. the recapitulation shows
the following three sums:—established church, ,,l.; church of
rome, ,l.; and protestant dissenters, ,,l. the sums were
advanced from  to .
imperishable bread.—on wednesday, in the mayor's private room,
at the town hall, liverpool, a box of bread was opened which was packed
at rio janeiro nearly two years ago, and proved as sound, sweet, and in
all respects as good, as on the day when it was enclosed. this bread is
manufactured of a mixture in certain proportions of rice, meal, and wheat
flour.
st george's chapel, windsor.—the extensive alterations and embellishments
which have been in progress since the early part of may last
(from which period the chapel has been closed), at an outlay of several
thousands of pounds, throughout the interior of this sacred edifice, having
been brought to a close, it was reopened for divine service on thursday.
father mathew.—father mathew, after finishing his labours in the
metropolis, went to norwich, where he met the bishop, who, in an earnest
and eloquent speech, in st andrew's hall, on thursday week, introduced
the reverend gentleman to that locality, and very warmly eulogized his
conduct. mr gurney, the well-known norwich banker, occupied the
chair on this occasion, and seconded the bishop in his patronage and approbation
of the great temperance movement. after remaining at norwich
two or three days, father mathew started for ireland, taking birmingham
and liverpool in his way.
importation of fruit from antwerp.—on thursday, the steam-packet
antwerpen, captain jackson, arrived at the st katherine's steam
packet wharf, after an expeditious passage, from antwerp. the continental
orchards continue to supply our fruit markets with large supplies,
the antwerpen having brought , packages, or nearly , bushels of
pears, apples, plums, and filberts. advices were received by the antwerpen
that another extensive importation of fruit from antwerp may be
expected at the st katherine's steam packet wharf this day (saturday),
by the steam-packet princess victoria, capt. pierce.
lieut. holman, the blind traveller.—this celebrated tourist
and writer took his departure from malta, on the rd of september, for
naples. he will afterwards proceed to the roman states, and then to
trieste. during the few days of his residence in this island the greatest
hospitality has been shown him. the veteran traveller had the honour
of dining with his excellency the governor, and with admiral sir e. owen.
amidst all the vicissitudes of his perilous life and increasing age, he still
maintains the same unabated thirst for travel, and his mental and bodily
faculties appear to grow in activity and strength in the inverse ratio of
his declining life and honoured grey hairs.
railway from worcester to cardiff.—it is proposed, by means of
this new line, to connect the population of the north of england and the
midland counties with the districts of south wales and the south of
ireland. it will commence at the taff vale railway, pass through wales,
cross the severn, and unite with the birmingham and gloucester railway
at worcester. the cost will be ,,l.
french opinions on spanish events.—the french journals are
loud in condemning the poor barcelonese for the very same acts which
drew down the applause of these same journals a week ago. the following
remarks from the national render any of our own useless:—"it
must be admitted that the french journals appreciate in a strange way
the deplorable events in spain. some soldiers revolt at madrid, without
going any length of insurrection, or at all endangering the government.
general narvaez comes, and without consulting government or any one
else, shoots eight non-commissioned officers. straight our ministerial
journals exclaim, what an act of vigour! vigour if you will; but
where is the humanity, the wisdom, the justice? then behold barcelona,
of which the people some weeks ago rose against the established
and constitutional government. what heroes! exclaimed the french ministerial
papers. now they do the same thing, rising against a provisional
and extra-constitutional government. what brigands! exclaim the ministerial
writers. a few weeks back a spanish government defended itself
with violence against those who attacked it. regiments fired rounds of
musketry, and the cannons of forts bombarded the rebellious towns. the
french ministerialists forthwith pronounced the spanish regent as a
malefactor, and devoted him to the execration of the civilized world.
now, another government, without the same right, follows precisely the
same course as the one overthrown. it defends itself, fires, bombards, and
pours forth grape from behind walls upon insurgent bands in the street.
this same conduct is glorified as firm, as legitimate, as what not. the
system of political morality changes, it seems, with men and with seasons.
what was infamy in espartero and zurbano, is heroism and glory in
narvaez and prim. what is more infamous than all this is the press,
that thus displays itself in the light of a moral weathercock, shifting round
to every wind."
statistics of the metropolitan police.—by a return just issued
in compliance with an order of the house of commons relative to the city
and metropolitan police force, it appears that there are  superintendents
in the metropolitan division, receiving from l. to l. per
annum;  inspectors, whose salaries vary from l. to l. per
annum;  sergeants, with incomes ranging from l. to l. per
annum; and , constables, receiving from l. to l. per annum,
including clothing and  pounds of coal weekly throughout the year.
the amount paid on this account during the past year, including
,l. for superannuation and retiring allowances to officers and constables
late of bow-street horse patrol, and thames police, amounted to
,l. in this is likewise included a sum of ,l. received from
theatres, fairs, and races. the number of district surgeons is , and the
amount paid for books, &c., is l. the total rate received during the
past year from the various wards in the city of london and its liberties,
for the maintenance of the city police force, is put down at ,l., and
the expenditure at ,l., the gross pay, irrespective of other charges to
the force, amounting to ,l.
[pg ]loss of the united states steam frigate "missouri," at
gibraltar, by fire.—the superb american steam frigate missouri,
which was conveying the hon. caleb cushing, american minister at
china, to alexandra, whilst at anchor in gibraltar bay, on the th ult.,
was entirely consumed by fire. the fire broke out in the night, and raged
with such determined fury as to baffle all the efforts of the crew, as well as
that of the assistance sent from her majesty's ship malabar, and from the
garrison. the magazines were flooded soon after the commencement of
the fire; and, although a great many shells burst, yet, very fortunately,
no accident happened to any of the crew. this splendid steamer was
, tons and  horse power, and is said to have cost , dollars.
the alleged arrest of the murderer of mr dadd.—the following
are the remarks of galignani's messenger on the report in the
english papers that dadd was arrested at fontainbleau:—"the above
statement has been partially rumoured in town for the last two days, but
not in a shape to warrant our publishing it in the messenger. the police
have been everywhere active in their researches for the fugitive; and we
perceive, by the courrier de lyons, that, on thursday night, all the hotels
in that city were visited by their agents, in pursuit of two englishmen,
one of them supposed to be the unfortunate lunatic. these individuals
had, however, quitted the town on their way to geneva, previously to the
visit of the police."
the cartoons.—we understand that several of the prize cartoons,
and a selection of some of the most interesting of the works of the unsuccessful
competitors, have been removed from westminster hall to the
gallery of the pantechnicon, belgrave square, for further exhibition.
mackerel.—the halifax papers state that the coast of nova scotia is
now visited by mackerel and herrings in larger quantities than ever were
known at this season. in the straits of canso the people are taking them
with seines, a circumstance without a parralel for the last  years.
the journal des chemins de fer says:—"an inventor announces that he
has found a composition which will reduce to a mere trifle the price of
rails for railroads. he replaces the iron by a combination of kaolin clay
(that used for making pottery and china) with a certain metallic substance,
which gives a body so hard as to wear out iron, without being injured
by it in turn."
friday night.—we are still without the arrival of the indian mail, nor has any
explanation of its detention transpired, except that which we mentioned last
week. no serious apprehension exists for its safety, as similar detentions, of even
much greater duration, have been experienced in the arrival of the september mail
in former years, as a consequence of the monsoon.
in manchester, during the week, the market has been somewhat flatter in
goods suited for the eastern markets, in consequence of merchants being anxious
to receive their advices by the indian mail before extending their transactions materially
at present prices. in the yorkshire woollen markets a fair trade continues to
be done; and in bradford a very active demand has arisen for the goods peculiar to
that neighbourhood. in the scotch seats of manufactures, both woollen and cotton,
the trade has considerably improved, especially in the demand for tartans of all kinds,
in which there is a very active and brisk trade. in the iron districts, the trade continues
without change since our last: most of the works are full of orders, at low
prices. in the coal districts, in northumberland and durham, trade is without any
improvement whatever, and this trade, as well as their shipping, is in the most
depressed condition.
indigo.—the transactions in this article have not been on a more extensive scale
in our market than last week, but a good demand continues for the home trade, and
occasionally a small advance upon the last july rates is paid on such sorts
suitable for that branch, but there is almost no demand for export, the consumption
of the article in foreign countries being this year unusually slack. the shipments to
russia, since the opening of the season, amount to only , chests, against ,
chests during the same time last year. a public sale was held yesterday, in liverpool,
of about  chests of east india, and  serons of caracas. of the former
about  chests were withdrawn by the poprietors, but the remainder, together with
the serons, sold briskly for the home trade, at prices about d. to d. per lb. higher
than the previous nominal value, and rather above that of the london market.
there are now , chests declared for the quarterly sale on the th of october; a
great portion of it consists of good shipping sorts. it is supposed that several thousand
chests more will be declared upon arrival of the indian mail, now due.
cochineal.—only two small public sales were held this week, together of 
serons. the first consisted of  serons mexican, mostly silver, which sold at prices
from d. to d. per lb. higher than those of last week. the lowest price for ordinary foxy
silver was s. d. per lb. the second sale was held at higher prices still, in consequence
of which the whole quantity was bought in.
cotton.—the purchases at liverpool, for this week, will again reach the large
quantity of about , bales, of which a considerable proportion is on speculation.
prices have been extremely firm, without any decided advance, however, there not
being much importance attached, or faith given, to the statements that the american
crop has suffered, which have been received by the halifax and new york steamers,
up to st inst. from the latter place.
in this market, business by private contract is again trifling. at public sales there
have been offered  bales american, and , bales surat; the former were held
considerably above the value, and only  bales good fair were sold at ⁄d. in bond.
of the surat about , bales found buyers, from ⁄d. to ⁄d. for middling, to ⁄d.
to ⁄d. for fair; a few lots superior went at ⁄d. for good fair, and d. per lb. for good.
the prices paid show an advance of ⁄d. to ⁄d. a lb. upon the last public sales of th
august, and sustain the previous market rates, though the highest advance was conceded
reluctantly, and not in many instances; there are buyers for low-priced cotton
of every description, but there is little of it offering.
sugar.—the purchases for home consumption have been upon a limited scale,
and prices barely maintained. the same remark applies to foreign sugar. only one
cargo of porto rico sugar has been sold afloat, for a near port, at s., with conditions
favourable to the buyer. at public sale  chests bahia, and  chests, and 
barrels pernambuco, were almost entirely bought in at extreme rates: since when only
about  chests of the brown bahia have been placed at an average of s. d., and with
 chests of the lowest white at s. to s. d.; by private contract  chests old
yellow havannah, of good quality, sold at s.
coffee.—the home demand remains good; good and fine jamaica fetched previous
rates; a parcel of ceylon, of somewhat better quality than the common run,
sold at s. to s., which is rather dearer: very good singapore java sold at s.
to s. in foreign coffee a cargo of st domingo has been sold afloat for flanders at
s. d. two others being held above that price without finding a buyer, they have
been sent on unsold. on the spot the transactions in coffee for export by private
contract are quite insignificant, and of  bags old st domingo via cape, only a
small proportion sold at s. to s. for pale bold good ordinary.
rice.—about , bags of bengal offered at public sale sold from s. to s.
per cwt., establishing a decline of d. per cwt.
saltpetre.—the market is sparingly supplied, and importers do not sell
except upon extreme rates, which have been paid for about , bags, viz. from
s. d. for very ordinary, to s. d. for good middling.
cassia lignea.—for small parcels offering in public sale full prices have been
paid; fine by private contract as high as s.
pimento.—fair quality has been sold ⁄d. to ⁄d., which is rather dearer.
tallow.—the demand on the spot is not improved and the price unaltered,
s. d. to s.; for forward delivery there is rather more disposition to purchase.
rum.—the demand is very limited, except for the finest qualities of jamaica, and
common are rather cheaper.
the accounts received from the united states up to the first of this month by the
hibernia and great western are favourable as regards commerce. the manufactories
in the union are reported to be in a state of considerable prosperity, notwithstanding
which the demand for imports was increasing. the reports about the cotton
crops were various; it was admitted that the weather had latterly been favourable.
large arrivals of wheat and flour were expected in the ports from the west.
the commercial reports received this week from the continent of europe do not
show any great activity in foreign markets, though the prices of colonial produce are
well maintained. sugar was somewhat more in demand both at antwerp and hamburg.
in coffee there was rather less doing at both places.
prices current, sept. , .
pricesthis day.
pricesthis day.
india stock
belgium bonds
 per cent. red
shut
brazilian bonds
 per cent. consols money
chilian bonds,  per cent.
⁄ per cent. annuity, 
columbian bonds,  per cent. 
⁄ per cent. red.
shut
dutch,  per cent.
new ⁄ per cent. annuity
ditto, ⁄ per cent. exchange  guil.
long annuities
shut
mexican bonds, ,  per cent.
annuities, terminable july, 
peruvian bonds,  per cent.
india bonds  per cent.
s pm
portuguese  per cent. converted
exchequer bills ⁄d.
s pm
ditto  per cent. ditto
 per cent. consols for account
russian bonds, ,  per cent.
bank stock for account
shut
spanish bonds,  per cent. , 
ditto, deferred
ditto, passive
(from messrs gillies and horne's circular.)
corn exchange, monday, sept. .—the weather continued most beautiful here until
yesterday, when we had some heavy thunder showers, and to-day is gloomy, damp and close.
the wind, what little there is of it, is north. the arrivals during last week were moderate
except of foreign wheat and barley, of which of course there is yet some quantity to arrive.
the new english wheat coming soft in hand, is slow sale at s. to s. reduction—free foreign
finds buyers for mixing at last week's currency. barley is dull sale at last week's rates. oats
are d. to s. lower. some new irish have appeared of fine quality. there is no change in
beans and peas. flour is the same as last week.
per qr.
per qr.
wheat, essex, kent, suffolk, white
s to s
wheat, white, spanish, tuscan
s to s
—— lothian, fife, angus, do.
s to s
—— high mixed danzig
s to s
—— inverness, murray, &c.
s to s
—— mixed do.
s to s
—— essex, kent, suffolk, red
s to s
—— rostock, new
s to s
—— cambridge, lincoln, red
s to s
—— red hamburg
s to s
barley, english malting, and chevalier
—— polish odessa
s to s
—— distiller's, english & scotch
—— hard
—— coarse, for grinding, &c.
s to s
—— egyptian
s to s
oats, northumberland & berwick
s to s
barley, malting, &c.
—— lothian, fife, angus
s to s
—— distiller's, &c.
s —
—— murray, ross
s to s
—— grinding, &c.
s to s
—— aberdeen and banff
s to s
oats, brew, &c.
s to —
—— caithness
s to s
—— polands, &c.
s to —
—— cambridge, lincoln, &c.
s to s
—— feed, &c.
s to —
—— irish
s to s
—— do, dried, riga, &c.
— s
—— english, black
s to s
rye, dried
—— irish "
s to s
—— undried
—— potato, scotch
s to s
beans, horse
s to s
—— " irish
s to s
—— mediterranean
s to s
—— poland, lincoln, &c.
s to s
peas, white
s to —
beans, ticks
s to s
—— yellow
— s
—— harrow
s to s
flour, french, per  lbs. nett weight
—— small
s to s
—— american, per bar.  lbs. nett weight
peas, white
s to s
—— danzig, &c. do. do.
—— boilers
—— canada, do. do.
s to s
flour, town made households
s to s
—— sour, do. do.
—— norfolk and suffolk
s to s
corn exchange, friday, sept. .—the weather threatened to be stormy yesterday, the
barometer fell, and we had some heavy drops of rain, but it has since cleared up, and to-day is
 degrees warmer and beautifully clear, with the wind south east. in ireland and scotland
there was a good deal of rain on sunday and monday, which (we understand) stopped the
harvest work for the time, but we hope by this time they have it fine again. the new english
wheat comes to hand softer and lighter than at first; as usual after being stacked, the yield is
much complained of, besides that many of the stacks got so soaked by the heavy rains of the
st and rd of august, that the condition of the wheat is sadly spoiled. the arrivals are
moderate this week, except of irish oats, several small parcels of which are of the new crop;
there is also a small parcel of new scotch barley in fine condition, and new scotch oats, also
good. almost all the wheat has been entered at the s. duty; we believe it is over , qrs.
new english wheat is dull sale: foreign, on the other hand, is more inquired for, and not to
be purchased in any quantity except at s. advance. barley is saleable in retail at monday's
prices. oats are again d. cheaper than on monday, except for very fine samples. the averages
lead us to suppose that on the st instant the duty on foreign wheat will rise to s. per
qr.; on barley it will remain s.; on oats s.; on rye it will rise to s. d.; on beans it will
remain s. d.; and on peas, s. d.
london averages.for the week ending september .
wheat.
barley.
oats.
rye.
beans.
peas.
. qrs.
 qrs.
, qrs.
 qrs.
 qrs.
 qrs.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
wheat.
barley.
oats.
rye.
beans.
peas.
weeks ending
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
aug. th
— th
— th
— st
sept. th
— th
aggregate of six weeks
duties till sept. th inclu.on grain from b. possession
out of europe
flour—foreign, s. d. per lbs.—british possession, s. d. ditto.
the average price of brown or muscovado sugar for the week ending september ,
, is s. ⁄d. per cwt., exclusive of the duties of customs paid or payable thereon
on the importation thereof into great britain.
monday.—there was a considerable and beneficial improvement in trade to-day
for everything, but not, however, permanent; at least, the causes which produced the
change this morning would not authorise a different conclusion, and the salesmen of
the market, although looking forward to a very fair state of things next monday, do
not anticipate that the improvement will last the next succeeding monday. it appears
that london is clear of meat, the which, with small supplies of everything to-day,
is the sole immediate cause of the improvement, for, notwithstanding that the
market was well attended by both town and country butchers and stock-takers, they,
nevertheless, at the opening of the market, appeared disposed to purchase briskly, on
the supposition, according to the returns of over-night, that the supplies were large,
but when this statement was discovered to be erroneous they then bought freely, and
higher prices were more readily given.
friday.—in consequence of the supply of beasts on sale being large for the time of
year, we have to report a very heavy demand for beef, and in some instances the quotations
declined d. per  lbs. from scotland nearly  lots were received fresh up.
prime old downs maintained their previous value; but that of all other kinds of sheep
had a downward tendency. in lambs very little was doing, at barely monday's quotations.[pg ]
calves moved off heavily, at a reduction of d. per  lbs. the pork trade was
unusually dull, at previous currencies. milch cows sold slowly at from l. to l.
each.
prices per stone.
at market.
monday.
friday.
monday.
friday.
beef
s
d
to
s
d
s
d
to
s
d
beasts
mutton
s
d
to
s
d
s
d
to
s
d
calves
veal
s
d
to
s
d
s
d
to
s
d
sheep and lambs
pork
s
d
to
s
d
s
d
to
s
d
pigs
lamb
s
d
to
s
d
s
d
to
s
d
prices of hay and straw, per load of  trusses.
hay, l. s. d. to l. s. d.
clover, l. s. d. to l. s. d.
straw, l. s. d. to l. s. d.
monday.—there was no business whatever transacted during last week, and even
the duty remains without fluctuation. in this state of inactivity the effects of the
metropolitan total abstinence movement was a topic of interest to the trade. as it
appears that nearly , persons took the pledge, the consumption of malt liquor
must seriously diminished, and the demand for hops will consequently be very
considerably decreased. it is fortunate, therefore, for the planters that this year's
growth is not large, otherwise the prices would have been seriously low, and although
that crop is not only about an average, yet from this diminished consumption, which
is likely to progress, the value of the new will not be more than last year, and possibly
even less. there have been a few small lots of 's at market, which go off
very slowly.
friday.—about ten pockets of new hops have been disposed of this week at from
l. to l. per cwt. we are now almost daily expecting large supplied from kent and
sussex, as picking is now going on rapidly. in old hops scarcely any business is doing,
while the duty is called ,l.
sept. .—a large amount of business has been transacted in cotton at this day's
market. the sales, inclusive of , american bought on speculation, have consisted
of , bales.
sept. .—we have a fair inquiry for cotton this morning, and there is no change
whatever in the general temper of the market.
buddle's west hartley, s.; davison's west hartley, s. d.; fenham, s. d.;
hastings hartley, s.; holywell main, s. d.; new tanfield, s.; ord's redheugh,
s. d.; pontop windsor, s. d.; tanfield moor, s. d.; west pelton, s. d,;
west hartley, s. d.; west wylam, s. d.; wylam, s. d. wall's end:—clennell,
s. d.; clarke and co, s.; hilda, s. d.; riddell's, s. d.; braddyll's
hetton, ls. d.; haswell, s.; hetton, s. d.; lambton, s. d.; morrison, s.;
russell's hetton, s,; stewart's, s. d.; whitwell, s.; cassop, s.; hartlepool,
s. d.; heselden, s, d.; quarrington, s.; trimdon, s. d.; adelaide, s.;
barrett, s. d.; bowburn, s. d.; south durham, s.; tees, s. d.; cowpen
hartley, s. d.; lewis's merthyr, s. d.; killingworth, s. fifty-nine ships
arrived since last day.
tuesday, september .
j. halls, wilkes street, spitalfields, braid manufacturer.—j. brooke, liverpool,
cupper.—j. thorburn, hillhouse, yorkshire, warehouseman.—j. allwright, basingstoke,
hampshire, boot maker.—j. bland, leeds, eatinghouse keeper.—w.s. lawrence,
essex place, grange-road, dalston, out of business.—t. leete, finedon,
northamptonshire, butcher.—w, simpson, elland upper edge, yorkshire, woollen
spinner.—d. m'george, huddersfield, tea dealer.—w. hall, cockhill, wiltshire,
out of business.—t. mercer, wansdon house, fulham, out of business.—w. elliott,
berners street, oxford street, waiter at an hotel.—c.t. jones, charles street,
berkeley square, out of business.—t. price, cardiff road, monmouthshire, coal
dealer.—w. williams, newport, monmouthshire, out of business.—w.g. still,
high street, poplar, hair dresser.—t. cook, giltspur street, city, tailor.—j. mayson,
marlborough road, old kent road, commission agent.—d. taylor, meltham, yorkshire,
licensed tea dealer.—w.w. greaves, newark-upon-trent, nottinghamshire,
corn dealer.—c.h. balls, beccles, suffolk, chemist.—j. chapman (commonly known
as j. fitzjames), bridges street, covent garden, comedian.
jones, t., liverpool, coal dealer.
sharp, r., jun., faversham, kent, draper. [reed and shaw, friday street,
cheapside.
pearsall, c., anderton, cheshire, boiler maker. [sharp and co., bedford
row.
johnson, t., late of great bridge, staffordshire, draper. [messrs nicolls and
pardoe, bewdley.
holt, w.j.; grantham, lincolnshire, tea dealer. [messrs hill and matthews,
st mary axe.
j.o. palmer, liverpool, music seller—first dividend of s. in the pound, any
wednesday after december , payable at  basinghall street, city.—d. ellis,
haverhill, suffolk, draper—first dividend of s. d. in the pound, any wednesday
after december , payable at  basinghall street.—p.j. papillon, leeds, wine merchant—first
dividend of s. in the pound, on any monday or wednesday after
october , payable at  benson's buildings, basinghall street, leeds.—e. cragg,
kendal, westmoreland, innkeeper—first dividend of s. in the pound, on october
, or on any succeeding saturday, payable at  grey street, newcastle-upon-tyne.
october , t. and j. parker, j. rawlinson, w. abbott, j. hanson, j. bell, t. chadwick,
a. emsley, r. kershaw, j. musgrave, j. wooller, t. pullan, j. shaw, g.
eastburn, and d. dixon, leeds, dyers.—october , t. bell, newcastle-upon-tyne,
tea dealer.—october , j.g. pallister and j.m.b. newrick, sunderland, durham,
grocers.—october , j. fletcher, maryport, cumberland, boiler manufacturer.—october
, j. todd. hylton ferry, durham, ship builder.—october , j. parke,
liverpool, druggist.—october , s. boult and t. addison, liverpool, stock brokers.—october
, t. bourne, liverpool, cotton broker.—october , h. merridew, coventry,
ribbon manufacturer.
october , f. robert, new bond street, and gower street north, coal merchant.—october
, j. bowie, shoe lane, city, grocer.—october , j. barnes,  commercial
place. commercial road, engineer.—october , j. davies, westminster road,
lambeth, linendraper.—october , m. jackson, east thickley steam mill, durham,
miller.—october , j. todd, hylton ferry, durham, ship builder.—october , j.
gallop, jun., bedminster, bristol, painter.—october , g.b. worboys, bristol, perfumer.—october
, r. crosbie, sutton, cheshire, tea dealer.—october , c. holebrook,
uttoxeter, staffordshire, plumber.—october , j. hedderly, nottingham,
druggist.—october , j. oates, glossop, derbyshire, innkeeper.
certificates, october .
w. pugh, gloucester, auctioneer.—j. lockwood, wakefield, yorkshire, and st.
john's, new brunswick, linendraper.—h. francis, feoek, cornwall, agent.—g. chapman,
aylesbury, buckinghamshire, grocer.—e. wheeler, birmingham, corn dealer.—j.
a. boden, sheffield, razor manufacturer.—w. woodward, birmingham, tailor.—s.
j. manning,  camomile street, city, and halleford, near shepperton, manufacturer
of bitters.
elizabeth o'connor and mary rossiter, brighton, sussex, milliners.—c. weatherley
and h. o'neil, wilkes street, spitalfields, and ferdinand street, camden town,
fancy trimming manufacturers.—h.i. isaacs and d. israel, duke street, aldgate,
city, poulterers.—j. davis and a. mottram, warrington, lancashire, timber merchants,—m.
fortier and emile and anna levilly, bruton street, berkeley square,
milliners.—t. and g. stevenson, dudley, worcestershire, tailors.—d. israel and j.
lyons, st mary-axe, city, trunk makers.—w. fairbairn, j. hetherington, and j.
lee, manchester, machine makers.—e. archer, h. ewbank, jun., and a.p.w.
philip, gravel lane, southwark, surrey.—j.m. pott and j. midworth, newark-upon-trent,
auctioneers.—t.p. holden, t. parker, and w. burrow, liverpool, upholsterers
(as regards w. burrow).—w.l. springett, t. beale, and e. kine, southwark,
surrey, hop merchants (as regards w.l. springett).
a. dunn, keithock mills, near coupar-angus, farmer.—d. m'intyre, jun., fort
william, merchant.
friday, september .
greenslade, w., gray's inn lane, builder. [oldershaw, king's arms yard.
bone, g.b., camberwell, builder. [meymott and sons, blackfriars road.
lewis, r.w., shenfield, essex, farmer. [watson and co., falcon square.
phillips, s., brook street, hanover square, carpet warehousman. [reed and
shaw, friday street, cheapside.
pino, t.p., liverpool, ship chandler. [chester and toulmin, staple inn.
hoole, w., sheffield, leather dresser. [branson, sheffield.
cambridge, r.j., cheltenham, wine merchant. [packwood, cheltenham.
metcalf, e., middlesbrough, yorkshire, currier. [blackburn, leeds.
duffield, c., bath, grocer [jay, serjeants' inn.
poppleton, c., york, linen manufacturer. [blackburn, leeds.
lister, j.c., wolverhampton, wine merchant. [phillips and bolton, wolverhampton.
j. brooke, liverpool, cupper.—j. thorburn, hillhouse, yorkshire, warehouseman.—j.
bland, leeds, eating house keeper.—w.s. lawrence, essex place, hackney,
bank clerk.—t. leete, finedon, northamptonshire, butcher.—w. simpson, elland
upper edge, yorkshire, woollen-spinner.—w. hall, cockhill, wiltshire.—d.
m'george, huddersfield, tea dealer.—t. mercer, wansdown house, fulham—w.
elliott, berner's street, oxford street, waiter.—c.t. jones, charles street, berkeley
square.—t. price, cardiffmouth, coal dealer.—w. williams, george street, newport.—w.
g. still, high street, poplar, tobacconist.—t. cook, giltspur street, city, tailor,—j.
mayson, marlborough road, old kent road, commission agent.—d. taylor, aldmondbury,
yorkshire, tea dealer.—w.w. greaves, newark-upon-trent, corn dealer.—c.
h. balls, ringsfield, suffolk, chemist.—j. chapman, bridges street, covent
garden, comedian.—j. robinson, edmonton, butcher.—g. dickinson, chenies mews,
bedford square, coach painter.—j. murphy, gloucestershire, coachman.—j. burnham,
harrold, bedfordshire, chemist.—w.l. phillips, kennington green, omnibus
proprietor.—j.d. lockhart, poplar, tobacconist.—j. wilkinson, cheltenham, licensed
victualler.—j.d. hubbarde, wakefield, printer.—j. ames, holywell, flintshire,
licensed victualler.—s. bone, greenwich, cabinet maker.—j. davis, great bolton,
lancashire, sawyer.—j. pollard, batley, yorkshire, blanket manufacturer.—s. m'millan,
llangollen, denbighshire, tea dealer.—s. brook, birstal, yorkshire, grocer.—f.
wormald, birstal, yorkshire, blacksmith.—w. barnes, knightsbridge, shopkeeper.—h.
manley, belvidere buildings, st george the martyr, surrey, coach builder.—w.
jeffery, queen street, brompton, horse dealer.—r.w. webb, saville row, walworth
road, attorney.
on the th inst., in milman street, bedford row, the wife of s.s. teulon, esq.
of a son.
on the th inst., at nottingham place, the wife of thomas a.h. dickson, esq.,
of a son.
at st george's church, hanover square, miss louisa georgina augusta anne
murray, only daughter of general the right honourable sir george murray, g.c.b.,
master-general of the ordnance, to henry george boyce, esq., of the nd life
guards, eldest son of mr and the late lady amelia boyce.
on the th inst., at kintbury, berks, lieutenant-colonel j.a. butler, to martha,
daughter of the late william bruce smith, esq., of starborough castle, surrey.
on the th inst., at rickmansworth church, john, second son of thomas weall,
esq., of woodcote lodge, beddington, to susanna, eldest daughter of w. white,
esq., of chorleywood.
on the th inst., aged  years, the rev. william porter, who was for  years
minister of the presbyterian congregation of newtownlimavady; for fourteen years
clerk to the general synod of ulster; the first moderator of the remonstrant synod,
and clerk to the same reverend body since its formation.
at bath, general w. brooke. the deceased general, who had served with distinction
throughout the peninsular war, had been upwards of fifty years in the army.
on sunday, the th instant, after a lengthened illness, at the family residence in
great george street, mr john crocker bulteel. he married, may , , lady
elizabeth grey, second daughter of earl grey, by whom he leaves a youthful family.
lady elizabeth bulteel, who is inconsolable at her bereavement, has gone to viscount
howick's residence, near datchet.
york and london life assurance company,
king william-street, london. empowered by act of parliament.
george frederick young, esq., chairman.
mathew forster, esq. m.p. deputy chairman.
the superiority of the system of assurance adopted by this company, will be found in the
fact that the premium required by a bonus office to assure ,l. on the life of a person
in the th year of his age would in this office insure ,l. s. d.
assurances at other ages are effected on equally favourable terms, and thus the assured has
an immediate bonus instead of a chance dependent upon longevity and the profits of an
office. in cases of assurance for a limited number of years, the advantage offered by this
company is still greater, no part of the profits of a bonus office being ever allotted to such
assurances.
prospectuses, containing tables framed to meet the circumstances of all who desire to provide
for themselves or those who may survive them by assurance, either of fixed sums or
annuities, may be had at the office as above, or of the agents.
john reddish, sec.
h. walker's needles (by authority the "queen's own"),
in the illustrated chinese boxes, are now in course of delivery to the trade. the
needles have large eyes, easily threaded (even by blind persons), and improved points, temper,
and finish. each paper is labelled with a likeness of her majesty or his royal highness
prince albert, in relief on coloured grounds. every quality of needles, fish hooks, hooks and
eyes, steel pens, &c. for shipping. these needles or pens for the home trade are sent, free by
post, by any respectable dealer, on receipt of  penny stamps for every shilling value.—h.
walker, manufacturer to the queen,  maiden lane, wood street, london.
the westminster marble company have now completed
their machinery, which will enable them in future to supply every variety of
marble work at a considerable reduction in price.
a neat box belgium marble chimney-piece, with moulded caps,  feet high, can be supplied
from l. to l.
a best vein marble chimney-piece, from l. to l.
a liberal commission for all orders will be allowed to the trade; and those persons
wishing to act as agents, can have a book of designs forwarded by enclosing twenty
postage stamps.
direct, "the westminster marble company, earl street, horseferry road."
carriages.—the attention of gentlemen about purchasing, or
having carriages to dispose of, is invited to marks and co.'s london carriage repository,
langham place. an immense stock, new and second hand, by eminent builders, is
always on sale, and a candid opinion of each carriage will be given as to its quality and condition.
invalid carriages for any journey. carriages to be let on yearly job.
wonderful cure!—read the following interesting facts,
communicated by mr brown, bookseller, gainsborough:—
"to messrs t. roberts and co. crane court, fleet street, london, proprietors of parr's
life pills.
"gentlemen,
"west stockwith, aug. , .
"i, james jackson easton, do hereby testify, that, by taking your excellent parr's life
pills, i have derived greater benefit than in using all the other medicines i have tried
since ; about which time i was attacked with severe illness, accompanied with excruciating
pain and trembling, with large rupture. for the last six months i have had no
return of this illness, nor the least appearance of the last-mentioned symptom. through
the mercy of god, i do at present feel perfectly recovered from it. i still continue the occasional
use of your excellent pills.—i am gentlemen, respectfully yours,
sold by all respectable medicine venders, in boxes at s. ⁄d. s. d. and s.—see the words
"parr's life pills," in white letters on a red ground, engraved on the government stamp.
[pg ]
no.  chatham place, blackfriars, london.
established, january, .
sir james rivett carnac, bart.
george forbes, esq. no.  fitzroy square.
with twelve directors.
facilities are offered by this long-established society to suit
the views and the means of every class of insurers. premiums
are received yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly, or upon
an increasing or decreasing scale. an insurance of l. may
be effected on the ascending scale by an annual premium for
the first five years of l. s. at the age of ; l. s. d. at
; l. s. at ; l. s d. at ; and l. s. d. at ; or,
one-half only of the usual rate, with interest on the remainder,
will be received for five or seven years, the other
half to be paid at the convenience of the assured.
the insured for life participate septennially; in the profits
realised.
a liberal commission is allowed to solicitors and agents.
david foggo, secretary.
n.b. agents are wanted in towns where none have yet been
appointed.
 princes street, bank, london.
empowered by special act of parliament, iv vict. cap. ix.
william bardgett, esq.
samuel bevington, esq.
wm. fechney black, esq.
john brightman, esq.
george cohen, esq.
millis coventry, esq.
john drewett, esq.
robert eglinton, esq.
erasmus rt. foster, esq.
alex. robert irvine, esq.
peter morison, esq.
henry lewis smale, esq.
thomas teed, esq.
j.b. bevington, esq.; f.p. cockerill, esq.; j.d. dow, esq.
john clendinning, m.d. f.r.s.  wimpolestreet, cavendish
square.
the hon. john ashley, new square, lincoln's inn.
mr serjeant murphy, m.p. temple.
william bevan, esq. old jewry.
messrs drewett and fowler, princes street, bank.
this institution is empowered by a special act of parliament,
and is so constituted as to afford the benefits of life
assurance in their fullest extent to policy-holders, and to
present greater facilities and accommodation than are usually
offered by other companies.
assurances may either be effected by parties on their own
lives, or by parties interested therein on the lives of others.
the effect of an assurance on a person's own life is to create
at once a property in reversion, which can by no other means
be realized. take, for instance, the case of a person at the
age of thirty, who, by the payment of l. s. d. to the britannia
life assurance company, can become at once possessed
of a bequeathable property, amounting to ,l., subject only
to the condition of his continuing the same payment quarterly
during the remainder of his life—a condition which may be
fulfilled by the mere saving of eight shillings weekly in his
expenditure. thus, by the exertion of a very slight degree of
economy—such indeed, as can scarcely be felt as an inconvenience,
he may at once realise a capital of ,l., which he
can bequeath or dispose of in any way he may think proper.
a table of decreasing rates of premium on a novel and
remarkable plan; the policy-holder having the option of discontinuing
the payment of all further premiums after
twenty, fifteen, ten, and even five years; and the policy
still remaining in force—in the first case, for the full amount
originally assured; and in either of the three other cases, for
a portion of the same according to a fixed and equitable scale
endorsed upon the policy.
increasing rates of premium on a new and remarkable plan
for securing loans or debts; a less immediate payment being
required on a policy for the whole term of life than in any
other office.
age of the assured in every case admitted in the policy.
all claims payable within one month after proof of death.
medical attendants remunerated in all cases for their
reports.
extract from increasing rates of premium, for an assurance
of l. for whole term of life.
age
annual premiums payable during
st five years.
nd five years.
rd five years.
th five years.
remainderof life.
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
detailed prospectuses, and every requisite information as
to the mode of effecting assurances, may be obtained at the
office.
peter morrison, resident director.
⁂ a board of directors attend daily at two o'clock, for
the despatch of business.
bazaar, no.  baker street, portman
square. london.—gentlemen about to furnish, or
going abroad, will find it worth their attention to look into
the above establishment, where they will find the largest
assortment of general furnishing ironmongery ever offered
to the public, consisting of tin, copper, and iron cooking
utensils, table cutlery, best shffield plate, german silver
wares, papier machee tea trays, tea and coffee urns, stove
grates, kitchen ranges, fenders and fire-irons, baths of all
kinds, shower, hot, cold, vapour, plunging, &c. ornamental
iron and wire works for conservatories, lawns, &c. and garden
engines. all articles are selected of the very best description,
and offered at exceedingly low prices, for cash only; the
price of each article being made in plain figures.
limbird's magnum bonum pens.—one
dozen highly-finished steel pens, with holder, in
a box, for d.; name-plate engraved for s. d.;  cards
printed for s. d,; crest and name engraved on visiting card
for s.; arms and crests for book plates on the most reasonable
terms; travelling writing-desks at s. d. s. d. s. d.
and s d. each; dressing-cases from s. d. each; blotting-books
in great variety, from d.; with locks, s. each; royal
writing-papers—diamond, five quires for s. d.; the queen's
and prince albert's size, five quires for s. d.; envelopes,
d. d. and s. the ; and every article in stationery, of the
best quality and lowest prices, at limbird's,  strand,
facing catherine street.
pianofortes.—messrs moore and
co. makers of the improved pianofortes, are now
selling their delightful instruments as follows:—a mahogany
piccolo, the best that can be made, in a plain but fashionable
case, only l.; a ⁄ octave ditto, only l.; a cottage ditto,
only l.; a ⁄ octave cottage ditto, only l. cabinets of all
descriptions. all warranted of the very best quality, packed
free of expense, and forwarded to any part of the world.
some returned from hire at reduced prices.
moore and co.  bishopsgate street without, near sun
steet.
just published, two thick volumes, vo. illustrated with
six large important maps, l. cloth,
statistical, and historical, of the various
countries, places and principal natural objects in the
world. by j.r. m'culloch, esq.
"the extent of information this dictionary affords on the
subjects referred to in its title is truly surprising. it cannot
fail to prove a vade-mecum to the student, whose inquiries
will be guided by its light, and satisfied by its clear and frequently
elaborated communications. every public room in
which commerce, politics, or literature, forms the subject of
discussion, ought to be furnished with these volumes."—globe.
london: longman, brown, green, and longmans.
just published in vo. price s. d.
railway reform—its expediency,
practicability, and importance considered, with a
copious appendix, containing an account of all the railways
in great britain and ireland, parliamentary returns, &c.
"an excellent pamphlet."—morning herald.
"the subject is very fully, earnestly, and ably investigated."—morning
advertiser.
"remarkable for originality of design, boldness of execution,
and minuteness in statistical detail."—sun.
"we would recommend all who have an interest in railways
to purchase this work."—sentinel.
pelham richardson, cornhill.
and local weakness, &c.
just published, seventh edition, price s. d. or free by post
for s. d.
self-preservation; a popular essay
on the concealed causes of nervous debility, local
and general weakness, indigestion, lowness of spirits, mental
irritability, and insanity; with practical observations on
their treatment and cure. by samuel la'mert, consulting
surgeon,  bedford street, bedford square, london;
matriculated member of the university of edinburgh; honorary
member of the london hospital medical society;
licentiate of apothecaries' hall, london, &c.
published by the author; and sold in london by s. gilbert,
 and  paternoster row; field,  quadrant; gordon, 
leadenhall street; noble,  chancery lane; and by all
booksellers.
"the design of this work will be tolerably obvious from its
title, and we cordially recommend the author and his book to
all who are suffering from nervous debility and general weakness.
mr la'mert has treated the subject in a very scientific
and intelligible manner."—wakefield journal.
at home every day till three, and from five till eight.
just published, in a sealed envelope, price s.; and sent free,
on receiving a post office order for s. d.
manhood; the causes of its premature
decline, with plain directions for its
perfect restoration; followed by observations on
marriage, and the treatment of mental and nervous debility,
incapacity, warm climate, and cure of the class of diseases
resulting therefrom. illustrated with cases, &c. by j.l.
curtis and co. consulting surgeons, london. fourteenth
edition.
published by the authors; and sold by burgess, medical
bookseller,  coventry street, haymarket; mann,  cornhill;
strange,  paternoster row, london; guest,  bull
street, birmingham; hickling, coventry; robinson, leamington;
journal office, leicester; cook, chronicle office,
oxford; sowler,  st anne's square, manchester; philip,
south castle street, liverpool; and sold, in a sealed envelope,
by all booksellers.
"this work, a tenth edition of which is now presented to
the public—ten thousand copies have been exhausted since its
first appearance—has been very much improved and enlarged
by the addition of a more extended and clear detail of general
principles, as also by the insertion of several new and highly
interesting cases. the numberless instances daily occurring,
wherein affections of the lungs, putting on all the outer appearances
of consumption, which, however, when traced to
their source, are found to result from certain baneful habits,
fully proves that the principle of the division of labour is
nowhere more applicable than in medical practice. we feel
no hesitation in saying, that there is no member of society by
whom the book will not be found useful, whether such person
holds the relation of a parent, a preceptor, or a clergyman."—sun,
evening paper.
"messrs curtis's work, called 'manhood,' is one of the few
books now coming before the public on such a subject which
can lay claim to the character of being strictly professional, at
the same time that it is fully intelligible to all who read it.
the moral and medical precepts given in it render it invaluable."—magnet.
messrs curtis and co. are to be consulted daily at their residence,
 frith street, soho square, london.
country patients are requested to be as minute as possible
in the details of their cases. the communication must be
accompanied by the usual consultation fee of l.; and in all
cases the most inviolable secrecy may be relied on.
p.l. simmonds, advertising agent,
receives regularly files of all the newspapers
published in the british colonies and possessions beyond the
seas, which are preserved for the facility of reference and inspection,
and sent when requested to parties for perusal.
also various german, french, italian, american, and other
foreign journals.
orders and advertisements received for every foreign and
european publication.
photography.—great improvements
having been recently effected in this interesting
and extraordinary science by mr beard, the patentee, in
the process of taking and colouring likenesses,
the public are particularly invited to an inspection of varieties,
at the establishment,  king william street, city; royal
polytechnic institution; and  parliament street, where
exchanges for new in lieu of old portraits may be had, on
payment of s. colouring small busts, s.
capital, £,.
charge hugge price, esq.
james francis maubert, esq.
thomas fowler, esq.
major-general parlby, c.b.
to officers of her majesty's service (both
civil and military), secretaries, clerks, and all others
holding, or about to hold, confidential and responsible situations,
this society presents immediate facilities for obtaining
surety, or integrity, upon payment of a small annual premium,
and by which relatives and friends are relieved from the
various pecuniary responsibilities attendant on private suretiships.
the surety of this society is accepted by the war office
(for payment of regiments and of pensioners), the ordnance,
east india company, the customs, the bank of england,
and numerous banking, mercantile, and commercial firms,
both in london and in the country.
forms of application and every information may be obtained
at the offices,  poultry, london.
thomas dodgson, sec.
h. duhamel and co.  duke street, grosvenor
square, have constantly on sale the undernamed natural
mineral waters, which they can supply fresh and genuine at
a very reasonable price.
barèges
cheltenham
malvern
schwalbach
bath
ems
marienbad
sedlitz
bonnes
fachingen
pullna
selters
bristol
harrogate
pyrmont
spa
cauterets
kissengen
saidschutz
