and fruits lose water, wilt, and become unfit to eat. flour and
corn-meal become mouldy. potatoes decay and sprout. some foods, such
as milk, turn sour. eggs become tainted, and fat grows rancid. with
proper care in handling, storing, and keeping, this spoiling can be
prevented.
the spoiling of foods is due to the presence of micro-organisms;
and if foods are fresh and sound and kept cool and clean in
every way, they will not spoil readily, because such conditions are
unfavourable to the development of the micro-organisms. on the
other hand, if foods are roughly handled and bruised, decomposition
will take place readily, for micro-organisms develop in the bruised
portions. care must, therefore, be taken to select foods wisely,
handle them carefully, wash them if they are not already clean, put
them in clean receptacles, and keep them in a clean, cool place.
all pots, pans, and dishes in which foods are kept or cooked should
be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed well, so that no fragments stick
to them which may decay and cause possible infection to the next
food that is put in. every part of the kitchen and store-rooms
should be kept clean, dry, and well aired. light is the best
germicide and purifier known.
covered receptacles should be secured for all foods. those that
are mouse-proof and insect-proof are essential to a well-kept
pantry. all bottles and cans should be neatly labelled and so
arranged that each one can be conveniently reached. the outside of
the bottle or case should always be wiped off after it has been
opened and food has been removed from it. the shelves on which the
cases are kept should be wiped off every day. if supplies of fruit
or vegetables are kept on hand, they should be looked over
frequently, and whatever shows even the slightest suggestion of
spoiling should be removed. bread should be kept in a covered tin
box, and the box should be washed out once or twice a week and
frequently scalded and aired.
if cooking lessons are to be given, it will be well to take this
lesson on the care of foods in connection with the first
cooking lesson, and to make it a means of arranging for the
materials that are to be kept on hand and of determining how
everything is to be handled.
devote a large part of the lesson to a discussion of the
necessity for care in the handling, storing, and keeping of foods.
if facilities permit, devote a few minutes to the putting away of
foods that are to be used in the next cooking lesson or in the
school lunch, discussing the reasons for such care.
if the daily disposal of waste is attended to, there will be no
undesirable accumulation of garbage. scraps of food that cannot be
utilized for the table should be fed to the pigs or the chickens
and should not be allowed to stand and gather flies. a covered pail
or pan should be used for holding the garbage, until final disposal
is made of it. those portions that are badly spoiled and will be of
no value in feeding the stock should be burned at once. waste
vegetable substances, if suitable, should be fed to the stock, and
if not, should be buried in a thin layer on the ground at some
distance from the house, so that they may enrich the soil.
old papers that are badly soiled should be burned, but all
others should be kept for use in cleaning the stove, starting the
fires, etc. empty cans should be well washed and buried, so
that they will not prove a breeding-place for flies. it is well to
pierce them through the bottom immediately after opening them, so
that they will not hold water. dish-water should be emptied at some
distance from the house, unless there is a drain nearby. all
receptacles that hold water should be carefully emptied, and all
depressions in the soil should be filled, in order to prevent
mosquitoes from breeding. all waste water should be used on the
garden.
protection of the water supply.—only the water from
deep wells should be used for drinking purposes, because all
surface water and water in shallow wells becomes dangerous through
seepage from compost, pig-pens, privies, and other places where
decayed organic matter may accumulate. in order that the water may
be kept clean, the well must be supplied with a tight-fitting top
which need not be opened and a metal pump to bring up the water. a
well platform that allows the water spilled on it to run back into
the well is unsafe, for any filth carried on the platform in any
way will be washed directly into it. rats, mice, and other animals
get into the well if the top is not tight, and these, in addition
to being unpleasant, are liable to introduce disease germs.
simple disinfectants.—sunshine and fresh air are
nature's disinfectants and should be freely admitted to every part
of the house. windows should be left open whenever possible. the
windows in the sleeping rooms should always be opened at night. the
interior of the house should be kept perfectly dry. decay does not
easily take place in dry places. a damp cellar should be drained,
and the grounds around the house should not be allowed to drain
into the cellar. coarse coal ashes should be used to fill in around
the house, on the walks, etc., to help in securing thorough drainage.
wood ashes may be used as a simple disinfectant to cover decayed
organic matter. whitewash is a good disinfectant and should be
frequently used both inside and outside the house and on all
out-buildings. kerosene and creosote also make good
disinfectants.
care of out-of-door closets.—the privy should be so
arranged that it may be cleaned often and all excreta disposed of
in a safe way. the building should be so well constructed that
there will be no cracks for the admission of flies. in a poorly
constructed building, old paper can be pasted over the cracks, to
make the structure fly-proof. dry earth, street dust, or lime
should be frequently sprinkled over the excreta, and the seat
should be closed, to prevent the entrance of flies or mosquitoes.
the seat should be washed frequently, and both the seat and the
floor scrubbed at least once a week.
it will be well to teach this lesson at a time when improvements
are necessary in the care of the school-house. the discussions in
regard to out-of-door closets will, of course, be taken when the
girls are alone with the teacher.
discuss the disposal of waste, the care of garbage, etc., in the
home and the school. talk over the care of waste from the school
lunch and discuss methods of keeping the school in a sanitary
condition. follow this by a general cleaning of the
school-house.
home-made hard soap
 lb. fat
 pt. cold water
 can lye
 tbsp. borax
melt the fat slowly. mix the lye and water
in a bowl or kettle (do not use a tin pan), stirring with a stick
until the potash dissolves. add the borax and allow the mixture to
cool. cool the fat and, when it is lukewarm, add the lye, pouring
it in a thin stream and stirring constantly. stir with a smooth
stick until about as thick as honey, and continue stirring for ten
minutes. pour the mixture into a box and allow it to harden. cut
into pieces the desired size and leave in a cool, dry place for ten
days, to ripen before using.
when making the soap, be careful not to
spill potash or lye on the hands, as it makes a bad burn. if the
hands are burned, rub them with grease at once. do not wet
them.
some time before this lesson is given ask the pupils to bring
scraps of fat from home. see that these are in good condition, and
weigh them, to determine the portion of the recipe that can be
made. ask one of the pupils to bring sufficient borax for the
recipe.
let the pupils look the fat over and put it on to melt, watching
it carefully. while it is heating and cooling, discuss the process
of soap-making, the cost of materials, the care necessary in the
making of soap, and the importance of its use. get ready the other
materials, and a box for moulding the soap, and let the pupils work
together. after the soap has hardened and been cut, have it put
away on a shelf to dry.
the following points must be remembered when a meal is to be
served: the dining-room must be clean, well aired, sufficiently
lighted, and in good order.
the table must be perfectly clean and covered with a clean white
cover (table-cloth, doilies, paper napkins, or oil-cloth).
a vase of flowers or leaves or a small potted plant, in the
centre of the table, will help to make it attractive.
the table should be prepared with everything necessary for
serving the meal, but only those foods should be placed on it that
will not be spoiled by standing. if there is danger of the food
attracting flies, cover it carefully.
plates for everyone who is to partake of the meal should be
arranged at equal distances from one another, and half an inch from
the edge of the table.
the knife should be placed at the right of the plate with the
cutting edge toward the plate, and one inch from the edge of the
table.
the fork should be placed at the left of the plate with the
tines turned up, and one inch from the edge of the table.
the spoon should be placed, bowl upward, at the right of the
plate, to the right of the knife. it should be placed one inch from
the edge of the table. spoons and forks for serving should be
placed at the right and left of the dish to be served, or in
another convenient position. no one should have to use the personal
fork or spoon for serving.
the napkins should be folded simply and placed at the left of
the fork.
the tumbler should be placed at the upper end
of the knife.
the cups and saucers should be placed at the right of the plate
with the handle of the cup toward the right.
the bread-and-butter plate, if used, should be placed at the
upper left hand of the fork.
the salt-cellars and pepper-shakers should be placed near the
centre of the table or at the sides, where they can be conveniently
reached. individual salt-cellars, if used, should be placed
immediately in front of the individual plate.
the chairs should be placed at the table after it is set. care
should be taken not to put them so close to it that it will be
necessary to move them after they are occupied.
if possible, arrange to give this lesson before lesson viii in
the series of "twenty lessons in cooking" is given; then the
emphasis in that lesson may be put upon the food to be served,
proper combinations, etc., while this lesson gives the drill in the
arrangement and handling of the dishes.
it is desirable to give the pupils a thorough drill in table
setting and table service, since much of the pleasure derived from
eating depends upon the attention paid to these processes.
be careful to see that everything necessary is on hand to set
the table simply but daintily. for class practice a small table may
be set for four. this will necessitate a table-cover, four or more
dinner plates, four bread-and-butter plates, four tumblers, four
cups and saucers, four knives, four forks, four teaspoons, four
napkins, a saltcellar, a pepper-shaker, a platter, one serving
spoon, and one serving fork. if these things are not
already in the school, probably they can be brought from home by
the pupils. if linen cloths are not used and cannot be afforded on
the tables in the homes, the pupils should be taught to use a white
oil-cloth.
have a diagram made on the black-board by one of the pupils of
the arrangement of an individual place at the table.
fig.
.—arrangement of an individual place at table
.knife .spoon
.tumbler .fork .napkin
.bread-and-butterplate .dinner
plate
the process of table setting should be demonstrated with the
materials at hand, and the work should be adapted to home
conditions.
if there is no available table in the school-room, the desk tops
may be used for individual places.
reasons for the arrangement of the table should be
given—the convenience of placing the knives and the spoons to
the right, the forks to the left, the cup and saucer and the
tumbler to the right, the use of the napkin, etc.
the one who is to wait on table must be careful to see that
everything is in readiness before the meal is announced, so that
she can do her work easily, without subjecting those at the table
to unnecessary delay. she should have water, bread, and butter (if
used), hot dishes ready for the hot foods, and dessert dishes
conveniently at hand. she must see that her hands are perfectly
clean and her hair and dress in order. a clean, neat apron will
always improve her appearance. the room should be clean and neatly
arranged.
if the meal is to be a family one and all are to sit at the
table together, plates will be passed from one to another as they
are served: but it will still be well to have one person appointed
to wait on the table. she should be ready to supply more bread,
water, etc., when it is necessary, and to change the plates for the
dessert course. she should rise from the table quickly and quietly,
in order not to disturb others, and should take her place again as
soon as the necessary service has been rendered.
the following rules should be observed: hold the tumblers near
the bottom, being careful not to touch the upper edge. fill only
three-quarters full.
put the butter on the table just before the meal is announced,
and serve in neat, compact pieces.
cut the bread in even slices, pile them neatly on a serving
plate, and place it on the table, covering it with a clean napkin
or towel, if there are flies about or there is danger of dust. if
preferred, the bread may be cut at the table as required. place the
dessert dishes at one end of the table or, better still, on a side
table, until it is time to use them. when carrying the dishes to
and from the table, be careful not to let the fingers come in
contact with the food. learn to place the hand under the dish. in
particular service a napkin is used between the hand and the dish,
or a tray, if the dish is a small one. the tray should be covered
with a napkin or doily.
when a dish is being passed, hold it at the left of the person
to be served and at a convenient height and distance. be sure that
each dish is supplied with a spoon or a fork for serving, and turn
the handle of the spoon or the fork toward the one to be
served.
if a plate is to be placed in front of a person, set it down
from the right. never reach in front of others at the table.
when a course is finished, remove the dishes containing the food
first; then the soiled plates, knives, and forks. be careful to
handle only a few dishes at a time and not to pile them. if another
course is to be served, remove the crumbs from the table, using for
the purpose a napkin and plate, or a crumb tray and brush, and
brushing the crumbs lightly into the plate. fill the tumblers, and
arrange the dishes and forks or spoons quickly for the next
course.
when the meal is over, the chairs should be moved back from the
table, the dishes neatly piled and carried to the kitchen sink, the
table wiped, the crumbs brushed from the floor, and the room
aired.
let this lesson be a continuation of the previous one, placing
emphasis on the method of waiting on table. the same articles will
be required as were used in the last lesson. in addition to these
the pupils must be careful to have clean aprons for this
lesson.
have the table set, as a review of the work of the last lesson;
then have four or six of the pupils seat themselves and go through
the forms of serving one another to any simple meal upon which the
class may decide. family meal service should be explained and
demonstrated first; then service where there is one waitress. have
the pupils, in turn, act as waitresses and serve all the others,
offering and placing the food, removing the soiled dishes, filling
the tumblers, etc.
rooms which are in constant use should be swept and dusted every
day. a thorough cleaning of each room in the house will be
necessary every week or two, even though the room is swept and kept
in order daily. first, all cupboards, drawers, and other
receptacles in which articles collect should be cleaned; then all
large movable articles should be dusted and moved out of the room;
those that are not readily movable should be dusted and covered.
the floor should be swept with the windows open; the ceiling and
walls should be brushed with a covered broom, and the dust allowed
to settle. the floor should then be wiped with a damp cloth on the
broom.[a] the wood-work should be cleaned
with a damp cloth and a soap that is not too strong. soda or
sapolio should not be used. the furniture should be carefully
uncovered, and everything arranged in perfect order.
[a] if the floor is of
unfinished-wood, it will require a thorough scrubbing. after
sweeping the floor and allowing the dust to settle, a small portion
at a time should be scrubbed with a floor-brush and soap. when
scrubbing, the grain of the wood should be followed. the
scrubbing-water should be changed frequently. for rinsing and
drying the floor, a cloth should be wrung out of clear water.
the things that are highest should be dusted first, and care
should be taken to collect all the dust in the dust-cloth. after
collecting the dust, the cloth should be shaken out-of-doors,
washed thoroughly, and boiled. the dust-cloth should be dampened
before using on all surfaces except the polished furniture and
windows.
sweeping should be done with short strokes and the broom should
be kept close to the floor, so that the dust will not be scattered.
the corners of the room should be swept first, the dust gathered in
the centre, and then swept into the dust-pan. the dust should be
burned, for it may contain disease germs. loose hairs and fluff
should be removed from the broom after using, and it should also be
washed periodically.
small rugs should be cleaned out-of-doors. they should be swept,
beaten, and re-swept, then rolled until ready to be put on the
floor. if the rug is a large one and cannot be removed, it should
be wiped over with a damp cloth, rolled, and the under side of the
rug and the floor beneath it should be wiped.
after the room has been cleaned, the windows should be arranged
so that a supply of fresh, clean air can come constantly into it.
this is essential to every room in the house, if perfect health is
to be maintained.
it will be well to have lesson ix given in one of the homes some
day after school hours, if possible. if that cannot be
arranged, the school-room may be utilized as the place for
practice.
devote lesson viii to a discussion of the methods of cleaning
and to various short tasks in connection with the school-room. in
lesson ix have the pupils go through the entire process of cleaning
a room. assign some portion of the task to each one of them, so
that all may take part in the work. supervise the work carefully,
assign home practice, and have each pupil clean a room at home once
a week for a month.
as soon as one is dressed in the morning, the windows in the
bed-room should be opened wide to air the room thoroughly, and the
bed-clothes should be removed and put on chairs before the window
to air. the night clothing should also be aired. the slops should
be emptied, and the chamber should be washed with cold water, using
a special cloth. the basin should be washed in warm, soapy water,
which should then be poured into the chamber and used for washing
it. the toilet articles should be washed, then the basin rinsed and
wiped dry. the slop jar should be washed out thoroughly, and both
the slop jar and the chamber should be cleaned frequently with
chloride of lime or some other disinfectant. the pitcher should be
filled with fresh water, and all the articles arranged neatly on
the wash-stand. if the towels are soiled, clean ones should be
supplied. the mattress should be turned and the bed made carefully;
the lower sheet being tucked under the mattress all around, and the
other covers tucked in at the bottom and sides of the bed. the bed
should be kept free from wrinkles and smooth in appearance, and the
pillows should be well shaken and arranged at the head of the bed.
the floor should be swept, the furniture dusted, and everything put
in place. the windows should be left partly opened, so that the
bed-room may be well aired. fresh air is always necessary, but
especially during sleep, when the body is repairing itself, and it
is important that the room should be well aired during the day and
the windows left open at night.
when the room is to be thoroughly cleaned, the frame of the bed
should be dusted, the mattress turned, and the bed should be made.
the window shades should be dusted and rolled up. the curtains
should be well shaken and covered, if one has a dust sheet. all the
small articles on the bureau, table, and shelf should be placed on
the bed, and the whole covered with a sheet. the tables, chairs,
and any other movable furniture should be dusted and placed outside
the room or covered. the rugs should be rolled and cleaned
out-of-doors. the room should be swept and dusted. as soon as the
dust has settled, the covers should be removed, and the furniture,
rugs, and all the small articles should be restored to their
places. the shades should be adjusted, and the room left in perfect
order. the broom and everything else that has been used in the work
should be cleaned and put back into their places.
it may be possible for the teacher to give this lesson in her
own bed-room or in the bed-room of one of the neighbours. if this
is not feasible, the only way to make it effective is to have the
pupils report each day on the work they do at home.
illustrate each process and give the reasons for everything that
is done. emphasize the importance of the sanitary care of the
bed-room, a regular time for doing the work, and the benefit of
having each member of the family care for her own personal
belongings and her own portion of the bed-room.
it is assumed that the teacher is acquainted
with the possibilities of electricity and other methods of better
lighting in country homes, and will instruct her pupils in the
economic use of modern lighting facilities.
directions for cleaning and filling lamps.—a bright
light comes from clean burners that allow a good draught. this
means constant care on the part of the one who looks after the
lamps. in the daily cleaning, first dust the chimney shade and the
body of the lamp. wash the chimney. if sooty, clean with a
newspaper before washing. next, turn the wick high enough to show
all the charred part; cut this off, making it perfectly even, then
rub with a piece of soft paper. wipe the burner and any other part
of the lamp that may be oily. dry with another cloth. fill the body
of the lamp with oil to within an inch of the top, leaving plenty
of room for the gas that may be generated from the kerosene, as
this gas, in a lamp that has been used many times without
refilling, may be a source of danger.
when lighting the lamp, turn the wick down,
allowing the chimney to become heated gradually. if it is necessary
to move the lighted lamp, turn the wick low. the flaring up of the
flame smokes the chimney. do not leave a lighted lamp in a room
where there is no one to watch it. when putting out the light, blow
across the chimney, never down into it, as this might send the
flame down into the kerosene.
about once a month give the lamp a thorough cleaning. spread out
a newspaper and take the lamp apart. wash the chimney and the shade
in hot water, dry with a towel, and polish, using soft paper. boil
every part of the burner in water to which two tablespoonfuls of
soda have been added. insert new wicks if the old ones are dirty,
and put the parts all securely together again. keep an old pan and
some cloths exclusively for this purpose, and be very careful not
to allow the dirty hands or a drop of kerosene to come near any
food.
have a regular time in the day for cleaning the lamps,
preferably immediately after all the morning work has been done
after breakfast. do not fill the lamps near the kitchen stove. do
not light a match while the oil-can is near, and never fill a lamp
while it is lighted or while near another one which is lighted. if
a fire is caused by kerosene, smother it with a heavy rug or a
woollen garment, and do not attempt to put it out with water.
it will be well to give this lesson just before some evening
entertainment at the school-house. if there are no lamps at the
school have a few brought in from neighbouring homes. secure an old
pan and some cloths to use in cleaning.
discuss with the pupils the cost and properties of kerosene and
the danger of having a light or too great heat near a can of
kerosene. explain the draught by means of which the kerosene can be
made to burn on the wick and the danger if the burner becomes
clogged up and the draught is cut off. have the lamps taken apart,
the burners boiled, the chimneys cleaned, and the body of the lamps
filled and wiped off. then have the lamps lighted, to see that they
burn properly.
household pests are annoying, dangerous to health, and
destructive to property. they carry disease germs from one person
to another and from the lower animals to human beings. absolute
cleanliness is essential, if the house is to be kept free from
pests. as a rule, they flourish in dark, damp, dirty places. with
proper care the housekeeper can keep her house free from them and,
if they are noticed, she should know how to exterminate them.
a few simple methods of extermination are here given:
bedbugs.—kerosene should be poured into all the
cracks, and a brush, dipped in kerosene, run briskly over all
surfaces. care must be taken to have no fire in the room while this
is being done. the windows should be open, and the room should be
kept free from dust. in four days this should be repeated, in order
to kill any bugs that may have just hatched.
cockroaches and water-bugs.—a
solution of one pound of alum to three pints of water should be
poured into all the cracks. insect-powder and borax are also
effective. absolute cleanliness and freedom from dampness are
necessary, if the house is to be kept free from cockroaches.
ants.—oil of cloves or pennyroyal on pieces of
cotton-batting scattered about in the places where ants appear will
drive them away. saturating the nests with coal-oil will destroy
them. food which attracts ants should be removed from places which
they are able to reach.
rats and mice.—these are best exterminated by the
use of a trap or some preparation such as "rough on rats". traps
should be set nightly and should be scalded and aired after a mouse
has been caught. rat holes may be stopped by sprinkling with
chloride of lime and then filling with mortar or plaster of
paris.
mosquitoes.—these breed in swampy places, or in old
barrels or kegs or tin cans which hold stagnant water. therefore,
if the swampy places are drained and the grounds about the house
are kept free from stagnant water, the housekeeper will, as a rule,
not be troubled with mosquitoes. empty barrels or kegs should be
inverted, and old tin cans should have a hole punched in the
bottom, so that they will not hold water. all high weeds near the
house should be cut down and destroyed, so that they will not
provide a damp place in which to harbour mosquitoes. if it is
impossible to get rid of all standing water, the breeding of
mosquitoes can be checked by pouring kerosene oil on the water. one
ounce of oil on fifteen square feet of water is sufficient, and
this will have to be renewed at least once in ten days. the doors,
windows, and ventilators of the house should be well screened, as a
protection against mosquitoes.
flies.—these are one of the
greatest carriers of typhoid and other germs, as well as filth of
all sorts. they can be got rid of only by destroying the breeding
places and killing the flies as rapidly as possible. materials that
attract them should not be exposed in and about the house. the
house should be well screened with wire mesh or mosquito netting,
in order to keep out the flies. a fly swatter should be kept at
hand. the stables should be cleaned daily. manure piles should be
screened, and every effort should be made to kill the larvæ
by frequent spraying with kerosene, creoline (dilute creosote), or
lime.
fleas.—these will be troublesome if cats or dogs
are kept in the house. these pets should be given frequent baths,
the rugs on which they lie should be brushed and shaken daily, and
the floors should be washed with soap and water and wiped with
kerosene.
moths.—these are apt to develop in woollen clothes
unless the garments are thoroughly shaken and absolutely protected
by wrapping in newspapers before being put away. woollen garments
that are used only occasionally should be kept in a light, dry
place, examined frequently, and hung in the sun occasionally. moths
or carpet beetles can be exterminated by the use of kerosene.
give this lesson at a time when the pupils are asking about
household pests or when the school is suffering from them. it would
be well to have it in the spring, just before the school closes, so
that the pupils may immediately put into practice what they learn.
it may be desirable to devote their efforts to the destruction of
one particular pest; for example, a fly crusade may be
inaugurated.
if there are pests in the school-room, discuss their habits,
what seems to attract them, where they come from, etc. have the
pupils report any that they may have at home. explain why they are
dangerous, tell how they can be exterminated, and assign to each
pupil the task of exterminating one household pest. have her
report, each day, the success of her efforts. continue this work
for several weeks.
as garments and household linens are apt to become stained and
thus lose their attractiveness, it is well to know the remedies for
the most common stains and the principle upon which their removal
depends. all stains should be removed as soon as possible. boiling
water will loosen and remove coffee, tea, and fresh fruit stains.
the stained spot should be held over a bowl, and the water should
be poured upon it with some force. cold water will remove stains
made by blood or meat juice. soaking will help in the removal of
blood stains. rust stains may be removed by wetting the stained
spot with lemon juice, covering it with salt, and placing the
stained fabric in the sun. stains from stove blacking, paint, and
grass may be removed by soaking in kerosene and washing well with
soap and water. ink stains may be removed by soaking in water,
removing as much of the stain as possible, and then soaking in
milk. stains from cream and other forms of grease may be washed out in
cold water, followed by warm water and soap.
white cotton and white linen materials may be bleached by
exposure to the sunshine while still damp. if they are left out
overnight, the bleaching process is made effective by the moisture
furnished by dew or frost. a stream of steam from the tea-kettle
may also help in the bleaching process.
some colours are set by the addition of a small amount of acid
to the first water in which they are soaked, while others are set
by the use of salt. it is necessary to try a small amount of the
material before dipping in the entire garment, in order to be sure
of satisfactory results. vinegar should be used for blues, one-half
cup to one gallon of water. salt is most effective for browns,
blacks, and pinks. in most cases, two cups of salt to one gallon of
cold water will be sufficient.
the towels used for drying dishes or the linen used for some
school entertainment may have become stained with coffee, fruit, or
some other substance. make this the basis of a lesson, and let the
pupils bring from home other things which are stained. each pupil
should have an article on which to practise. this lesson should be
preliminary to the lesson on laundry work.
examine the various articles from which stains are to be
removed. discuss the method of removal, and let each pupil work at
her own stain until it is as nearly removed as possible.
dish-towels should be thoroughly washed at least once a day.
wash one piece at a time (the cleanest first) in warm, soapy water
and rinse in clear water in another pan. hang in the sun, if
possible, so that the air will pass through. boil at least once a
week in soapy water, to keep them fresh and white. sunshine and
fresh air are valuable for the purposes of bleaching and
purifying.
wash the aprons in hot, soapy water; boil, rinse, and blue
slightly. a small amount of thin starch may be desirable. a thin
starch may be made as follows:
recipe for thin starch
 tbsp. starch
½ tsp. lard, butter, or paraffin
 tbsp. cold water
 qt. boiling water
add the cold water to the starch and lard,
stir until smooth, then add the boiling water slowly, stirring
constantly. boil for several minutes in order to cook the starch
thoroughly; then add one pint of cold water and a small amount of
blueing. dilute if necessary.
hang the articles in the sun to dry, shaking well before putting
on the line, and folding the edge of each over at least six inches.
be sure to have the line clean. when dry, fold carefully. a short
time before ironing, sprinkle well.
it may be desirable to give this lesson earlier in the course,
if cooking lessons are being given and dish-towels are in use, or
if the aprons are badly soiled. other articles may be washed, if
time and facilities permit.
discuss briefly the need for laundry work and the general
principles. let the pupils take turns at washing the towels or
aprons; examine each article after it is washed, and give careful
directions for the boiling, blueing, and starching. while these
processes are being completed, let some of the pupils prepare the
line. let two of them be appointed to bring the towels in, before
going home from school.
to do good ironing it is necessary to have a firm, unwarped
ironing board. this should be covered with some thick woollen
material and a white cotton cover that is clean, smooth, and
tightly drawn. the thick cover should be tacked on, while the top
cover should be pinned, so that it may be easily taken off to be
washed. a heavy iron-holder should be provided; and the irons
should be clean and smooth. for this purpose paper should be kept
at hand, as well as a piece of beeswax, sandpaper, or salt. a small
cloth should be used to wipe the iron after using the beeswax. a
newspaper should be spread on the floor, to protect any pieces that
may hang down while being ironed. the coarser towels should be
ironed first, as the longer the irons are used, the smoother they
become. starched pieces should not be ironed until the irons are
very hot. if the article is first laid smooth, it will be easier to
iron it and keep it in shape, and every piece should be ironed until
it is perfectly dry. as soon as the ironing is completed, the
articles should be hung up to air.
arrange to have the ironing lesson just as soon after the
laundry lesson as possible. it will probably be easy to borrow the
necessary equipment from homes near the school. each pupil may be
directed to bring something that will contribute toward the
equipment, and one may be instructed to have the fire ready and
another to put the irons on to heat before the lesson hour.
call the pupils together early in the morning or at some time
previous to the lesson period, and give them directions for
sprinkling the articles to be ironed. when the class hour comes,
demonstrate the method of ironing, folding, and hanging the
articles, and let the pupils take turns in doing the work.
because young girls are fond of little children and must help
their mothers often with their baby brothers and sisters, they
should know how to care for them. it is essential that they should
understand the following points: the little body needs protection.
the head is soft, and the brain may be injured by hard bumps or
pressure. the skin is tender and is easily irritated by the bites
of insects, friction, and so on. kicking and wiggling are necessary
to
the development of the muscles, but the baby should not be played
with all the time; and it is well for it while awake to lie quiet
for part of the time. it should not be made to sit up until ready
to do so. a desire to creep should be encouraged. standing or
walking should not be taught the baby until it tries to stand or
walk itself, and then it must be helped very carefully.
the baby should have plenty of fresh air and should be allowed
to spend much of its time out-of-doors. in cold weather it must be
warmly covered and sheltered from high winds. its eyes should
always be protected from strong sunlight.
regular hours should be observed for sleep, and the baby should
be put to bed early in the evening. if the house is not well
screened in summer, a mosquito bar should be put over the crib. the
clothing should be light and loose, so that the body can move
freely.
perfect cleanliness is necessary to keep the baby's skin in good
condition; and a daily bath should be given. a morning hour, midway
between the meals, is usually the best time for this. the baby
should be taught to use the chamber before the bath and after the
nap. everything should be ready before it is undressed. the room
should be very warm. the water should be only moderately warm, and
should be carefully tested to make sure that it is not too hot. the
towels and covers for the baby should be at hand. the head and the
feet should be washed first, and the body soaped before putting the
child into the bath. little soap should be used, for even the best
soap is strong and is apt to irritate the delicate skin. the bath
should be given quickly, and the body wrapped at once in a blanket
or towel and kept covered as much as possible while it is being
dried.
the baby should be fed in small quantities at
regular intervals and given plenty of cold water to drink. not
until it is eleven or twelve months of age should it be given solid
or semi-solid food. even then, milk should continue to form the
basis of its diet, and of this a considerable quantity should be
used—about a quart a day from the twelfth month on. as the
child grows older a more varied diet will be necessary. the most
hygienic methods of food preparation should always be observed.
certain foods should never be given; for example, fried foods,
pastries, condiments, pickles, preserves, canned meats, fish, pork,
sausage, cheap candies, coarse vegetables, unripe and overripe
fruits, stimulants, foods treated with a preservative or colouring
matter, and half-cooked starches.
the teacher should talk with the pupils, in order to see what
points in connection with the care of the baby it is necessary for
them to know, so that they may do their work at home
intelligently.
it will probably not be possible to have anything more than a
class discussion of the points in question, but the pupils' home
experiences ought to make this discussion vital. if there is a
nurse in the neighbourhood who can be secured to give one lesson on
the care of the baby, the teacher should supplement her own lessons
by an additional lesson given by the nurse.
it is of great importance that children should learn in an
elementary way the value of property. this will prepare them for
the knowledge of the cost of living that is essential. they should
learn that the cost of food can be decreased by having gardens, and
by the proper choice, care, and handling of foods; that taking care
of clothing will reduce another item of expense; and that the
owning of one's own house and lot is something worth working for,
in order to obviate the necessity of paying rent.
the teacher will have to acquaint herself thoroughly with
conditions in the community, so that she can talk intelligently
with the pupils, emphasize the right points, and give constructive
help.
begin with a discussion of the cost of food; how much the pupils
earn or spend during the week; and why it is worth while to cook
and sew well and to look after property. continue such discussions
from time to time, in connection with other school work.
it is well for every one to keep a written record of all money
received and all money spent. children should be taught to do this
as soon as they are old enough to have money in their possession. a
simple little note-book in which all expenditures are entered on
the right side and all receipts on the left side, with the balance
drawn up each week or month, will prove an easy and satisfactory
method of keeping accounts. if the little girl learns to do this
with her pennies, she will be better able to take care of the more
important household accounts when she is in charge of a home.
however, there will be no real incentive for her to keep accounts
unless she is endeavouring to save for some good purpose. if she
learns to save for the future purchase of a book, a dress, or some
little treat, she will feel that her account-keeping is worth
while. as a housekeeper, she will appreciate the importance of
saving for some future benefit to the family.
in order to make the lesson of vital interest, introduce it at a
time when the pupils are saving for some specific
purpose—material for a dress to be made in the sewing class,
refreshments for a party for their mothers, a school library, or
something else that will be a pleasure and help in the work of the
school.
after discussing the sources of income of the pupil and of her
family, and the means of increasing and taking care of that income,
discuss simple methods of keeping accounts, illustrate these on the
black-board, show how to balance the accounts, and see that each
pupil has a small book suitable for the purpose. it may be
necessary to make or to rule this book as a portion of the class
exercise.
closely allied to the housekeeper's work within the home is the
care of the exterior of the house and its surroundings. it is
absolutely necessary that the grounds be kept neat and clean. in
addition to this they should be made attractive by the careful
selection of a few trees and shrubs suitably placed. while the
gardens at the rear of the house may be planned solely for the
pleasure and use of the family, in planning the lawn at the sides
and front the neighbours and passers-by must be considered. the
grounds should be a picture of which the house is the centre, the
trees and shrubs being grouped to frame the picture.
in placing shrubs, the effect of the whole landscape should be
considered. as a rule, shrubs should be placed in corners, to hide
outhouses from view, or to screen other places which should be
shielded. the centre of the lawn should be left free, and in no
case should a shrub be placed in the middle of an open space in a
lawn or yard. a few flowers should be planted among the shrubs, to
give colour at different seasons.
the exterior of the house must be considered, if the picture
framed by the shrubs and vines is to be a pleasing one. the house
should be painted in a soft brown or dark green to blend with the
landscape of oaks and pines. the paint will help to preserve the
house, but its colour must be carefully chosen to give a pleasing
effect.
the general plan of the grounds and local conditions in regard
to soil and climate will determine to a large extent the kind of
shrubs to be used. many beautiful shrubs which have been introduced
from foreign countries do well in ontario, but our native shrubs serve
all decorative purposes. for damp ground there is no better shrub
than the red osier dogwood. this shrub will do well on almost any
kind of soil. the swamp bush honeysuckle grows quickly and is
suitable for clay land; so are the black elderberry and several
species of viburnum. the hazel which may be obtained from the woods
makes a good dense shrub, and the wild rose also has possibilities.
the common barberry is an attractive shrub; but, as it assists in
the formation of wheat rust, it should not be used in rural
sections. the lilac may be used where a high shrub is desirable.
the common arbor vitae or cedar of the swamps makes a good
evergreen shrub. it serves well as a shield for both winter and
summer and thrives with moderate care. the weigela, forsythia, and
spiræa are also excellent shrubs.
the ground at the back of the house should be used for vegetable
gardens with flower borders. for this purpose a deep, rich soil is
necessary, and every square foot of space should be utilized. every
family should learn to make use of an increased number of
vegetables and fruits and to cook them in a variety of ways. no
crops should be allowed to go to waste. a family of five people
could be entirely provided with vegetables for the summer and
autumn from a garden less than fifty by seventy-five feet.
the attractiveness, as well as the usefulness, of the borders
depends upon the choice and arrangement of flowers. these should be
chosen with due consideration as to height of plants, colour of
blooms, and seasons of blooming. the tallest plants should be
placed at the back of the border; for a border six feet wide none
of the plants need be over five feet in height. there can be a riot
of colours, if the flowers are arranged in clumps of four to six
throughout the entire length of the border. in a well-planned
flower border some flowers should be in bloom each month. hardy
perennial flowers should predominate, with enough annuals to fill
up the spaces and hide the soil. the well-tried, old-fashioned
flowers will give the best satisfaction. every four years the
flower borders need to be spaded, well manured, and replanted.
the following lists of flowers for borders may be
suggestive:
perennials.—bleeding-heart, carnations,
chrysanthemums, columbine, coreopsis, dahlias, gaillardias, golden
glow, iris, larkspur, oriental poppies, peonies, phlox, pinks,
platycodon, snapdragon.
biennials.—forget-me-not, foxglove, canterbury
bells, hollyhock, sweet-william, wallflower.
annuals.—african daisy, ageratum, aster, calendula,
calliopsis, balsam, candytuft, cornflower, cosmos, marigold,
mignonette, nasturtium, petunia, poppy, stock, sweet alyssum,
sweet-pea, verbena, zinnia, annual phlox, red sunflower,
cut-and-come-again sunflower.
each home gardener should study garden literature, in order to
assist in solving the garden problems; for the day has passed when
one needed only to scratch the soil with a shell, plant the seeds,
and receive an abundant crop. today successful gardening depends
upon intelligent management of the soil and crop and upon
persistent labour.
the teacher should, if possible, visit the homes of all the
pupils, in order to make herself familiar with the condition in
which their grounds are kept. she may be able to secure permission
from one of the housekeepers to use her grounds as the practice place
for the lesson, or it may be more desirable to give this lesson at
the school and to conduct a school garden as a model home
garden.
discuss the arrangement and care of the home or school grounds.
have the class tidy the lawn and garden chosen for the lesson,
supervising the work carefully. assign the tidying up of the home
lawns or work in the home gardens for the coming week. let this
lesson serve as a means of interesting the pupils in home
gardening, if that has not already been taken up, or of emphasizing
the relation of gardening to the housekeeper's work, if they are
already interested in the former.
bush fruits. card. macmillan's, toronto
when mother lets us garden. duncan. moffat,
yard & co., new york
a woman's hardy garden. ely. macmillan's,
toronto
the beginner's garden book. french.
macmillan's, toronto
productive vegetable garden. lloyd.
lippincott co., philadelphia
the teacher should learn how the pupils live in their own homes,
what food produce is grown for home use, what foods they use, and
how they prepare and serve their foods. the instruction given in
the lessons should be based on this knowledge, and the
possibilities for the improvement of accepted methods of cooking
should be considered. those foods should be used in the recipes
which the pupils can afford to use at home. they should be
encouraged to grow in their gardens a variety of garden produce,
and to keep chickens, pigs, and cows.
elementary principles of nutrition and sanitation should be
taught. simple meals, with plain but well-cooked dishes, should be
planned. variations should be suggested, and the value of a mixed
diet emphasized. care should be taken not to waste time on points
that are unrelated to the homes of the pupils, except as such
points may be necessary to raise their ideals.
all the work should be done carefully. the sanitary handling of
food and care in the storage of foods should be insisted upon.
careful attention should be given to the dish-washing, care of the
dish-towels, etc., emphasizing the points in sanitation involved.
the pupils should be drilled faithfully in all points connected
with the handling of anything that comes in contact with the
food.
proper methods of sweeping and cleaning should be employed, and
thoroughness must be practised in every detail of the work.
constant drill in these processes should be given.
the order in which the lessons are to be
given will be regulated, in part, by the season of the year in
which they occur, the locality, the foods obtainable, and any
special local needs. however, care must be taken that the lessons
are given in proper sequence, so that the pupils may see the
relation of one to another and may appreciate the value of each. it
may be necessary to combine two lessons or to give only part of a
lesson. in some of the lessons more recipes are suggested than can
be prepared in a brief period. in every case the choice of a recipe
will have to be made by the teacher. wherever it is possible,
simple experiments should be performed to show the composition of,
and the effect of heat on, food.
no attempt has been made to give a complete set of recipes; but
those included here are chosen as illustrating the subjects to be
discussed in the lessons. the teacher who desires to make use of a
greater number of recipes will do well to supply herself with one
of the text-books listed. level measurements should be used in the
preparation of all the recipes, and all the directions should be
carefully followed.
the first few lessons are more fully outlined than the others,
furnishing suggestions for methods of procedure that may be adapted
to later lessons. the teacher should have a detailed plan for every
lesson, outlining her method of work, the leading questions for the
discussion, and the home assignments which she desires to make.
foods that are in common use are suggested for the lessons
outlined. there will necessarily be exceptions to their use in
different localities. if any foods used in the homes are harmful
because of the manner in which they are prepared, the teacher
should do all in her power to correct the situation, but she must, at
the same time, be careful not to be too radical. if the lessons
given are not followed by home practice, the time devoted to them
will be, to all intents and purposes, wasted. simple meal service
should be introduced wherever it is possible, and as much
instruction on the furnishing and the care of the kitchen should be
included as time permits.
by the time the course is completed, the pupil should be able to
keep her kitchen in a sanitary condition and should have a
sufficient knowledge of food values and of the processes of cooking
to enable her to provide simple, wholesome meals for her
family.
for the teaching of food values, it will be helpful to secure
the set of sixteen food charts which may be obtained from the
superintendent of documents, government printing office,
washington, d.c., price one dollar.
it will be shown later how the school luncheon may be managed
with very little interference with the ordinary organization of the
school. where definite instruction is given in household science, a
place must be provided for it on the school time-table, as is the
case with the other school subjects. in sewing and household
management lessons of forty minutes each are sufficient, and these
can be arranged for at the times found to be most convenient. if
each pupil keeps her sewing in a box or bag, it may often be used
as "busy work" when the pupil has finished her assigned work or
while she is waiting for the teacher, who may be engaged with
another class. lessons in cookery should be, if possible, at least
one hour in length, and should be given at a time when this period
can be exceeded, if the character of the lesson renders it
desirable; for example, in those cases where the cooking is not
completed at the expiration of the time assigned. for this reason
the last hour on friday afternoon has proved a very suitable time.
in some schools the lesson is commenced at half-past three and runs
on until completed, and in this way only half an hour of the
regular school time is taken. the possibilities of a saturday
morning cooking class should not be overlooked.
tbsp.
=tablespoonful
oz.
= ounce
tsp.
=teaspoonful
lb.
=pound
c.
=cupful
min.
=minute
qt.
=quart
hr.
= hour
pt.
=pint
tsp.=tbsp.
tbsp.(liquid)=c.
tbsp.=c.(dry measure)
c.=pt.
 c. butter, packed solidly
=lb.
 c. sugar (granulated)
=lb.
 c. meat, finely chopped
=lb.
⅔ c. brown sugar
=lb.
⅔ c. oatmeal
=lb.
¾ c. rolled oats
=lb.
 c. flour
=lb.
 tbsp. butter
=oz.
 tbsp. flour
=oz.
 or  eggs
=lb.
 lemon (juice)
=tbsp.
note.—the half-pint measuring cup and not the ordinary tea cup is
the one to be used.
household management. ontario teachers'
manual. the copp, clark co., ltd., toronto
domestic science. austin, b. j. lyons &
carnahan, chicago. vol.i
vol.ii
principles of cooking. conley, g. american
book co., new york
home economics. flagg, g. p. little, brown
& co., boston. (mcclelland, goodchild & stewart,
toronto).
lessons in elementary cooking. jones, m. c.
boston cooking school magazine co., boston
food and health. kinne, h., and cooley, a. m.
macmillan's, toronto
the school kitchen text-book. lincoln, m. j.
little, brown & co., boston. (mcclelland, goodchild &
stewart, toronto)
food and cookery. metcalf, m. l. industrial
education co., indianapolis
household science and arts. morris, j.
american book co., new york
the science of home-making. pirie, e. e.
scott, foresman & co., chicago
elements of the theory and practice of
cookery. williams, m. e., and fisher, k. r. macmillan's,
toronto
management of the kitchen stove. cooking by
dry heat. baked vegetable or fruit.
foods.—the body uses food to build and repair its
tissues, to provide heat and energy, and to regulate the body
processes. foods differ from one another in their composition and
in their ability to assist the body in the performance of its
varied functions. these differences have led to the classification
of foods into five groups, which are spoken of as the five
food-stuffs or food principles.
cooking.—while some foods can be used as they occur
in nature, most of them are made more acceptable by the application
of heat. heat softens the structure of vegetables and fruits, makes
tender the tissues of meat, prepares starch for digestion, develops
the flavour in many foods, and destroys the parasites and germs
that may be present. the five food-stuffs are differently affected
by heat—some require slow cooking, others require intense
heat. hence, it is necessary to study cooking, in order that each
food may be properly prepared.
the stove.—a knowledge of the construction of the
stove and the methods whereby heat is obtained is imperative if one
is to be a successful cook. for all stoves three things are
necessary—fuel, a supply of oxygen, and a certain degree of
heat, known as the kindling point, whereby the fire is started. the
supply of oxygen is regulated by dampers and checks so arranged as
to admit or cut off the draught of air.
the creative dampers are doors or slides that
come below the fire box. when open, they admit the entrance of air,
increase the draught, and facilitate combustion.
the oven damper is a flat plate which closes the opening into
the chimney flue, to decrease the drawing of the draught. when the
oven damper is closed, the heat from the fire remains in the stove
and passes around the oven.
checks are doors or slides higher than the fire-box, which, when
open, allow the cold air to pass over the fire, retarding
combustion.
a stove is also provided with means for disposing of the ashes,
soot, and the gases formed. all parts of the stove are so arranged
that they may be kept clean.
(see twenty lessons in the care of the home.
lesson i)
there should be provided for this lesson (from the homes of the
pupils or the school garden), some fruit or vegetable in season
that can be cooked by dry heat. each pupil may be able to bring an
apple or a potato. the teacher should be sure to have an oven that
can be well heated for baking and to have the fire well started
before the lesson begins, so that the oven will be ready for
use.
lessons in geography and nature study should be correlated with
the cooking lesson, to give the pupils an opportunity to study the
source of foods and the reasons for cooking them.
one of the pupils should write the recipes on the black-board
before the lesson hour.
baked apples
wash the apples, core them, and cut through
the skin with a knife, so that the apple can expand in baking
without breaking the skin. place the apples in a baking-dish and
fill each cavity with sugar. cover the bottom of the dish with
water one quarter of an inch deep and bake until the apples are
soft ( to  minutes), basting them every  minutes. place them
in a serving dish and pour the juice over them. serve hot or
cold.
baked potatoes
select smooth potatoes of medium size, scrub
carefully, and place in a baking-pan. bake in a hot oven from 
minutes to one hour. when soft, break the skin to let the steam
escape and serve at once.
discuss very briefly the food that is to be cooked and the
method of cooking it. have as many apples or potatoes baked as
there are members of the class or as the baking-dish will hold.
assign tasks to special members of the class.
as quickly as possible put the vegetable or fruit in the oven to
bake.
while the baking is in process, take up a general discussion of
foods and cooking and a special discussion of the food which is
being used and the method of cooking that is being employed.
give as thorough a lesson on the stove and combustion as time
permits. examine the baked article and discuss the methods of
serving it, the time for serving, and so on.
use the finished product for the school lunch or have it served
daintily in the class. encourage the pupils to bring a dish to
school in order to take the results of their work home for
the family meal, if a school lunch is not served or if they do not
need a lunch. give careful directions for washing the dishes and
supervise the housework carefully. (see pages , , household
management.)
note.—it may be necessary to go on with some other recitation
before the baking is completed, in which case one member of the
class should be appointed to watch the oven.
questions used to develop the lesson
what food have we on hand for use to-day?
does this food need cooking? why?
how shall we prepare it for cooking?
how shall we prepare the oven?
how shall we care for the fire?
how long will it be necessary to cook this food?
(time the baking carefully and discuss more
thoroughly at the close of the lesson.)
how can we tell when it is cooked?
how shall we serve it?
for what meal shall we serve it?
of what value is it to the body?
home assignment.—the pupils should prepare the
baked dish at home and at the next lesson report the result of
their work.
note.—the recipes given in this manual are prepared for normal
times; but in every case the regulations of the canada food board
should be observed, and substitutes used wherever possible.
water and mineral matter in vegetables. how to
prepare and serve uncooked vegetables—lettuce, cress,
cabbage, etc. cooking by moist heat. how to boil, season, and serve
beet tops, turnip tops, cabbage, sprouts, kale, spinach, mustard,
or other vegetable greens.
water.—all fluids and tissues of the body contain
large quantities of water, therefore water is regarded as one of
the most important food-stuffs required by the body. practically
all foods contain some water. fresh vegetables and fruits provide
the body with a high percentage of water.
water is a valuable medium for cooking. as it heats, small
bubbles are formed, which continually increase in number and size,
but gradually disappear. some time before the boiling-point is
reached, an occasional large bubble will rise to the surface and
disappear. the water has then reached the simmering-point,
°, a temperature frequently made use of in cooking. when
many bubbles form and break, causing a commotion on the surface of
the water, the boiling-point, °, has been reached.
mineral matter.—mineral matter is a second
food-stuff that is needed by the body, but the amount required is
very small. if a variety of food is used, there is generally
sufficient mineral matter in the diet. fruits and vegetables,
especially fresh green vegetables, are comparatively rich in
mineral matter. mineral matter builds up the bones and certain
tissues, such as the hair, teeth, and nails, and regulates the body
processes by keeping the blood and digestive fluids in proper
condition.
green vegetables.—green vegetables hold an
important place in the diet, because they contain valuable mineral
matter. they also contain a high percentage of water and
considerable cellulose. with few exceptions they should be eaten
raw, because the mineral salts, being soluble, are lost in the
water in which they are cooked and because the cellulose serves its
purpose best in the crisp form. cabbage is rendered much more
difficult of digestion by cooking. spinach, beet tops, etc., are more
palatable when cooked. the delicately flavoured vegetables should
be boiled in a very small amount of water, so that they need not be
drained. thus the mineral matter will be retained when the
vegetables are served.
there should be provided for the lesson (from the homes of the
pupils or the school garden), some fresh vegetables in season; one
that can be cooked by boiling and one that can be served uncooked
with a simple dressing.
one of the pupils should write the recipes on the black-board
before the lesson hour.
preparation of fresh green
vegetables[a]
wash the vegetables thoroughly, leaving them
in cold water to crisp, if wilted. keep cool until ready to serve,
then arrange daintily, and dress with salt, vinegar, and oil as
desired, or prepare a dressing as follows:
cooked dressing
tbsp. salt
tbsp. flour
tsp. mustard
egg or yolks of  eggs
tbsp. sugar
tbsp. melted butter
a few grains pepper
c. milk
¼c. vinegar
mix the dry ingredients, add the egg
slightly beaten and the butter and the milk. cook over boiling
water until the mixture thickens. add the vinegar, stirring
constantly. strain and cool.
[a] note.—it may be well to omit from this lesson the uncooked
vegetable that is served in the form of a salad and to give it at
some other time. it is not well to attempt to teach more than the
pupils can master thoroughly.
recipe for boiling and seasoning fresh
green vegetables
wash the vegetables carefully and put them
on to cook in boiling water. delicately flavoured vegetables
(spinach, celery, fresh peas, etc.) will require but little water,
and that should be allowed to boil away at the last. if spinach is
stirred constantly, no water need be added. starchy vegetables
should be completely covered with water, and strongly flavoured
vegetables (as turnips, onions, cabbage, and cauliflower) should be
cooked in water at simmering temperature.
after the vegetables have cooked for a few minutes, salt should be
added, one teaspoonful to each quart of water. cook the vegetable
until it can be easily pierced with a fork. let the water boil away
at the last. if it is necessary to drain, do so as soon as the
vegetable is tender. season with salt, pepper, and butter (¼
teaspoon salt, ⅛ teaspoon pepper, and ½ tablespoon
butter to each cup of vegetable).
note.—the water in which the vegetables are cooked should be
saved for soups and sauces, as it contains most of the valuable
mineral matter.
discuss the heating of water and apply the facts to cooking.
have the pupils observe and describe the heating of water.
if a new tin sauce-pan or other bright tin vessel is at hand in
which to heat the water, the changes which take place as the
temperature increases will be more readily apparent, and the pupils
will enjoy watching the process.
discuss why one vegetable is to be cooked and another served
uncooked.
emphasize the cleaning of the vegetable, its structure,
composition, and the effect of the boiling water upon it.
after the vegetable has been put on to cook, discuss the method
of seasoning or dressing the vegetable which is to be served
uncooked, and have it prepared attractively to serve on the
plates. especial emphasis should be placed on the use and
importance of fresh, green vegetables.
continue the discussion of vegetables, letting the members of
the class suggest others that may be prepared as salads or cooked
in the manner being illustrated, and write the list on the
black-board for the pupils to copy in their note-books.
when the cooked vegetable is tender, have it drained, seasoned,
and served, and serve the uncooked vegetable at the same time.
when ready for serving, let the pupils arrange their plates and
forks carefully, then let them all sit down except the two who pass
the vegetables. be sure that they eat carefully and daintily.
emphasize the careful washing of the dishes, etc., as on the
previous day.
questions used to develop the lesson
how shall we prepare our vegetables for serving?
of what value is hot water in cooking food?
how must the vegetable be prepared for boiling?
does this vegetable contain any water?
will it be necessary to add any more?
will it be necessary to cover the sauce-pan?
how hot must the water be kept? how can one tell
when the water is sufficiently hot?
how can we determine when the food has cooked long
enough?
how shall we serve this vegetable?
how does boiling compare with baking—
in the time needed?
in the matter of flavour?
in the amount of fuel used?
in the amount of work
necessary?
home assignment.—practice in the boiling and the
serving of vegetables.
potatoes as a source of carbohydrates. the
choice, cost, care, composition, food value, and cooking of
potatoes, baked squash, steamed squash.
carbohydrates.—a third class of food-stuffs
required by the body is known as the carbohydrates, or sugars and
starches. this class of foods is used as fuel, for the production
of heat and energy in the body. excess of carbohydrates may be
stored in the body as fatty tissue.
potatoes.—potatoes are a cheap source of
carbohydrates. they are also valuable for their mineral matter and
for the large quantity of water which they contain. three fourths
of the potato is water. the framework of the potato is cellulose,
which is an indigestible carbohydrate material. potatoes have only
a small amount of cellulose, however, and they are comparatively
easy of digestion. when dry and mealy, they are most digestible.
when used for a meal, potatoes should be supplemented by some
muscle-building food, such as milk, cheese, eggs, fish, or
meat.
at some previous period the teacher should have discussed with
the pupils the use of potatoes and learned from them the different
ways in which they cook them in their homes. she should determine
upon some recipes for the lesson that will increase the variety of
ways in which potatoes may be served and that will improve the
methods used in the homes.
each pupil should be asked to bring one or
two potatoes for the lesson. the best methods of cooking and the
means of securing variety should be emphasized.
mashed potatoes
 potatoes
tbsp. butter
¼c. hot milk or cream
 tsp. salt
wash and pare the potatoes, boil, drain,
dry, and mash (with a potato masher) in the sauce-pan in which they
were cooked. beat them until very light and creamy; add hot milk,
butter, and salt, and beat again, re-heat, and serve. serves six to
eight.
browned potatoes
wash, scrub, and pare potatoes of a uniform
size. parboil for  minutes, then put in a dripping-pan with the
meat or on a rack in a baking-pan.
baste with fat every  minutes, when the meat is
basted.
allow about  minutes for the potatoes to cook.
scrub and pare a potato. examine a thin
cross-section.
grate the potato. remove the coarse, shredded
portion. examine.
examine the liquid and note any sediment.
heat the liquid and stir until boiling. how has it
changed?
examine the portion of the grater. how has the
colour changed? why?
baked squash
wipe the shell of the squash, cut it into
pieces for serving, remove the seeds and stringy portion, place in
a dripping-pan, and bake in a slow oven for three quarters of an
hour (until tender). serve at once.
steamed squash
prepare the squash as for baking, put in a
steamer over boiling water, and cook for  minutes or until soft.
then scrape the squash from the shell, mash, and season with
butter, salt, and pepper.
discuss the composition and structure of the potato. read over
and discuss the recipes that are to be used.
make assignments of work. after the potatoes have been put on to
cook, have the class examine a raw potato, following the directions
given.[a]
[a]squash is another
vegetable containing a high percentage of carbohydrate. the recipe
for squash can be used at this time or in some other lesson.
if one of the recipes requires the use of the oven, be careful
to have the potatoes for it prepared first and as quickly as
possible. it may be necessary to proceed with another class,
assigning one pupil to take charge of the baking. special attention
should be given to the careful serving of the potatoes.
home assignment.—before the next lesson, each pupil
should be able to report that she has cooked potatoes at home,
using the recipes learned in class.
food value and use of fruits. reasons and rules
for canning. how to can and use such vegetables as beets, beans,
tomatoes, and carrots, and such fruits as figs, grapes, apples, and
peaches. the drying of fruits and vegetables.
fruits impart palatability and flavour to other foods and
exercise a favourable influence upon the digestive organs, though
their food value is low. they contain a high percentage of water
and only a small percentage of nutrients. most fruits are eaten raw
and are exceedingly valuable to the body because of the fresh acids
they contain. cooking softens the cellulose of the fruit and,
therefore, renders some fruits more easy of digestion. the cooking
of fruit is of value chiefly for the purpose of preservation.
the drying of fruits.—fruits are dried so that they
may be preserved for use. bacteria and moulds, which cause the
decay of fruits, need moisture for development and growth. if the
moisture is evaporated, the fruits will keep almost indefinitely.
fruits and vegetables can be easily and inexpensively dried. when
dried fruits are to be used for the table, they must be washed
thoroughly and soaked for several hours, or overnight, in water, so
as to restore to them as much water as possible. they should be
cooked, until soft, in the same water in which they are soaked.
canning and preserving.—other methods of
preservation are desirable, in order that vegetables and fruits be
made of value for a longer period of time than through their
ripening season. canning is one of the methods most commonly
employed in the home, being both easy and satisfactory. fruit which
is to be canned is first sterilized by boiling or steaming, in
order to destroy all germs and spores. this can be adequately
accomplished by boiling for twenty minutes, but a shorter time is
sometimes sufficient. in order to ensure complete success, all
germs must also be destroyed on the cans and on everything which
comes in contact with the food. this will be effected by boiling or
steaming for twenty minutes. the jars, covers, dipper, and funnel
should all be placed in cold water, heated until the water comes
to the boiling-point, boiled five minutes, and left in the water
until just before sealing. as for the rubbers, it will be
sufficient to dip them into the boiling water. after the fruit has
been put into the can, it must be sealed so that it is perfectly
air-tight. in order to do this, it is necessary to have good
covers, with new, pliable rubbers, and to see to it that they fit
tightly.
when the jar is to be filled, it should be placed on a board or
wooden table, or on a cloth wrung out of hot water, and should be
filled to overflowing.
sugar is not essential to sterilization and is used only to
improve the flavour. both fruits and vegetables can be canned
without sugar. however, fruits canned with a large amount of sugar
do not spoil readily, for germs develop slowly in a thick
syrup.
methods of canning.—the simplest method of canning
is the "open-kettle method" employed for small, watery fruits, such
as berries, grapes, tomatoes, etc. the fruit is boiled in an open
kettle (which permits of the evaporation of some of the water in
the fruit) and transferred at once to a sterilized jar, which is
immediately sealed.
another and safer method, which secures more complete
sterilization without serious change of flavour in the fruit, is
that known as the "cold-pack method". after being transferred to
the cans, the vegetable or fruit is subjected to an additional
period of heating of considerable length, or to three periods of
briefer length on three successive days. if the three periods of
sterilization are used, the process is known as the "intermittent
method".
the single process method is described in the recipe for canned
beets. the intermittent process proves more satisfactory for canned
beans.
the teacher should ascertain what fruits and vegetables are most
abundant and select for canning those that the class can
provide.
each pupil should be asked to bring some vegetable or fruit,
some granulated sugar, and a jar in which to can her fruit. if the
school does not possess enough kettles or sauce-pans in which to do
the cooking, they may be borrowed from the homes.
only one fruit or one vegetable should be taken up at a time,
for the preparation necessarily varies slightly, and the different
methods will prove confusing. it is not necessary to confine the
choice of fruits and vegetables to those mentioned in the recipes
included here. the teacher will find it better to base her
instruction on the products of the particular time and place. the
principles of canning should be taken up at some other period, if
possible, in order that the cooking lesson may be devoted entirely
to the practical work.
canned tomatoes
(open-kettle method)
scald and peel the tomatoes. boil gently for
 minutes. sterilize the jars, covers, and rubbers. stand the jars
on a cloth in a pan of hot water or on a board or wooden table.
fill the jars with hot tomatoes, being careful to fill to
overflowing and to expel all air bubbles from the jar. adjust the
rubbers and covers. seal and allow to cool. test, label, and set
away in a cool, dry, dark place.
(cold-pack method)
scald in water hot enough to loosen the
skins. plunge quickly in cold water and remove the skins. pack
whole or in pieces in the jars. fill the jars with tomatoes only.
add  level teaspoonful of salt to each quart. place the rubber and
cover in position. partially seal, but not tightly. place the jars
on a rack in a boiler. pour sufficient warm water into the boiler
to come half-way up the jars. place the filled jars on the rack so
as not to touch one another, and pack the spaces between them with
cotton, to prevent the jars striking when the water boils.
sterilize for  minutes after the water begins to boil. remove the
jars from the boiler. tighten the covers. invert to cool, and test
the joints. wrap the jars in paper to prevent bleaching and store
in a cool, dry, dark place. this method of cooking is also called
"the hot water bath".
canned grapes
(open-kettle method)
 qt. grapes
 qt. sugar
½ c. water
pick over, wash, drain, and remove the stems
from the grapes. separate the pulp from the skins. cook the pulp 
minutes and then rub through a sieve that is fine enough to hold
back the seeds. put the water, skins, and pulp into the preserving
kettle and heat slowly to the boiling-point. skim the fruit and
then add the sugar. boil  minutes. put into jars as
directed.
sweet grapes may be canned with less sugar;
very sour grapes will require more sugar.
canned peaches
choose firm, solid fruit. scald long enough
to loosen the skins. peel and cut in halves. if clingstone peaches
are used, they may be canned whole. pack the fruit into sterilized
jars, fill with boiling syrup ( c. sugar to ½ c. water).
then put on the covers loosely and place on wooden racks in the
boiler. sterilize in hot water bath for  minutes. remove the jars
and tighten the covers. invert to cool, and test the joints. wrap
the jars in paper to prevent bleaching; then store.
canned beets
(single process)
wash the beets and boil them until they are
nearly tender and the skins come off easily. remove the skins and
carefully pack the beets in a jar. cover with boiling water, to
which one tablespoonful of salt is added for each quart, and put
the cover on the jar, but do not fasten it down. place the jar on a
rack or a folded cloth in a large kettle that can be closely
covered. pour enough water into the kettle to reach within two
inches of the top of the jar, cover the kettle, bring the water to
the boiling-point, and boil from one and one-half to two hours. as
the water around the jar boils down, replenish with boiling water,
never with cold. remove the jars and tighten the covers. invert to
cool, and test the joints. wrap the jars in paper to prevent
bleaching; then store.
note.—in canning beets, if vinegar is added to the water in the
proportion of one part vinegar to four parts water, the natural
bright colour will be retained.
canned string beans and peas
(intermittent method)
can on the same day that the vegetables are
picked. blanch in boiling water from  to  minutes. remove, and
plunge into cold water. pack in sterilized jars. add boiling water
to fill the crevices. add  level teaspoonful of salt to each
quart. place rubbers and covers in position.
set the jars on the rack in the boiler and
bring gradually to boiling heat. at the end of an hour's boiling,
remove the jars from the boiler. tighten the clamps or rims and set
the jars aside to cool until the following day. do not let the
vegetables cool off in the boiler, as this results in over-cooking.
on the second day, loosen the clamps or unscrew the rims, place the
jars in warm water, heat again to boiling temperature, and boil for
an hour; then remove them again. on the third day, repeat the
hour's boiling, as on the preceding day.
corn may be canned successfully in the same
way.
dried corn
pick the corn early in the morning.
immediately husk, silk, and cut the corn from the cob. spread in a
very thin layer on a board, cover with mosquito netting which is
kept sufficiently elevated so that it will not come in contact with
the corn, place in the hot sun, and leave all day. before the dew
begins to fall, take it into the house and place in an oven that is
slightly warm. leave in the oven overnight and place out in the sun
again the next day. repeat this process until absolutely dry.
string beans
string beans are hung up to dry and kept for
winter use.
if possible, let each pupil can a jar of vegetables or fruit for
her own home. if the class is large, let the pupils work in groups
of two or three.
begin the lesson with a very brief discussion of how to prepare
fruit for canning.
let the pupils proceed with the practical work as quickly as
possible. demonstrate the method of filling and sealing the
jars.
assign the care of the jars and the intermittent canning on
succeeding days to members of the class, and hold them responsible
for the completion of the work.
the drying of some vegetables can be undertaken at school, and
carefully followed from day to day. it will furnish the pupils with
an interesting problem.
fats—vegetables—continued
preparation of white sauce to serve with
vegetables. how to boil, season, and serve such vegetables as lima
or butter beans, string beans, onions, cabbage, corn, beets,
turnips, or carrots.
fats.—butter belongs to the class of food-stuffs
known as fats. it increases the fuel value of those dishes to which
it is added.
fats supply heat and energy to the body in a concentrated form.
for this reason they should be used in a limited quantity. fats
undergo several changes during the process of digestion, and the
excessive use of them interferes with the digestion of other foods
and throws a large amount of work upon the digestive organs. cooked
fats are more difficult of digestion than uncooked fats, and other
foods cooked with hot fat are rendered more difficult to
digest.
vegetables.—vegetables should be used when in
season, as they are always best and cheapest then. they are better
kept in a cold, dry, and dark place.
if the vegetables contain starch or tough cellulose, they will
require cooking; as raw starch is indigestible, and the harsh
cellulose may be too irritating to the digestive tract.
in old or exceedingly large vegetables the cellulose may be very
tough; hence a long period of cooking is necessary. they should be
cooked only until they are tender. longer cooking may destroy the
flavour, render the vegetables difficult of digestion, and cause
the colour to change. in very young vegetables the cellulose is
delicate and, if young vegetables do not contain much starch, they
may be eaten raw.
when cooked vegetables are served, they are usually seasoned and
dressed with butter (for one cup of vegetables use ½
teaspoonful of salt, ⅛ teaspoonful of pepper, and ½
tablespoonful of fat), or a sauce is prepared to serve with
them.
it may be well to have a preliminary lesson devoted to simple
experiments with flour, liquid, and fat, in order to determine the
best method of combining the ingredients in the white sauce.
however, if the lesson period is of sufficient length, a few of
these experiments may be performed in connection with it.
there should be provided for the lesson some vegetable that is
improved by serving with white sauce, and sufficient milk, butter
or other fat, flour, and salt for the sauce and the experiments.
discuss with the pupils the fat that is used in their homes, in
order to know what is available.
the recipes should be written on the black-board before the
lesson hour.
stewed onions
 qt. onions
 tbsp. butter
white pepper
¼ tsp. salt
peel the onions under cold water. cover with
boiling water, add salt, and simmer until tender. drain and serve
with one cup of white sauce; or omit the sauce and serve seasoned
with butter and pepper. serves six.
cabbage
cut the cabbage into quarters and soak
one-half hour in cold salt water to draw out any insects. chop or
shred, cover with boiling water, add salt, and simmer until tender.
drain, and serve with butter, salt, and pepper, or with a
sauce.
carrots
scrape the carrots and cut them into large
dice or slices. add boiling water and boil until tender (from  to
 minutes). drain, and season with butter, salt, and pepper, or
serve with white sauce.
string beans
string the beans, if necessary, and cut into
pieces. boil in salted water until tender. season with butter,
salt, and pepper, and serve hot.
salt pork may be boiled with the beans, to
give them an added flavour.
(any powdered starch may be used)
. boil ¼ cup of water in a small sauce-pan.
while boiling, stir into it ½ tsp. of cornstarch and let it
boil one minute. observe the result. break open a lump and examine
it.
. mix  tsp. of cornstarch with  tsp. of cold
water and stir into ¼ cup of boiling water. note the
result.
. mix  tsp. of cornstarch with  tsp. of sugar and
stir into ¼ cup of boiling water. note the result.
. mix  tsp. of cornstarch with  tsp. of melted
fat in a small sauce-pan and stir into it ¼ cup of boiling
water. note the result.
. starch granules must be separated before being
used to thicken a liquid:
() by adding a double quantity of
cold liquid,
() by adding a double quantity of
sugar,
() by adding a double quantity of
melted fat.
. the liquid which is being thickened must be
constantly stirred, to distribute evenly the starch grains until
they are cooked.
white sauce
 tbsp. butter or other fat
 c. milk
 tbsp. flour
¼ tsp. salt
⅛ tsp. pepper
(sufficient for  pint vegetables)
melt the butter, add the flour, and stir
over the fire until frothy. add the milk and stir constantly until
it thickens. stir in the seasonings.
note.—vegetable water may be substituted for part of the
milk.
review the facts on boiling vegetables learned in the previous
lesson. let the pupils put water on to boil and prepare a vegetable
for cooking. if experiments are to be made, they can be performed
while the vegetable is cooking. if the experiments have been made
previously, they can be reviewed in discussion at this time.
prepare a white sauce by demonstration, using the method which
seems most practical. have the vegetables drained, dried, and added
to the white sauce. when well-heated, serve.
questions used to develop the lesson
what facts regarding the boiling of vegetables did
we learn in the last lesson?
does the vegetable that we are to cook to-day differ
in any marked way from those we cooked before? should we follow the
same rule in cooking it?
should we add the flour directly to the cold milk?
to the hot milk?
how shall we combine the white sauce?
with what other vegetables can white sauce be
used?
home assignment.—each pupil should prepare some
vegetable and serve it with white sauce, before the next
lesson.
kinds, composition, care, and general rules for
cooking cereals. oatmeal, cracked wheat, corn-meal porridge, rice.
fruits to serve with cereals—stewed prunes, stewed apples, or
apple sauce.
the term "cereals" is applied to the cultivated
grasses—rice, wheat, corn, rye, oats, and buckwheat. they are
widely grown throughout the temperate zone and are prepared in
various forms for use as food. cereals contain a high percentage
of starch and a low percentage of water, with varying proportions
of mineral matter and fat. in addition to the four food-stuffs
already studied, cereals contain a small amount of another
food-stuff known as protein—a muscle-building material. for
the most part, the cereals contain a large amount of cellulose,
which is broken up during the process of preparation for market and
requires long cooking before being ready for use by the body. the
digestibility of the cereals depends upon the amount of cellulose
which they contain and the thoroughness of the cooking. cereals are
palatable, and they are valuable, because in cooking they can be
blended in various ways with other substances. they are beneficial
also to the body, because their cellulose acts mechanically on the
digestive organs by stimulating them to action. cereals are made
more attractive by serving with fresh or cooked fruit.
the cereals should be discussed in a nature study or geography
lesson, and two or three kinds that are in common use should be
brought from home by the pupils. if cereals are not generally used
as breakfast foods, the lesson may be a means of introducing them.
some pupils should bring a little milk and sugar, to serve with the
cooked cereal. apples or prunes should be brought, to cook and
serve with the cereal.
oatmeal
c. boiling water
¾c. oatmeal
¾tsp. salt
add the oatmeal slowly to boiling salted water.
boil for  minutes, stirring constantly,
then cook slowly, preferably over water, at least one and one-half
hours longer; the flavour is developed by longer cooking. serves
six.
cracked wheat
follow the recipe for oatmeal, using ¾ c. of
cracked wheat.
corn-meal porridge
c. boiling water
¾c. corn-meal
tsp. salt
add the corn-meal slowly to boiling salted
water.
boil for  minutes, stirring constantly, then cook
slowly for three hours longer, preferably over water. serves six to
eight.
boiled rice
qt. boiling water
c. rice
tsp. salt
pick the rice over carefully and wash
thoroughly. add it to the boiling salted water so gradually that it
will not stop boiling. partly cover and cook for  minutes, or
until the grains are soft; turn into a colander, and pour cold
water through it, drain, dry, and re-heat in a hot oven with door
open. serve hot as a vegetable or as a simple dessert with cream
and sugar. serves six to eight.
stewed prunes
½lb. prunes
qt. cold water
wash the prunes in two or three waters; then
soak them in cold water for several hours. heat them in the water
in which they are soaked and simmer until tender (an hour or more).
serves six to eight.
stewed apples
 small apples
½ c. sugar
¾c. water
cook the sugar and water together until it
boils.
wash, pare, and cut the apples into
quarters; core, and slice the quarters lengthwise into
¼-inch slices; put the apple slices into boiling syrup and
cook slowly until tender. remove from the syrup at once and let the
syrup boil down to thicken.
apple sauce
 small apples
½ c. sugar
¾c. water
wipe, quarter, core, and pare sour apples;
add the water and cook until the apples begin to soften; add the
sugar and flavouring, cook until the apples are very soft, then
press through a strainer and beat well. serves eight to ten.
as soon as the class meets, discuss the recipes briefly and put
the cereals on to cook at once. prepare the fruit. while the long
cooking of the cereal is in progress, discuss the composition, food
value, and methods of using cereals. then go on with another lesson
and call the class together, for serving, later in the day. serve
the fruit and the cereals together.
foods—reviewed
those foods which build up and repair the muscular tissues of
the body are called protein foods, muscle builders, or flesh
formers. meat, fish, eggs, cheese, milk, cereals, legumes, and nuts
are classed as protein foods.
those foods which serve solely as fuel for the
body—providing heat and energy—are classed under two
groups: the carbohydrates (sugar and starches), which the body is
able to use in relatively large quantities; and the fats, which the
body cannot use in such large quantities, but which yield a large
amount of heat and energy. protein also serves as fuel, though
tissue building is regarded as its special function. sugars and
starches are abundant in fruits and vegetables. fats are found in
meats, fish, milk, and in some vegetable foods. heat-giving food
may be stored in the body as fatty tissue.
mineral compounds must be present in our food, to help in the
regulation of the body processes and to enter into the composition
of the structure and the fluids of the body. mineral compounds are
best supplied by fresh green vegetables, fruits, and milk.
water is absolutely essential to the body, is present in large
quantities in many foods, and is combined with many other foods
during the processes of cooking.
one or more of the food-stuffs sometimes predominate in a single
food. for example, rice is almost entirely carbohydrate, and butter
is almost pure fat. occasionally, we find a food that contains all
the five groups of food principles. milk is an example of such a
food, containing all five food principles in such proportions as to
supply all the nourishment which a baby needs during the early
months of its life. as the child grows older, foods rich in both
carbohydrates must be added to the diet. wheat contains all that
the body needs for nourishment except water, which is easily added
in cooking.
protein
foods
carbohydrate
foods
meats
sugar
fish
honey
poultry
syrup
eggs
vegetables:
cheese
potatoes
milk
parsnips
cereals:
peas
wheat
beets
oatmeal
carrots
rye
cereal preparations:
legumes:
meals
peas
flours, etc.
beans
fruits
lentils
prepared foods:
peanuts
bread
nuts
crackers
macaroni
jellies
dried fruits
candy
milk
fat
foods
mineral
foods
cream
fruits
butter
vegetables:
lard
spinach
suet
tomatoes
fat meats
onions
fish
turnip tops
salad oil
cauliflower
nuts
cereals:
chocolate
grits and other coarse
preparations
milk
eggs
choice of food.—the diet must be carefully chosen,
to give a needed variety and to combine the foods properly so that
one may have a right proportion of all the food-stuffs. each meal
should contain some protein food, some fats or carbohydrates, some
mineral matter, and water. all five forms of food-stuffs should
have a place in the day's diet. the greater part of the water which
the body needs should be taken between meals.
review the foods discussed in the previous lessons and sum up
the classification of foods, being sure that the pupils can name
common examples of each. discuss simple combinations for the
different meals, using dishes already prepared in the course and
creating an interest in other recipes to be prepared in succeeding
lessons.
there are five food principles:
. water—builds and repairs the
tissues, regulates the system—
found in all food-stuffs.
. mineral matter—builds and repairs
the tissues, regulates the system—
found in vegetables, fruits, cereal, and so on.
. carbohydrates—give heat and energy
to the body—
found in sugar and starches.
. fats—give heat and energy to the
body—
found in cream, nuts, pork, and so on.
. protein—builds and repairs the
tissues—
found in meat, eggs, cheese, seeds.
always choose a diet carefully:
. to give variety.
. to combine the
foods properly, so that they will contain adequate proportions of
each food-stuff at every meal.
experience has shown that some foods are more acceptable at one
time of day than other foods, and that certain combinations are
more pleasing than others. the choice of foods will also depend
upon the season of the year. for example, breakfast is, as a rule,
made up of simple foods that are not highly seasoned nor subjected
to elaborate methods of cooking. a fruit, a cereal, and bread,
with, possibly, eggs or meat, are served at
breakfast. a hot beverage is added by most people to this meal.
fundamentally, dinner consists of a hot meat or other protein
dish, with one or two vegetables. soup, salad, and a sweet dessert
are often served. the soup is served before the meat course, and
the salad and dessert follow it. the dessert may be a fruit, a
cookie or other pastry, a pudding, or a frozen dish.
lunch or supper may be a very simple meal, consisting of a soup
with crackers, one protein dish (eggs, milk, or meat) with bread
and stewed fruit, or a salad, with a simple dessert.
breakfast
no. i
apple sauce
oatmeal
sausage or
bacon
toast
no. ii
baked apples
cracked wheat
eggs in the
shell
corn muffins
no. iii
stewed figs or berries
corn-meal porridge
poached eggs
toast
note.—eggs should be omitted from the breakfast menu if they are
not cheap and easily obtainable.
dinner
no. i
pork chops
mashed turnips
potatoes
bread
fried apples
rice pudding
no. ii
beef or mutton stew
spinach or turnip tops
biscuits
cornstarch pudding
no. iii
baked beans
cabbage salad
grape sauce
bread and biscuits
 supper
no. i
stewed apricots or other fruit
buttermilk or sweet milk
whole wheat
bread
peanut cookies
no. ii
omelet
bread
creamed
potatoes
fresh fruit
no. iii
cream of carrot soup
cottage cheese
biscuits
syrup
the table should always be neatly set, with individual places
arranged for each one who is to partake of the meal. each place
should be wide enough for a plate, with a knife and spoon at the
right and a fork at the left side. a tumbler should be placed at
the point of the knife and a napkin at the left of the fork.
everything on the table should be perfectly clean, the napkin
should be neatly folded, and all the articles should be uniformly
arranged, in order to give a neat appearance to the table. a flower
or plant in the centre will add to its attractiveness. salt,
pepper, sugar, vinegar, and anything of the kind that may be needed
with the meal should be arranged where it can be easily reached.
fresh water should be poured into the tumblers just before the meal
is served. the bread, butter, and so on, may be put on the table
several minutes before the meal is announced, but the hot dishes
should be placed immediately before the family is seated.
if lesson vi, entitled "setting and clearing the table" as
outlined in the course on the care of the home has been given, this
lesson may be devoted to what to serve and how to serve it, or it
may precede the lesson on "waiting on table". the manner of serving
may be demonstrated in the next lesson, in connection with the
course on the care of the home.
simple equipment for family service will be
required, if the form of serving is to be taken up. for class
practice, a table for four may be arranged. this will necessitate a
table-cover, four dinner plates, four bread-and-butter plates, four
tumblers, four cups and saucers, four knives, four forks, four
teaspoons, four napkins, a platter, one serving spoon, and one
serving fork.
discuss meal service from the standpoint both of choice and
combination of foods and of the method of service. let the class
plan a meal, then go through the form of serving that meal at
table. in the absence of a table, the top of a desk may be used.
later in the course, the teacher should plan to combine this lesson
with one on cooking and have the food served. in each cooking
lesson, suggestions for serving the food should be made, and each
dish cooked should be carefully served. interest in this lesson may
be increased by allowing the pupils to make original menus, and, if
they are having some lessons in drawing, simple menu cards may be
planned and executed.
care, cost, and food value of milk. value and
use of sour milk—cottage cheese, curdled milk. rice or
cornstarch pudding (plain, caramel, or chocolate).
milk contains all the food-stuffs which the body requires,
except starch, and, therefore, is capable of sustaining life for
comparatively long periods. it is one of the most important protein
foods; but it contains so small a percentage of carbohydrate (milk
sugar) that for the adult it must be supplemented with carbohydrate
foods. for the baby, milk is a perfect food, and it is a valuable
adjunct to the diet of all children. one quart of milk should be
allowed for the diet of each child daily, after the twelfth month;
and the diet of the adult should be supplemented by the use of
milk. the greatest care should be exercised in protecting milk from
dust and dirt, for it is easily contaminated and may be the means
of carrying disease germs to the body. the changes which milk
undergoes when souring do not render it harmful. for many people
buttermilk is more easy of digestion than sweet milk, because of
the changes produced by souring, as well as the absence of fat.
sour milk is of value in cooking, producing a tender bread which
can readily be made light by the addition of soda—one
teaspoonful of soda to one pint of sour milk that has curdled.
in the preparation of cheese, the whey is separated from the
curds, thus extracting most of the water, sugar, and mineral
matter, and leaving a substance rich in protein and fat. cheese is
of value in cooking, for it increases the food value of those foods
to which it is added.
the teacher should make inquiries a few days in advance, to be
sure that one quart of sour milk can be secured, and, when it is
brought, she should examine it to see that it is in proper
condition to make cottage cheese. she should arrange to have about
one quart of sweet milk and such other supplies as are necessary
for the pudding, brought by the pupils.
an opportunity may be afforded to discuss the use of left-over
cereal by the preparation of a rice pudding, if the teacher
provides some cold cooked rice for the lesson. in the absence of
cold rice, the cornstarch pudding may be prepared.
cottage cheese
heat sour milk slowly until the whey rises
to the top, pour the whey off, put the curd in a bag, and let it
drip for six hours without squeezing. put the curd into a bowl and
break into fine pieces with a wooden spoon; season with salt and
mix into a paste with a little cream or butter. mould into balls,
if desired, and keep in a cold place. (it is best when
fresh.)
rice pudding
½c. rice
⅓c. sugar
 c. milk
⅛tsp. salt
 eggs
½tsp. vanilla
scald the milk in a double boiler. add the
prepared rice and cook until soft. beat the egg-yolks, sugar, and
salt together until well mixed. stir into the rice and cook for 
minutes. remove from the heat and serve cold. serves eight.
cornstarch pudding
¼c. sugar
tbsp. cornstarch, or ½ c. flour
tsp. vanilla, or other flavouring
c. milk
egg
mix the sugar and cornstarch thoroughly. add
one cup of cold milk and stir until smooth. heat the remainder of
the milk in a double boiler; add the cornstarch mixture slowly,
stirring constantly until it begins to thicken. continue cooking
for  minutes. beat the egg well, add the hot pudding slowly,
strain, and cool. serve with milk or cream and sugar. (the egg may
be omitted, if desired.) serves eight.
for chocolate cornstarch pudding, use
¼ cup of sugar additional and two squares of chocolate. melt
the chocolate carefully, add the sugar, and add to the cornstarch
mixture.
for caramel cornstarch pudding, use  cup of
brown sugar and ½ cup of boiling water. heat the sugar until
it becomes a light-brown liquid, add the boiling water, and stir
until the sugar is all dissolved. let it cool; then add to the
cornstarch mixture.
as soon as the class meets, demonstrate the method of making
cottage cheese. show the separation of curd and whey, by adding
vinegar or lemon juice to sweet milk. while the cheese is draining,
make assignments of work and have the rice or cornstarch pudding
made.
in this lesson and in those following emphasize the use of
protein foods.
discuss also the food value of skimmed milk and sour milk and
the purposes for which these may be used in cooking.
use the cottage cheese and the pudding for the school lunch.
cream soups. cream of carrot, potato, or onion
soup, green pea soup. toast, croutons, or crisp crackers to serve
with soup.
cream soups.—the strained pulp of cooked vegetables
or legumes, with an equal portion of thin white sauce, is the basis
for cream soups. the liquid for the soup may be all milk, part
vegetable water and part milk, or all vegetable water.
a binding of flour is used to prevent a separation of the
thicker and the thinner parts of the soup. this is combined as for
white sauce and is stirred into the hot liquid just before the soup
is to be served. the soup should be made in a double boiler and
kept in this utensil until it is served.
four tablespoons of flour to each quart of soup is a good
proportion to use for thickening all vegetable soups that are not
of a starchy nature; half that amount will be sufficient for soup
prepared from a very starchy vegetable.
the value of the vegetable water should be impressed upon the
pupils, and it should be pointed out that these soups are an
excellent way of using the cooking water and any left-over
vegetables. from these, attractive cream soups may be prepared, and
a combination of flavours often gives good results.
accompaniments.—crisp crackers, croutons, soup
sticks, or bread sticks are served with cream soups, and are
valuable because they necessitate thorough mastication, thus
inducing the flow of saliva and aiding in the digestion of the
starchy ingredients of the soups.
as a basis for the soup, the teacher should secure a vegetable
that the pupils use in their own homes, and crackers or bread to
serve with the soup.
if dried peas are used, they should be allowed to soak overnight
and be put on to cook early in the morning.
it will be well to have the cooking of the carrots begun before
the lesson period. if the carrots are cut up in small pieces, they
will cook more quickly.
cream of carrot soup
c. cooked carrots
tbsp. flour
c. vegetable water
tbsp. butter
c. milk
salt and pepper to taste
press the vegetables through a sieve or chop
finely; put the vegetable water on to heat. mix the flour smoothly
with an equal measure of milk and thin it with a
little more of the milk. stir into the steaming liquid, stirring
constantly until it thickens. stir in the butter, vegetable pulp,
and remaining milk. season to taste and serve hot. serves
six.
cream of potato soup
pt. milk or milk and water
tbsp. flour
tsp. chopped onions
tsp. salt
 potatoes
⅛tsp. pepper
tbsp. butter
tsp. chopped parsley
put the milk to heat in a double boiler.
boil the potatoes and onion together until soft, then rub the
liquid and pulp through a strainer into the hot milk. bind with the
flour, add the seasonings, and serve hot. serves four.
pea soup
c. split peas
tbsp. flour
qt. water
tsp. salt
tbsp. chopped onion
tsp. pepper
tbsp. butter
pt. milk
wash the peas and soak them overnight in
cold water, drain and rinse thoroughly, add ½ quarts of
cold water and the onion, cook slowly until soft, rub the liquid
and pulp through a strainer, and bind with the flour. add the milk
and the seasonings and serve hot. serves six to eight.
toast
cut stale bread into slices one quarter of
an inch thick; put on the toaster or fork, move gently over the
heat until dry, then brown by placing near the heat, turning
constantly. bread may be dried in the oven before toasting. hot
milk may be poured over dry toast.
croutons
cut stale bread into one-half-inch cubes and
brown in the oven.
crisp crackers
put the crackers into the oven for a few
minutes, or split and butter thick crackers, and brown in a hot
oven; serve with soup.
devote a few minutes to a discussion of cream soups and a review
of the cooking of vegetables and white sauce.
divide the work among the members of the class, assigning enough
to each pupil to keep her busy, arranging the work so that the soup
and its accompaniments will be ready for serving at the same
time.
food value and general rules for cooking
eggs. cooked in shell, poached, scrambled, and omelet.
eggs are a very valuable food, because of the large amount of
protein and fat they contain. though lacking in carbohydrates, they
furnish material for building up the muscles and provide heat and
energy to the body. if cooked at a low temperature, eggs are very
easily and very completely digested. combined with other foods,
they serve as a thickening agent (for sauces and soups) and as a
means of making batters light (popovers and sponge cake). they add
flavour and colour and increase the nutritive value of other
foods.
the lesson on eggs furnishes one of the best opportunities to
teach the muscle-building foods. if eggs are scarce, it may be well
to give this lesson at some other time. each pupil should be asked
to bring an egg; one or two should bring a little milk; and
sufficient bread should be provided to toast for the poached eggs.
the teacher should not undertake to give too many recipes in this
lesson, but should try to make the pupils familiar with a
sufficient variety of ways of using eggs to make egg cookery
interesting. the necessity of having a moderate temperature for the
cooking of eggs should be emphasized.
soft-cooked eggs
put the eggs in boiling water sufficient to
cover them, remove from the fire, cover, and allow them to stand
from  to  minutes.
hard-cooked eggs
put the eggs in cold water, heat, and, when
the water boils, reduce the heat, and let them stand for  minutes
with water just below the boiling-point, then put them into cold
water.
poached eggs
break each egg into a saucer carefully, slip
the egg into boiling water, decrease the heat, and cook for 
minutes, or until the white is firm and a film has formed over the
yolk. take up with a skimmer, drain, trim off the rough edges, and
serve on slices of toast. season.
poached eggs are attractive when covered
with white sauce to which chopped parsley has been added.
baked eggs
line a buttered baking-dish with buttered
bread crumbs or with cold mashed potatoes. break the eggs in the
dish without separating and add one tablespoon of milk or cream for
each egg. season with salt and pepper and sprinkle with grated
cheese, if desired. bake in a moderate oven until the eggs are
set.
creamed eggs
 hard-boiled eggs
 slices toast
 c. medium white sauce
prepare a white sauce. add hard-boiled eggs
cut in halves, sliced, or chopped and, when hot, serve on toast.
or
separate the whites and yolks, chop the whites fine, add to the
white sauce and, when hot, serve on toast and garnish with yolks
run through a sieve or ricer. season with salt and pepper. serves
four to six.
creamy omelet
 egg
pepper
¼ tsp. salt
½ tsp. butter
 tbsp. milk
beat the egg slightly, add the milk and
seasonings, put the butter in the hot omelet pan and, when melted,
turn in the mixture. as it cooks, draw the edges toward the centre
until the whole is of a creamy consistency, brown quickly
underneath, fold, and turn on a hot platter. serve at once. serves
one.
scrambled eggs
double the quantity of milk given for creamy
omelet and stir all the time while cooking.
foamy omelet[a]
 egg
 tbsp. milk or water
⅛ tsp. salt
½ tsp. butter
cayenne or white pepper
beat the yolk of the egg until creamy, add
seasoning and milk. beat the white until stiff, but not dry, cut
and fold into the yolk carefully. heat an omelet pan, rub the
bottom and sides with the butter, and turn in the omelet, spreading
it evenly on the pan. cook gently over the heat until the omelet is
set and evenly browned underneath. put it into a hot oven for a few
minutes, to dry slightly on top, fold, and serve immediately.
serves one.
devote one half of the class period to a discussion of the
structure of the egg and the effect of heat upon it. use simple
experiments or watch the poached egg, to make a study of the
changes produced in the egg by the application of heat. if the
pupils are sufficiently experienced, let them work together in
small groups, first scrambling an egg, then making an omelet.
demonstrate the cooking of the omelet before the entire class.
serve the egg dishes carefully while hot.
[a]the omelet recipes
given are for individual portions. to make a large omelet, multiply
the quantity of each ingredient by the number of eggs used. the
best results will be obtained by making an omelet of not more than
four eggs, as larger omelets are difficult to cook thoroughly and
to handle well. a two-egg omelet will serve three people. a
four-egg omelet will serve six people.
a custard is a combination of eggs and milk, usually sweetened
and flavoured, and either steamed, or baked as cup custard, or
cooked in a double boiler as soft custard. the whole egg may be
used or the yolks alone. the yolks make a smoother, richer
custard.
the eggs must be thoroughly mixed, but not beaten light, the
sugar and salt added, and the milk scalded and stirred in slowly.
the custard must be strained through a fine sieve and cooked at a
moderate temperature. it is desirable to strain a custard, in order
to remove the cords and pieces of the membrane which inclosed the
yolk. the cup custard should be strained before cooking, the soft
custard may be strained afterwards.
a soft custard is cooked over water and is stirred constantly
until done. when done, the froth disappears from the surface, the
custard is thickened and coats the spoon and sides of the pan, and
there is no sign of curdling. if the custard is cooked too long, it
becomes curdled. if it becomes curdled, put it into a pan of cold
water and beat until smooth.
a steamed or baked custard is done when it becomes set and when
a silver knife will come out clean after cutting it.
this lesson will furnish an opportunity for a review of milk and
eggs. the pupils should arrange to bring the necessary materials
from their homes.
steamed custards
 qt. milk (heated)
¼ tsp. salt
 eggs or  egg yolks
 tbsp. caramel or
½ c. sugar
½ tsp. nutmeg
beat the eggs sufficiently to mix them
thoroughly; add the sugar, salt, and hot milk slowly.
strain into cups, flavour with caramel, or
sprinkle nutmeg on top, and steam until firm over gently boiling
water—from  to  minutes.
baked custards
prepare as for steamed custards, set in a
pan of hot water, and bake in a slow oven until firm—from 
to  minutes.
chocolate custards
use the recipe for steamed custards, adding
 ounce of chocolate (melted) to the hot milk. steam or bake as
desired.
soft custard
 pt. milk (heated)
⅟ tsp.
salt
 egg yolks
½ tsp. vanilla extract
 tbsp. sugar
beat the egg yolks sufficiently to mix them
thoroughly, add the sugar, salt, and hot milk slowly. cook over
water that is boiling gently. stir constantly until the
custard thickens. strain. flavour when cool.
for soft chocolate custard add ½
ounce chocolate (melted) to the hot milk. serves six.
floating island
use recipe for soft custard and, when cold,
garnish with a meringue made according to the following
recipe:
meringue
 egg whites
¼ c. powdered sugar
beat the egg whites very light, add powdered
sugar, and continue beating. drop in large spoonfuls on the cold
custard. serves eight to ten.
it may be possible to teach two or three recipes in this lesson.
the baked custard may be put into the oven while the soft custard
or floating island is being made. serve at the school lunch.
griddle cakes
batters.—batters are mixtures of flour or meal and
a liquid, with salt or sugar to give flavour, butter to make
tender, and steam, air, or gas to make light.
one scant measure of liquid is used with one measure of flour
for thin, or pour, batter. one measure of liquid is used with two
measures of flour for a thick, or drop, batter. one measure of
liquid is used with three measures of flour for a soft, or bread,
dough. one measure of liquid is used with four measures of flour
for a stiff, or pastry, dough.
before mixing a batter, the oven or griddle should be at the
proper temperature, with the fire well regulated and in good
condition. the oven should be tested by putting in a piece of white
paper or two tablespoonfuls of flour, which should brown in three
minutes. the pans should be prepared by greasing with lard, salt
pork, or beef dripping. all the materials should be measured and
ready before beginning to combine the ingredients. when the batter
has been mixed and beaten until smooth, it should be baked at
once.
the teacher will be better prepared to give the lesson on
batters if she first makes herself familiar with the kinds of
breads that are used in the homes of the pupils and the methods
followed in their preparation. the simple, general methods of
preparing batters should be taught. the teacher should not attempt
the preparation of more than one or two batters in this lesson.
sour-milk griddle cakes
½ c. flour
¼ tsp. soda
½ tsp. salt
 egg
 c. sour milk
mix and sift the flour, salt, and soda; add
the sour milk and egg well beaten. drop, by spoonfuls, on a greased
hot griddle; cook on one side. when puffed full of bubbles and
cooked on the edges, turn, and cook on the other side. serve with
butter and maple syrup.
sweet-milk griddle cakes
 c. flour
¼ c. sugar
½ tbsp. baking-powder
 c. milk
 tsp. salt
 egg
 tbsp. melted butter
mix and sift the dry ingredients, beat the
egg, add the milk, and pour on the first mixture. beat thoroughly
and add the butter. cook the same as sour-milk griddle cakes.
discuss batters briefly. have all measurements made, the fire
regulated, the pans prepared, and so on. demonstrate the mixing and
cooking of griddle cakes. serve the cakes daintily after they are
cooked.
doughs—continued
muffins—baking-powder
biscuits
methods of making batters light.—batters are made
light by beating air into them, by adding eggs into which air has
been beaten, or by entangling gas in the batter. gas is secured by
using soda and sour milk in a batter (one teaspoon of soda to one
pint of sour milk), or soda with molasses (one teaspoon of soda to
one cup of molasses), or soda with cream of tartar (one teaspoon of
soda with two slightly rounding teaspoons of cream of tartar). the
soda should be mixed well with the other dry ingredients, then the
sour milk or molasses added, the whole beaten up quickly, and baked
at once.
baking-powder is a preparation containing soda and cream of
tartar, and may be used in place of soda if sweet milk is used. two
level teaspoonfuls of baking-powder should be used with one cup of
flour.
this lesson is a continuation of the lesson on batters. care
should be taken not to undertake more than can be done well in the
time available.
graham muffins
 c. graham flour
 c. milk
 c. flour
 egg
¼ c. sugar
 tbsp. melted butter
 tsp. salt
 tsp. baking-powder
mix and sift the dry ingredients. gradually
add the milk, the egg well-beaten, and the melted butter. bake in a
hot oven in greased gem pans for  minutes.
plain muffins
¼ c. butter
¾ c. milk
¼ c. sugar
 c. flour
 egg
 tsp. baking-powder
cream the butter, add the sugar and egg well
beaten, sift the baking-powder with the flour, and add to the first
mixture, alternating with the milk. bake in greased gem pans for 
minutes.
baking-powder biscuits
 c. flour
 tsp. salt
 tsp. baking-powder
 tbsp. fat
¾ to  c. milk or
water
sift the dry ingredients together, chop the
fat into the flour with a knife, slowly add sufficient milk to make
a dough not too soft to be handled. toss and roll the dough gently
on a slightly-floured board and cut into small biscuits. moisten
the tops with a little milk. handle the dough quickly, lightly, and
as little as possible. place on a buttered sheet. bake in a hot
oven till brown—from  to  minutes. either white or whole
wheat flour may be used for the biscuits. serves six to eight. oven
test—the oven should be hot enough to colour a piece of
unglazed white paper to a golden brown in one minute.
soda biscuits
 c. flour
½ tsp. salt
½ tsp. soda (scant)
 c. sour milk (scant)
 tbsp. shortening (lard or
other fat)
proceed as for baking-powder biscuits.
if the sour milk is not thick enough to
curdle, it will not contain sufficient acid to neutralize the soda,
and the biscuits will be yellow and bitter. to avoid this, cream of
tartar may be mixed with the soda ( teaspoonful). if there is no
cream of tartar at hand, it will be wise to use the recipe for
baking-powder biscuits.
have the oven and pans prepared and all the measurements made.
demonstrate the mixing of the muffins and, while these are baking,
the mixing of the biscuits. have one pupil take charge of the
baking of the muffins and another of the baking of the biscuits.
when the breads are done, have the class sit down and serve them to
one another, or to all the pupils at the school lunch hour.
composition and food value. how to make tough
cuts of meat palatable. pork chops with fried apples. beef or
mutton stew with vegetables and dumplings. rabbit stew.
bacon.
meats are rich in protein and usually in fats, but are lacking
in the carbohydrates. they build up the muscular tissue, furnish
heat and energy, are more stimulating and strengthening than any
other food, and satisfy hunger for a greater length of time. for
the most part, meats are a very expensive food. one cannot perform
more labour by the use of a meat diet than on a diet of vegetable
foods. those who use large quantities of meat suffer from many
disturbances of the system. hence it should
form a very small part of the diet. the cuts of meat that come from
those portions of the animal's body that are much exercised are
tough, owing to the development of the connective tissues, but they
contain a high percentage of nutrition. for the same reason, the
meat from older animals is apt to be tough. the flesh of chickens,
turkeys, and other fowls is very nutritious and is easily digested
if not too fat.
the flavour of meats is developed by cooking. dry heat develops
the best flavour, hence the tender cuts are cooked by the processes
known as broiling and roasting. tough cuts of meat require long,
slow cooking in moist heat, hence they are prepared in the form of
stews and pot roasts or are used in meat soups.
after the teacher has found out what meats are used in the homes
or what the school can afford to use, she should determine upon a
method of cooking that will make the meat palatable, digestible,
and attractive. if it can be prepared as a stew, she should use a
recipe in which vegetables are also used and, if possible, have
dumplings prepared to serve with the meat, as a review of the
lesson on batters.
beef or mutton stew
 lb. beef or mutton
¾ c. carrot cut in dice
 qt. water
 potatoes cut in ½-inch slices
salt, pepper, flour to dredge
 tsp. salt
 onion, cut in slices
¼ tsp. pepper
½ c. turnip cut in dice
½ c. flour
¼ c. cold water
remove the fat and cut the meat into -inch
pieces. reserve half of the best pieces of meat, put the rest of
the meat and the bone into cold water, soak for one hour, then heat
until it bubbles. season half the raw meat and roll it in the
flour, melt the fat in a frying-pan, remove the scraps, brown the
sliced onion and then the floured meat in the hot fat, add both to
the stew, and cook for  hours at a low temperature. to this add
the vegetables and cook ½ hour; then add the flour and
seasonings, which have been mixed with one-half cup of cold water,
and cook for ½ hour longer, until the meat and vegetables
are tender. remove the bone from the stew and serve. serves six to
eight.
rabbit
if beef and mutton are not commonly used and
are not readily obtainable, but rabbit can be secured, substitute
rabbit for beef in the stew. after the rabbit has been thoroughly
cleaned, cut up in eight pieces (four leg and four body pieces),
season, and dredge with flour, brown in the fat, and proceed as
with beef stew.
dumplings
 c. flour
½ tsp. salt
 tsp. baking-powder
 tbsp. fat (lard or butter)
¾ c. milk or water
(about)
sift the dry ingredients together, cut in
the butter, and add the milk gradually, to make a soft dough. roll
out on a floured board, cut with a biscuit cutter, lay on top of
meat in a stew pan (they should not sink into the liquid), cover
the kettle closely, keep the stew boiling, and cook the dumplings
for  minutes without removing the lid. (do not put the dumplings
in to cook until the meat is tender.)
note.—if desired, the rolling may be eliminated and, after mixing,
the dough may be dropped by spoonfuls into the stew.
to cook bacon
place thin slices of bacon from which the
rind has been removed in a hot frying-pan, and pour off the fat as
fast as it melts. cook until the bacon is crisp and
brown, turning frequently. another method of cooking is to lay the
bacon on a rack in a baking-pan and bake in a hot oven until crisp
and brown.
pork chops
wipe the chops with a damp cloth, and place
in a hot frying-pan. turn frequently at first and cook slowly until
well browned on each side. sprinkle with salt and pepper.
fried apples
wash and core the apples and slice to the
centre. roll in flour if very juicy.
after the chops have been removed from the
pan, lay the apples in and cook till tender. serve around the
chops.
if the meat is to require two or three hours' cooking, arrange
to have the lesson divided and given at two periods through the
day. half an hour before opening the morning session or a portion
of the morning or noon recess may be sufficient time to put the
meat on to cook and to prepare the vegetables. when the second
class period is called, the vegetables should be added to the
partially cooked meat and the dumplings should be made. it would be
well to serve the completed dish at the lunch period. there should
be as much discussion regarding the kinds of meat, their food
value, and the methods of cooking as time permits; but it may be
necessary to complete this discussion at some other class
period.
should it be possible for the teacher to give additional lessons
on meat, it might be well to devote one lesson to the preparation
and cooking of poultry, directions for which may be secured from
any reliable cook-book.
peas, beans, and lentils which are dried for market contain a
high percentage of protein, carbohydrate, and mineral matter. they
form an excellent substitute for meat and are much cheaper in
price. the digestion of leguminous foods proceeds slowly, involving
a large amount of work: on this account they are not desirable for
invalids, but they are satisfactory for those who are well and
active. the dried legumes must be soaked overnight in water and
then cooked for a long time, in order to soften the cellulose and
develop the flavour.
it will be necessary to plan this lesson several days in
advance, if the beans are to be baked. as they will be prepared and
put on to bake before the lesson period, the baking-powder biscuits
may be made during the lesson, to serve with them.
boston baked beans
 qt. navy beans
 tbsp. molasses
 tbsp. salt
 c. boiling water
½ tbsp. mustard
½ lb. fat salt pork
 tbsp. sugar
boiling water to cover
look over the beans and soak them in cold
water overnight.
in the morning drain, cover with fresh
water, and simmer them until the skins will burst, but do not let
the beans become broken.
scald one-half pound of fat salt pork.
scrape the pork. put a slice in the bottom of the bean pot. cut the
remaining pork across the top in strips just through the
rind, and bury the pork in beans, leaving the rind exposed.
add one cup of boiling water to seasonings
and pour over the beans. cover with boiling water. bake slowly,
adding more water as necessary. bake from  to  hours, uncover at
the last, so that the water will evaporate and the beans brown on
top. serves twelve.
have the beans washed and put to soak the night before the
lesson is to be given. assign to one of the pupils the task of
putting them on to simmer early the next morning. call the class
together for a few moments when the beans are ready to bake. assign
one of the pupils to attend to the fire and the oven. let the beans
bake all day. if the lesson is to be given late in the afternoon,
the beans may be ready to serve, or the cooking may be continued on
the second day and the lesson completed then. it would be well to
serve the dish at the lunch period. have the biscuits prepared to
serve with the baked beans.
cakes.—cakes made with fat resemble other batters,
except that the fat, sugar, and eggs are usually larger in amount
and the texture of the baked batter is finer and more tender.
when preparing cake, first get the pans ready. grease them or
line them with greased paper. make sure that the oven is at the
proper temperature. for a small cake, the oven should be hot enough
to brown a piece of unglazed paper or a tablespoonful of flour in three
minutes. bake a small cake from twenty to thirty minutes. when
done, the cake will shrink from the sides of the pan; the crust
will spring back when touched with the finger; the loud ticking
sound will cease; a fine knitting-needle will come out clean if the
cake is pierced; and the crust will be nicely browned. when the
cake is removed from the oven, let it stand in the pan for about
three minutes, then loosen, and turn out gently. do not handle
while hot. keep in a clean, ventilated tin box in a cool, dry
place.
cocoa.—chocolate and cocoa are prepared from the
bean of a tropical tree. this bean is rich in protein, fat,
carbohydrate, mineral matter, and a stimulant called theobromine.
in the preparation of chocolate the seeds are cleaned, milled, and
crushed into a paste. in the preparation of cocoa much of the fat
is removed, and the cocoa is packed for market in the form of a
fine powder. cocoa is more easily digested than chocolate, because
it contains less fat. though the amount of cocoa used in a cup of
this beverage is not large, when prepared with milk it serves as a
nutritious food. it is slightly stimulating as well, because of the
theobromine present and because it is served hot.
coffee and tea.—coffee and tea have no food value
when prepared as beverages. they contain stimulating properties
that are harmful to the body if taken in large quantities and, on
this account, they should be used with discretion. they should
never be given to children or to those troubled with indigestion.
if carelessly prepared, both coffee and tea may be decidedly
harmful to the body. coffee should not be boiled for more than
eight minutes. tea should never be permitted to boil. fresh,
boiling water should be poured on the leaves and left for three
minutes. it should then be strained off and kept hot until
used.
it may be wise to give this lesson on some special occasion, as
it is well adapted to serve for the refreshments for a mother's
club or a little class party.
plain yellow cake
½ c. butter
tsp. baking-powder
 c. sugar
c. flour
 eggs
tsp. spice or
½ c. milk
tsp. flavouring
cream the butter, add the sugar gradually,
and mix well. add the well-beaten yolks of eggs, then the flour and
baking-powder alternately with the milk. then add the flavouring
and cut and fold in the whites of the eggs carefully. turn into
buttered pans and bake at once in a moderately hot oven.
for chocolate cake,  ounces of melted
chocolate may be added after the yolks of the eggs. serves sixteen
to twenty.
gingerbread
¼ c. butter
tsp. soda
½ c. brown sugar
c. flour
 egg
tsp. ginger
½ c. molasses
tsp. cinnamon
½ c. milk (sour if possible)
salt
cream the butter, add the sugar gradually,
then a well-beaten egg. add the molasses. sift all the dry
ingredients together and add alternately with the milk. bake in a
buttered tin or in gem pans in a moderate oven for  or 
minutes. serves eight to ten.
cocoa
¼ c. cocoa
 c. water
¼ c. sugar
 c. milk
mix the cocoa and sugar with the water and
boil from  to  minutes. stir into the hot milk and serve at once.
if a scum forms, beat with a dover egg-beater. serves eight to
ten.
tea
 tsp. green or  tsp. black tea
 c. boiling water (freshly boiling)
scald the tea-pot, put the tea in the
tea-pot, and pour boiling water over it; steep  minutes, strain,
and serve. serves four.
coffee
take two tablespoonfuls of ground coffee for
each cup of boiling water that is to be used. put the coffee in the
coffee-pot and add enough cold water to moisten the coffee and make
it stick together—about one teaspoonful of water to each
tablespoonful of coffee. pour the boiling water over the coffee and
boil it for  minutes. place it where it will keep hot, but not
boil, for  minutes or more, and then serve. if a small amount of
egg white and shell is mixed with the coffee grounds and cold
water, it will aid in clarifying and settling the coffee.
the recipes for coffee and tea are given, so
that the teacher can discuss their preparation with the pupils and
compare their value with that of cocoa. if coffee and tea are both
commonly used in the homes, it may be well to have the pupils
prepare both in the class, to be sure that they understand how to
make them properly.
begin the lesson period with a discussion of the methods of
preparing cakes, and put the cake in the oven as soon as possible.
while it is baking, prepare the cocoa. if the cocoa is not to be
served for some time, it can be kept hot or re-heated over hot
water.
yeast bread is made light by the presence of a gas produced by
the action of yeast in the sponge or dough. yeast is a microscopic
plant which grows in a moist, warm temperature and feeds on starchy
materials such as are present in wheat. a portion of the starch is
converted into sugar (thus developing new and pleasant flavours),
and some is still further changed, giving off the gas upon which
the lightness of the bread depends. if the yeast is allowed to work
for too long a time or the temperature is very hot, a souring of
the dough may result. this souring can be prevented by kneading the
dough thoroughly, as soon as it has risen well or doubled in bulk,
or by putting it in a very hot oven to bake, when it has reached
this stage. the yeast plant thrives in a heat of about the same
temperature as our bodies. a little extra heat will only make it
more active, but boiling temperature will kill it. cold makes yeast
inactive, though it does not kill the plants.
yeast develops in a natural state on hops and other plants. it
is prepared for market in the form of dry or moist cakes. the
latter must be kept very cold. for home use, a liquid yeast is
often prepared from the dry cakes. this has the advantage of being
more active.
when the yeast has been added to a batter, it is spoken of as a
sponge. when the batter has had enough flour added, so that it may
be handled, it is called a dough. if the bread is to be made in a
few hours, the yeast is made up at once into a dough. if it is to
stand overnight, a sponge is often made first. more yeast is
required for quick rising. in ordinary circumstances, one yeast
cake is sufficient for one quart of liquid. thorough
kneading and baking are both essential to the success of the
bread.
arrange to have the class meet the afternoon before, in order to
begin the process by making the sponge, and to come early in the
morning to care for the dough. begin the study of flour, yeast, and
bread in a previous class period, correlating the work with
geography, nature study, or some other subject. either white or
whole-wheat flour may be used for the breads.
bread
(prepared with dry yeast)
 dry yeast cake
 tsp. salt
 c. warm water
 tbsp. sugar
 c. flour
 tbsp. lard or butter
 qt. water or milk
(scalded)
flour enough to make a soft
dough
at noon put a dry yeast cake to soak in a
cup of warm water. when it is soft, add a cup of flour, cover, and
put in a warm place to grow light. this will require several
hours.
in the evening, when ready to begin the
dough, mix the salt, sugar, fat, and hot liquid in a large bowl;
when lukewarm, add the cup of light yeast and enough flour to knead
(about three quarts). mix thoroughly and knead it into a smooth
dough, and continue this process until it is soft and elastic.
return the dough to the bowl, moisten, cover, and set in a
moderately warm place for the night. be sure that the place is free
from draughts. in the morning knead slightly; divide into loaves or
shape in rolls; put into pans for baking; cover, and let it rise
until double in bulk. bake large loaves from  to  minutes.
rolls will bake in from  to  minutes, for they require a hotter
oven. it is of the utmost importance that all yeast
breads be thoroughly cooked. (makes  loaves.)
(time required for making bread with dry
yeast, from  to  hours.)
bread
(prepared with compressed yeast)
 c. milk or water (scalded)
 tsp. salt
 tbsp. lard or butter
¼ cake compressed yeast ( cake if set in
morning)
¼ c. water (lukewarm)
flour, white or whole wheat
put the hot water or milk, salt, sugar, and
fat in a bowl; when lukewarm, and the yeast softened in the
lukewarm water, then the flour gradually and, when stiff enough to
handle, turn the dough out on a floured board and knead until soft
and elastic ( minutes). return the dough to the bowl, moisten,
cover, and let it rise in a warm place until double in bulk; then
knead slightly, divide into loaves or shape into rolls, cover, and
let rise in the pan in which they are to be baked until double in
bulk, and bake from  to  minutes. (makes  loaves.)
(time required for making bread, if one cake
of compressed yeast is used,  hours.)
if the class is large, prepare two or three bowls of sponge, so
that all can have some practice in stirring and kneading. do not
make too large a quantity of bread to bake in the oven, unless
arrangements can be made to do some of the baking at the home of
one of the pupils. use the bread for the school lunch or divide it
among the class to take home.
plan a bread contest, so that each pupil will be interested in
making bread at home.
at some previous time the teacher should discuss with the pupils
the plans for the dinner. it may be well to let them invite the
members of the school board or others interested in their work to
partake of the dinner. they should decide on the menu, with the
help and suggestions of the teacher, and should choose foods that
they can bring from their homes. the main course should consist of
such a vegetable dish as baked beans, an omelet, or macaroni with
white sauce and grated cheese. to accompany this there should be
potatoes and a fresh green vegetable, such as spinach or cabbage,
and a hot bread.
a simple dessert which the pupils know how to make should be
chosen. one duty should be assigned to each pupil, and she should
be entirely responsible for that portion of the dinner. the teacher
should supervise all the work carefully.
instructions for making the menu cards may be given in a drawing
lesson.
baked omelet
 tbsp. butter
 c. milk, heated
 tbsp. flour
 eggs
½ tsp. salt
 tsp. fat
pepper
melt the butter, add the flour and
seasonings, mix thoroughly, then add the hot milk slowly. separate
the eggs, beat the yolks, and add the white sauce to them. beat the
whites until stiff and cut and fold them carefully into the yolk
mixture, so that the lightness is all retained. turn into a greased
baking-dish and bake in a moderate oven from  to  minutes.
serve hot. serves six.
macaroni and cheese
 c. macaroni, noodles, or
rice
 tbsp. fat
pepper
 tbsp. flour
½ c. milk
½ tsp. salt
 c. grated cheese
 c. buttered bread crumbs (two tbsp. butter or
other fat)
break the macaroni into -inch pieces and
cook it in a large amount of salted boiling water from  to 
minutes. drain it well when tender and pour cold water through
it.
break up the bread crumbs and add two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter to them. grate the cheese and make
a white sauce of the fat, flour, seasonings, and milk. mix the
cheese with the sauce, add the macaroni, and pour it into a
buttered baking-dish. cover with the bread crumbs and bake  or 
minutes, to brown the crumbs. serves eight.
food value and cooking. the use of peanuts in
candy. peanut cookies, or peanut, molasses, or fudge candies, to be
made for a special entertainment.
sugar is valuable to the body as a source of heat and energy.
while it is easy of digestion, it is very irritating to the body if
taken in large quantities and, on this account, it should be taken
in small quantities and preferably at meal time or with other food.
two or three pieces of candy taken at the end of the meal will not
be hurtful, but when eaten habitually between meals, it is sure to
produce harmful effects.
sugar is present in many fruits and in most vegetables. milk
contains a large percentage of sugar. in preparing foods to which
the addition of sugar seems desirable, care should be taken not to
add it in large quantities.
as it is desirable to have a discussion
regarding sugar and its value to the body, the preparation of
cookies or candy for some school function or christmas party may be
undertaken in conjunction with this lesson, which should be given
at a time when it will mean most to the pupils. the work should be
so planned that they will learn something of the principles of
sugar cookery, as well as the specific recipes they are using.
cookies
 c. fat
 c. flour
 c. sugar
 tsp. baking-powder
 eggs
 tbsp. cinnamon
¼ c. milk
½ c. sugar
cream the butter and add the sugar and
well-beaten eggs. then add the milk alternately with the sifted dry
flour (sifted with baking-powder). mix to the consistency of a soft
dough, adding more milk if necessary. roll lightly, cut in shapes,
and dip in the one-half cup of sugar and cinnamon that have been
sifted together. place on buttered sheets and bake in a hot oven
for about  minutes. slip from the pan and lay on the cake cooler.
to make a softer cookie, use only one-half cup of butter. (three to
four dozen)
peanut cookies
 tbsp. butter
 c. flour
¼ c. sugar
 tsp. milk
 egg
½ c. finely chopped peanuts
 tsp. baking-powder
½ tsp. lemon juice
⅛ tsp. salt
 doz. whole peanuts shelled
cream the butter and add the sugar and the
egg well beaten. add the milk and sifted dry ingredients,
alternately, to the first mixture, then the peanuts and lemon
juice. drop from a teaspoon on a baking sheet an inch apart and
place ½ peanut on top of each. bake from  to  minutes in
a moderate oven. (two and a half to three dozen)
peanut brittle
 c. sugar
 c. peanuts in the shell
stir the sugar over the heat, constantly,
until it becomes a clear liquid. take at once from the heat, add
the prepared peanuts, and pour on a warm, buttered tin. mark in
squares and cool. serves ten.
molasses candy
 c. molasses
 tbsp. vinegar
⅔ c. sugar
¼ tsp. soda
 tbsp. butter
put the molasses, sugar, and butter into a
thick sauce-pan or kettle and stir until the sugar is dissolved.
boil until the mixture becomes brittle when tried in cold water.
stir constantly at the last to prevent burning. add vinegar and
soda just before removing from the fire. pour into a well-greased
pan and let it stand until cool enough to handle. then pull until
light and porous and cut in small pieces with scissors, arranging
on buttered plates. serves sixteen to twenty.
fudge
 c. sugar
 tbsp. butter
 c. milk
½ c. nuts, broken up
put the sugar and the milk in a sauce-pan
and stir over the heat until the sugar is dissolved. add the butter
and boil to the "soft ball" stage. take from the heat and beat
until creamy. add the nuts and pour on buttered pans. when cool,
cut in squares. serves sixteen to eighteen.
devote, if possible, a separate period to the discussion of the
food value and cooking of sugar; then assign two recipes for the
practical work, allowing the pupils to work in groups. assign only
as much work as can be carefully supervised. do not undertake both
the cookies and the candy.
the teacher should be familiar with the conditions in which the
pupils live, should know how much money they can afford to pay for
materials, what materials are available, what previous experience
in hand work they have had, whether they can afford to have
sewing-machines in their own homes, and to what extent they make
their own clothes or buy them ready-made.
the lessons should be planned to furnish hand training, to give
pupils practical instruction in the care of their own clothes, and
to provide an opportunity for preparing the apron for the cooking
lessons. the lesson course should tend to develop habits of thrift,
industry, and neatness. the pupils should be encouraged to learn to
sew, both to improve their own home conditions and to give them
suggestions as to a possible means of livelihood. if
sewing-machines are available and are in use in the homes, it is
well to have lessons given in machine sewing and to have the long
seams run by machine. if the pupils cannot have sewing-machines in
their own homes, the lessons given should be limited to sewing by
hand. in some schools, it may be necessary to simplify the lessons;
in others, an increased number of articles may be prepared in the
time allotted. should the apron and cap not be needed for the
cooking class, an undergarment (corset cover) may well be
substituted.[a]
[a]should the teacher
feel that an apron or corset-cover is too large a piece for her
pupils to undertake, and should she desire to have more time spent
on the first ten lessons. lessons xi to xviii may be omitted, two
periods each devoted to both lessons xix and xx, and three lessons
used for the making of a simple needle-book or other small
piece.
for each lesson the teacher should have in
mind a definite plan of procedure. the lesson should be opened with
a brief and concrete class discussion of the new work that is to be
taken up or the special stage that has been reached in work that is
already under way. though individual instruction is necessary, it
should not take the place of this general presentation of the
subject-matter, which economizes time and develops the real thought
content of the work. whenever possible, the teacher should
endeavour to correlate this work with the other subjects on the
curriculum.
new stitches may be demonstrated on large pieces of scrim, with
long darning-needles and coarse red or black yarn. the scrim should
be pinned to the black-board with thumb tacks, and the stitches
made large enough for all to see without difficulty. a variety of
completed articles should be kept on hand, in order to show
additional application of points brought out in the lesson. each
class may be given the privilege of preparing one article to add to
this collection, and a spirit of class pride and valuable team work
may be thereby developed.
during the lesson, posture, neatness, and order should be
emphasized. application can be secured by making the problems of
interest. care must be taken that none of the work demands
unnecessary eye strain. each lesson should be closed in time to
have one of the members of the class give a brief summary of the
steps that have been covered.
since the class period for sewing in the rural school will
necessarily be brief, the pupils should be encouraged to continue
their work at some other period. however, no work outside of the
class period should be permitted until the pupil has mastered the
stitch and can be trusted to do the work in the right way. the
privilege of sewing may be made the reward for lessons quickly
learned, home practice may be assigned, or the class may meet out
of school hours. all outside practice must be carefully supervised,
the pupil bringing her work to the teacher for frequent
inspection.
if it is possible to keep on hand a permanent equipment for
sewing, the following should be provided for a class of twelve:
approximate cost
scissors,  dozen
thimbles,  dozen
tape-measures,  dozen
emery,  dozen
boxes for work,  dozen
note.—shoe or candy boxes may be used, but an effort should be
made to have them uniform.
the teacher who is to give lessons in sewing should secure a
helpful elementary text-book or some bulletin that deals with the
teaching of sewing.
school sewing, based on home problems.
burton, i. r. and m. g. vocational supply co., indianapolis
handbook of elementary sewing. flagg, e. p.
little, brown & co., boston. (mcclelland, goodchild &
stewart, toronto)
constructive sewing, book i. (paper)
industrial book & equipment co., indianapolis
school needlework. hapgood, o. c. ginn &
co., boston
handicraft for girls. mcglauflin, i. manual
arts press, peoria. ill.
home and school sewing. patton, f. newson
& co., new york
a sewing course. woolman, m. s. frederick a.
fernald, washington
sewing. department of education of
ontario
preparation and use of working equipment:
needles, pins, thread, tape-measure, thimble, scissors, box for
work. talk on cleanliness and neatness (care of hands, etc.).
discussion of hemming. hems folded on sheets of paper.
a hem is made by twice turning over the edge of a piece of cloth
toward the worker, and then sewing it down. it is used to finish a
narrow edge. in turning a narrow hem the first fold must not be so
deep as the second, in order that the hem may lie smoothly. if the
hem is a wide one, the first fold can be much narrower than the
second.
the teacher should have interested the pupils in the sewing
lessons before the first meeting of the class, and each pupil
should be asked to bring with her the box in which to keep her
materials and such other equipment as is required. if the school is
to furnish the equipment, the teacher should be sure that there is
an adequate supply on hand.
it will probably be necessary to have the towels to be used in
the cooking classes hemmed, and the pupils should be interested in
doing this work. if some of them wish to hem towels for use in
their own homes, it may be desirable to allow them to do so. flour
or meal sacks will answer. it may be well to have each pupil hem a
towel for home use, as well as for school use, in order to impress
upon her the desirability of having hemmed dish-towels for daily
use. the towels may be planned during this lesson, and the pupils
may arrange to bring the material from home, if they are to
provide it; but it will be well for the teacher to have on hand
material for one or two towels. plain paper will answer for the
practice folding of the hem in the first lesson.
the teacher should devote a few minutes to a talk on
cleanliness, emphasizing its importance, and the necessity for
exercising care in handling the sewing materials. this should be
followed by a discussion regarding the care of the hands and the
condition in which they should be for the sewing lesson. each pupil
should inspect her own hands and show them to the teacher.
fig.
.—gauge
when all the pupils have their hands in a proper condition for
sewing, the teacher should look over their supplies with them, give
them suggestions as to how they are to keep these, and let them
arrange their boxes.
next, she should tell them what their first work is to be, show
them the material for the towels, and discuss with them the best
method of finishing the ends. (see lesson ii.)
before turning the hem, the pupils should make a gauge from
heavy paper, notched to indicate the depth of the hem. a few
minutes should be devoted to practice in measuring and turning a
hem of the desired depth on a sheet of paper. this should give
practice in the double turning necessary—first, the narrow
turn to dispose of the cut edge; second, the fold to finish the
edge.
when the lesson is finished, the boxes should be put away in
systematic order, and all scraps should be carefully picked up from
the desks and the floor.
turning and basting hems. hemming towels of
crash, sacking, or other material, for use in washing and drying
dishes at home or in school.
fig.
.—even basting
basting is used to hold two pieces of material together until a
permanent stitch can be put in. it is done by taking long stitches
(one-fourth inch) from right to left and parallel to the edges that
are to be basted together. in starting, the thread is fastened with
a knot; when completed, it is fastened by taking two or three
stitches one over the other.
the teacher should have the necessary materials on hand or
should see that they are supplied by the pupils. the articles
needed will include material for the towels, white thread for
basting and hemming, and gauges for measuring.
the teacher should also have a large square of unbleached cotton
or canvas,  by  inches, and a large darning-needle and coloured
worsted thread, to use for demonstration purposes. the canvas
should be fastened to the black-board, where the class can see it
easily.
as soon as the class is called, the supplies are at hand, and
the hands are in a proper condition, the teacher should demonstrate
the basting-stitch, with a large needle and thread, on the square
of canvas that has been fastened on the wall. materials for work
should be passed. each pupil should straighten the ends of her
towel by drawing a thread. then she should turn and baste a hem
three eighths of an inch in depth.
at the close of the lesson, the pupils should fold their work
carefully and put it neatly in their boxes.
towels—continued
the overhanding stitch and the hemming
stitch.
overhanding (also called overseaming or top
sewing).—the edges to be overhanded are held between the
first finger and the thumb of the left hand, with the edge parallel
to the first finger. the needle is inserted just below and
perpendicular to the edge. the needle is pointed straight toward the
worker. the stitches proceed from right to left, each stitch being
taken a little to the left of the preceding stitch. the stitches
should all be straight on the right side, but they will slant a
little on the wrong side. they should not be deep. it may be
desirable to use this overhanding stitch at the ends of hems, to
hold the edges of the material together. the overhanding stitch is
also used for seams, for patching, and for sewing on lace.
fig.
.—overhanding
the overhanding of narrow hems is not always necessary, but the
ends may be made stronger thereby, and the stitch is a valuable one
for the pupils to know.
fig.
.—hemming
hemming.—the hemming-stitch is placed on the inside
of the hem. the end of the basted hem is laid over the first and
under the second finger of the left hand, with the folded edge
outside and the material toward the worker. it is held in place
with the thumb. the stitch is begun at the end of the hem. the
fastening of the thread is concealed by slipping it underneath the
hem in the inside fold of the material. the needle is pointed over
the left shoulder, a small stitch is taken by inserting the needle
through the material just below the hem, then through the folded
edge. this is repeated, making the next stitch nearer the worker
and moving the goods away from the worker as necessary. uniformity
of slant, size, and spacing of the stitches is important.
before this lesson is given, all the pupils should report to the
teacher, having both ends of their towels basted, so that they will
all be ready to proceed at once with the new stitches.
the teacher should begin by demonstrating on the large square of
canvas with the large needle and heavy thread the stitches to be
used. after overhanding the end of the hem, the hemming-stitch
should follow with the same thread. the pupils will probably not be
able to finish the hemming in this first lesson, so provision
should be made for additional time. this can be required as an
outside assignment, if the pupils have mastered the method during
the class period. the teacher may also be able to give them some
supervision while she is looking after other classes.
a school bag. bag (made of material obtainable)
to hold sewing materials. measuring and straightening the material
for the bag. basting the seams.
the basting-stitch will be used as a review of work in the
second lesson.
some time before the lesson, the teacher should discuss with the
pupils the kind of material they will be able to provide for their
bags and, if the material has to be purchased, she should suggest
something that is suitable, washable, and inexpensive. the bag
should cost only a few cents. the dimensions of the finished bag
should be about  by  inches.
the pupils should get out the materials they have brought and
determine upon the size and shape of their bags. it will not be
necessary to make them uniform. the teacher should help the pupils
to use their material to the best advantage. it should be
straightened, pulled in place, and measured carefully. when the
bags have been cut out, the sides should be basted.
lesson v: bags—continued
sewing up the seams with a running-stitch
and a back-stitch.
running is done by passing the needle in and out of the material
at regular intervals. small, even stitches and spaces should follow
consecutively on both sides of the material. the stitches should be
much shorter than those used for basting, the length being
determined largely by the kind of cloth used.
when running is combined with a back-stitch, two or more
running-stitches and one back-stitch are taken alternately. the
back-stitch is a stitch taken backward on the upper side of the
cloth, the needle being put back each time into the end of the last
stitch and brought out the same distance beyond the last
stitch.
the teacher should be sure that all the pupils are ready to
report, having the sides of their bags basted ready for
stitching.
the teacher should first demonstrate the running-stitch with the
back-stitch, and the pupils should begin to sew the sides of the
bag, using this stitch. they should commence sewing three quarters
of an inch from the top of the bag, so that there will be a space
left for slits in the hem through which to run the cord.[a] the seams will doubtless have to be finished
outside of the class hour, and may be assigned for completion
before the next lesson.
fig.
.—running-stitch with a back-stitch
[a]the draw-string, or
cord, is to be run through the hem from the inside of the bag, and
it will be necessary to leave three quarters of an inch of space at
the ends of the seams, to provide slits as outlets for the
cord.
lesson vi: bags—continued
overcasting the seams and turning the hem
at the top of the bag.
overcasting is done by taking loose stitches over the raw edge
of the cloth, to keep it from ravelling or fraying.
the teacher should be sure that all the pupils are ready to
report, having the sides of their bags neatly sewed with the
running-stitch.
fig.
.—overcasting
the teacher should demonstrate the method of overcasting and
explain its use. she should have the pupils trim the edges of their
seams neatly and overcast them carefully. after the seams have been
overcast, she should discuss the depth of the hem that the pupils
expect to use and the method of turning and basting it.
they should then measure, turn, pin, and baste the hems, using the
gauge for determining the depth of the hem. if the bags are deep
enough to admit of a heading at the top, a deep hem (about
½ inches) can be made, and a running-stitch put in one-half
inch (or more) above the edge of the hem, to provide a casing, or
space, for the cord. if it is necessary to take a narrow hem, the
hem itself can be made to answer as space for the cord; in this
case the hem should be made about one-half inch deep.
lesson vii: bags—continued
hemming the top of the bag and putting in a
running-stitch to provide a space for the cord.
review of the hemming-stitch and the running-stitch.
the pupils, having the hems basted, should report to the
teacher.
the teacher should review briefly the method of making the
hemming-stitch and the running-stitch, asking the pupils to
describe these stitches and to demonstrate them on the large square
of canvas before the class. the basted hems should then be sewed
with the hemming-stitch.
after the hem is finished, the pupils should run a basting
thread around the bag, to mark the location of the running-stitch,
which is to be half an inch above the hem. they should measure for
this carefully.
if there is not time to do all the hemming in
the class period, the hemming-stitch and the running-stitch (which
is to provide space for the draw-string) should be assigned for
outside work, and each pupil should bring in her finished hem at a
designated time before the next class period.
lesson viii: bags—continued
preparing a cord or other draw-string for
the bag. putting a double draw-string in the bag, so that it can
easily be drawn up. use of the bodkin.
fig.
.—bag nearly completed
to make a cord, it is necessary to take more than four times as
much cotton as the final length of the cord will require, for some
of the length will be taken up in the twisting of the cord. it will
be easier for two to work together in making a cord. the cord
should be doubled, the two lengths twisted together firmly, and the
ends brought together again and held in one hand, while the middle is
taken in the other hand, and the lengths are allowed to twist
firmly together. the ends should be tied, and the cord run into the
bag with a bodkin or tape-needle. if one cord is run in from one
side and another is run in from the other side, each cord running
all the way around, the bag can be drawn up easily.
fig.
.—bodkin
in place of the cord, narrow tape may be used. take two pieces
of tape, each piece being twice as long as the width of the bag
plus two inches. run one tape in from one side and a second from
the other side, each tape running all the way around. join the tape
ends in the following manner:
. turn a narrow fold on one end of the tape to the
wrong side, and on the other end of the tape to the
right side.
. slip one fold under the other and hem down the
folded edges.
if the pupils are not able to supply cords for their own bags,
the teacher should have a sufficient supply of cord on hand. she
should be sure the bags are in readiness for the cord before the
class period.
fig.
.—completed bag
the teacher should begin the lesson by describing the method of
making the cord, estimating the amount necessary, and demonstrating
the process with the assistance of one of the pupils. the pupils
should be numbered, so that they may work in groups of two. after
they have completed the cord and run it into the bag, methods of
finishing the ends neatly should be suggested to them.
use of a darning-ball or gourd as a substitute for a ball.
talk on the care of the feet and the care of the stockings.
fig.
.—darning
this lesson will involve running and weaving. darning is used to
fill in a hole with thread, so as to supply the part that has been
destroyed or to strengthen a place which shows signs of weakness. a
darning-ball, a gourd, or a firm piece of cardboard should be
placed under the hole. the darn should extend one quarter of an
inch beyond the edge of the material, beginning with fine stitches
in the material, making rows running close together in one
direction, then crossing these threads with rows that run at a
right angle to them. care should be taken alternately to pick up
and drop the edge of the material around the hole, so that no raw
edges will be visible, and to weave evenly in and out of
the material and the cross threads.
each pupil should provide a pair of stockings with a few small
holes and a gourd or ball of some sort that she can use as a
darning ball.
when the class meets, the teacher should discuss briefly the
care of the feet and of the stockings, and demonstrate the method
of darning, on a large piece of coarse material, with heavy yarn
and a needle. if the pupils finish one darn during the lesson
period, more darning should be assigned for practice out of
class.
hemmed patches on cotton garments. talk on
the care of the clothes.
this lesson will involve measuring, trimming, basting, and
hemming. a patch is a piece of cloth sewed on to a garment to
restore the worn part. the material used for the patch should be as
nearly like the original fabric in colour and quality as possible.
in placing the patch, the condition of the material about the hole
must be taken into consideration, as well as the size of the hole.
the worn parts around the hole should be removed, and the hole cut
square or oblong. the patch should be, on all four sides, an inch
larger than the trimmed hole. the corners of the hole should be cut
back diagonally, so that the edges may be turned under. the patch
should be matched and pinned to the wrong side of the garment,
leaving the edges to project evenly on all four sides. the edges of
the material around the hole should be turned in and basted to the
patch. the edges of the patch should be turned in so that they
extend, when finished, one-half inch from the edge of the hole. the
patch and the cloth should be basted together and hemmed.
[a]used when special
problem comes up.
fig.
.—patching
the lesson on patching should be given at any time in the course
when it can be applied to an immediate need. if a pupil tears her
dress while playing at school, or if she wears a torn apron, the
teacher can announce a patching lesson for the next sewing class,
and request each pupil to bring a torn garment and the material for
the patch from home. it may be desirable to use two or three
periods for this lesson.
the teacher should demonstrate the process of patching on a
large piece of cotton. the pupils should practise placing a patch
on a piece of paper with a hole in it. each step should be assigned
in succession—examination of the article to determine its
condition, calculation of the size and preparation of the patch,
placing the patch, trimming the article around the hole, basting
the patch and material together, and hemming the patch.
when cutting out an apron, the length of the skirt should first
be measured, and to this measure  inches should be added for the
hem and the seams. one length of the material corresponding to this
length should be cut. this should be folded lengthwise through the
middle. three quarters of an inch should be measured on this fold,
and the material cut from the end of the selvage to this point, in
order to slope the front of the apron. when the waist measure is
taken,  inches should be added to it ( for the lap and  at each
end, for finishing). this makes a strong piece at each end for the
button and button-hole. two pieces of this length and ½
inches wide should be cut lengthwise of the material for the belt.
a measure should be made from the middle of the back of the waist
line, over the shoulder, to a point  inches to the right to the
centre front and on the waist line. two pieces of the length of
this measure and ½ inches wide should be cut lengthwise of
the material for the shoulder straps. a piece  by  inches should
be cut for the bib, the longer distance lengthwise of the
material. these measurements allow one quarter of an inch for
seams.
before the lesson the teacher should see if arrangements can be
made to secure the use of one or two sewing-machines, so that the
pupils may sew all the long seams by machine.
at a previous lesson she should discuss the kinds of material
suitable for the aprons. the pupils should consider whether their
aprons shall be white or coloured, and whether they shall be of
muslin, cambric, or gingham. each pupil will need from ½ to
 yards of material, according to her size. the taller ones will
need  yards.
fig.
.—cutting out skirt of apron
there should be on hand a sufficient number of tape-measures,
pins, and scissors, so that the pupils may proceed with the cutting
of their aprons without unnecessary delay.
the apron to be made is to have a skirt, with
a bib and shoulder straps, in order to be a protection to the
dress, the skirt, and the waist.[a]
[a] if the pupils are
very inexperienced and find the sewing difficult, it may be
advisable to omit the bib and straps and to make the simple
full-skirted apron. if a machine is not at hand to use for the long
seams, the limited time may make the simpler apron necessary. this
will give more time for the various steps. lessons xiv and xv may
then be omitted, lesson xvi made more simple, and less outside work
may be required.
as soon as the class meets, the pupils should take the
measurements for their aprons. one measurement should be assigned
at a time, and the reason for each measurement should be given. the
pupils should have explicit directions as to the measurements, as
they are apt to become confused if the directions are not clear.
they should work carefully, so that the material does not become
crumpled or soiled and, at the conclusion of the lesson, they
should fold it carefully and put it away neatly. all threads and
scraps of material should be carefully picked off the floor and the
desks, and the room left in order.
undergarments—continued
basting the hem for hemming on the machine
or by hand. uneven basting.
an uneven basting forms the better guide for stitching. in
uneven basting, the spaces are made about three times as long as
the stitches. the stitch should be about one eighth of an inch and
the space three eighths of an inch.
in addition to the apron material which has been cut out in the
previous lesson, each pupil should provide her own spool of thread
(number sixty white thread will probably answer for all the work),
a piece of cardboard  inches wide for a gauge, and pins to use in
fastening the hem.
fig.
.—uneven basting
as soon as the class meets, the pupils should prepare a -inch
gauge, to guide them in turning the hems of the skirts of their
aprons. they should make a half-inch notch in the measure for the
first turn in the material. a half-inch edge should be turned up
from the bottom of the skirt, then a -inch hem should be turned,
pinned, and basted carefully with uneven basting. the gauge should
be used for both measurements.
undergarments—continued
gathering the skirt and stitching to the
belt.
in gathering, a stitch much like running is employed. small
stitches are taken up on the needle, with spaces twice as great
between them. the top of the skirt should be divided into halves,
and each half gathered with a long thread, fine stitches one
quarter of an inch from the edge being used. the middle of the belt
and the middle of the top of the skirt of the apron should be
determined upon. the belt should be pinned to the wrong side of the
apron at these points, and the fulness drawn up to fit
(approximately one half of the waist measure). the skirt and the
belt should be pinned, basted, and sewn together.
fig.
.—gathering
if the hems have been completed in the skirts, the pupils are
ready to gather the skirts and attach them to the belt. it
will be well to have a supply of pins on hand, to use in fastening
the skirt and belt together.
the teacher should first demonstrate the method of gathering and
assign that portion of the lesson. when the skirts have all been
gathered, she should show the pupils how to measure, pin, and baste
the skirt to the belt.
fig.
.—sewing on the belt of the apron
undergarments—continued
making the bib.
a -inch hem should be turned across one short end of the bib.
this should be basted and hemmed. the bottom of the bib should be
gathered, the method employed for the top of the skirt being used,
and sufficient thread being left to adjust the gathers easily.
if the pupils have completed the skirts and attached them to the
belts, they are ready to make the bibs. they should be
provided with a -inch marker, for use in making the hems in the
top of the bibs.
the teacher should guide the pupils carefully in the making of
the bibs, reviewing their knowledge of basting, hemming, and
gathering.
fig.
.—bib and straps of apron
undergarments—continued
making the straps.
one end of one of the straps should be placed at the bottom of
the bib. the edge of the strap should be pinned, basted, and sewed
to the right side of the bib with a running-stitch. the other long
edge of the strap should then be turned in one quarter of an inch
and the side turned in one inch. the strap should then be
folded through the middle for its entire length and the free side
basted to the wrong side of the bib and hemmed. the remaining edges
of the strap should be overhanded together. the other strap should
be sewn to the other side of the bib in the same way.
the bibs should have been completed before the pupils report for
this lesson.
as soon as the pupils report for the lesson, the teacher should
explain the method of attaching the straps to the bib and tell them
how to finish the former. as they proceed with their work, she
should supervise them carefully and assign the unfinished portion
to be done out of class.
undergarments—continued
putting the bib and the skirt on the
belt.
the middle of the bottom of the bib should be determined, and
pinned to the middle of the upper edge of the belt, to which the
skirt has already been attached. the belt should be fastened to the
wrong side of the bib. the gathering string of the bib should be
drawn up, leaving  inches of fulness on each side of the middle.
the bib should be pinned, basted, and sewn to the belt. the
remaining long edges of the belt should be turned in one quarter of
an inch, and the ends one inch. the edges of the other belt piece
should be turned in in the same way, and should be pinned over the belt
to which the skirt and the bib have been attached (with all the
edges turned in), and basted carefully, to keep the edges even. the
skirt and the bib should be hemmed to this upper belt, and all the
remaining edges should be overhanded.
the bib and the straps of the apron should be completed before
the pupils report for this lesson.
the teacher should guide the pupils carefully in the various
steps necessary in fastening the bib to the belt and in completing
the belt. if the hemming and overhanding is not completed during
the class hour, they may be assigned as home work.
sewing buttons on the aprons, corset-cover,
or other garment.
this lesson should teach neatness in dress, through a
consideration of the best methods of fastening garments. the
position of the button is measured by drawing the right end of the
band one inch over the left end. the place for the button should be
marked with a pin on the left end of the band. a double thread is
fastened on the right side of the band, drawn through one hole of
the button, and back through the other, and then taken through the
band close to the first stitch. a pin should be inserted on top of
the button under the first stitch, left there until the button is
firmly fastened in place, and then removed. before the thread is
fastened, it should be wrapped two or three times around the
threads holding the button, between the button and the cloth, then
fastened neatly on the wrong side with a few small stitches one on
top of another.
fig.
.—sewing on buttons
each pupil should come to the class with her apron as nearly
completed as possible, and with three buttons to sew on it, for
fastening the belt and straps.
the teacher should discuss the best methods of fastening
garments and should demonstrate the method of sewing on buttons.
the pupils should sew one button on the left end of the apron band
in the middle of the width about  inch from the end, and another
button  inches from each end of the band, to hold the shoulder
straps.
garments—continued
button-holes on practice piece and on
apron.
directions for making the button-hole.—measure carefully
the position for the button-hole, lengthwise of the band, so that
the end will come one quarter of an inch from the edge of the
garment. mark the length of the button-hole on the material by
putting in two lines of running-stitches at the ends. to cut the
button-hole, insert the point of the scissors at the point marked
by the running-stitches nearest the edge of the garment, and cut
carefully along the thread of the material to the row of stitches
marking the length at the other end.
(a)
(b)
(c)
starting the button-hole
the button-hole stitch
the finished button-hole
fig.
.—working button-holes
to make the button-hole, use a thread of sufficient length to do
both the overcasting and the button-holing. beginning at the lower
right corner, overcast the raw edges with stitches one sixteenth of
an inch deep. do not overcast around the ends of the hole. as soon
as the overcasting is done, proceed with the button-holing without
breaking the thread. hold the button-hole horizontally over the
first finger of the left hand and work from right to left. insert
the point of the needle through the button-hole (at the back end),
bringing the point through, toward you, four or five threads below
the edge of the button-hole. bring the doubled thread from the eye
of the needle from right to left under and around the point of the
needle, draw the needle through, and pull the thread firmly, so
that the purl is on the edge. at the end of the button-hole, near
the end of the band, make a fan, by placing from five to seven
stitches. the other end of the button-hole should be finished with
a bar made by taking three stitches across the end of the
button-hole, then button-hole over the bar, taking in the cloth
underneath and pulling the purl toward the slit. the thread should
be fastened carefully on the under side of the button-hole.
for this lesson it is desirable to have small pieces of cotton
on hand, to use as practice pieces for the button-holes.
the teacher should demonstrate the making of a button-hole,
illustrating each step of the process on a large piece of canvas.
the pupils should sew two small strips of cotton together and cut a
button-hole one quarter of an inch from the edge, and lengthwise of
the material, to work for practice. when the button-hole has been
sufficiently perfected on the practice piece, the pupils should
make three in the apron—one in the right end of the band and
one in the end of each shoulder strap.
a holder  inches square will be satisfactory for handling hot
dishes. it can be made of quilted padding bound with tape, or of
two thicknesses of outing flannel covered with percale or denim and
bound with tape or braid. if made of the outing flannel and
covered, it should be quilted, by stitching from the middle of one
side to the middle of the opposite side in both directions, in
order to hold the outing flannel and the outside covering together.
the tape that is to be used for the binding should be folded
through the middle lengthwise; then, a beginning being made at one
corner of the padding, the edge should be basted, half on one side
and half on the other. right-angled corners should be formed. when
basted all around, the tape should be sewn on each side with a
hemming-stitch.
if the holder is to be suspended from the apron band, a tape of
from  inches to  inches in length should be attached to one
corner. the raw edge at one end of the tape should be turned in.
the end should be so placed that it overlaps the corner of the
holder about half an inch and it should be basted to the holder.
the tape should then be secured firmly to the holder, hemmed down
on one edge, across the bottom, and up the other edge. the other
end of the tape should be finished with a -inch loop. the raw edge
should be folded over, the tape turned  inches down for the loop,
and basted in place. this should be hemmed across the end. one
quarter of an inch up from the end, the double thickness of tape
should be back-stitched together, and the edges of the tape should
be overhanded from there to the hemmed end.
each pupil should provide sufficient denim, percale, huckaback,
or other washable material to cover the two sides of a holder 
inches square, and enough outing or canton flannel for a double
lining. about ½ yards of straight tape one-half inch wide
will be needed for the binding and for suspending the holder from
the apron.
fig.
.—the holder
the pupils should first carefully measure and turn the material
for the covering of the holder and then prepare the lining, basting
it all together. they should then put in the running-stitch and
finish with the binding. if it is not possible to complete the holder
in one period, a second lesson period should be provided, or
arrangements may be made to have supervised work done outside of
the lesson hours.
fig.
.—cap
the simplest cap to make will be the circular one. a pattern
should be made by drawing with a pencil and string on a piece of
wrapping-paper a circle  inches in diameter. the material for the cap
should be cut carefully around the circle and finished with a
narrow hem. a tape to hold the draw-string should be placed
¼ inches inside the edge of the hem. a small piece of
cardboard cut about one-half inch wide should be used for measuring
the position of the tape. bias strips three quarters of an inch
wide should be prepared for the tape, or a commercial tape three
eighths of an inch wide may be purchased. the outer edge of the
tape should be basted first and the edges joined; then the inner
edges should be basted, the edge being kept smooth. both edges
should be neatly sewn with the hemming-stitch by hand or on the
machine. an elastic should be inserted in the band, carefully
fitted to the head, and the ends fastened neatly.
this lesson will give a good opportunity to make a cap that will
answer for a dust cap or serve as a part of the cooking uniform. if
such a cap does not seem desirable and the former lesson has not
been completed, the cap may be omitted and the work on the holder
continued.
the pupils should first make the pattern for the cap and then
cut out their material. the hem should be basted and stitched with
the hemming-stitch. the bias strip should be basted on and sewn
with a running-stitch. it will probably not be possible for the
pupils to complete the cap in one class period; but, if the
material has been cut out and the work started, they may be able to
complete it at some other time. the stitches are not new, and the
work will serve as an excellent test of the skill they have
acquired in the course.
the introduction of household science into rural schools has
been hindered by the prevalent impression that the subject requires
equipment similar to that in the household science centres of towns
and cities, where provision is made for the instruction of
twenty-four pupils at one time and for from ten to fifteen
different classes each week. owing to the expense and the lack of
accommodation, it is not possible to install such equipment in rural
schools. for this and other reasons it has been concluded that the
subject is beyond the possibilities of the rural school. that this
is not the case is shown by the fact that many rural schools in the
united states, and some in saskatchewan, as well as a number in our
own province, are teaching the subject successfully, with equipment
specially designed to meet existing conditions.
the accommodations and equipment required may be classified as
follows:
. working tables
. cupboards and cabinets for storing the utensils
. stoves
. cooking and serving utensils
. the provision for working tables is conditioned by the space
available, and every effort must be made to economize this space.
the equipment may be placed in the basement or in a small
ante-room. in one school in the province very successful work is
being done in a large corridor. when a new school-house is being
erected, provision should be made by building a small work-room off
the class-room. the possibilities of a small, portable building, in
close proximity to the school, should not be overlooked.
where the school is provided with a large
table, this may be made of service. when used as a working table it
should be covered with a sheet of white oil-cloth. when used as a
dining-table a white table-cloth may be substituted for the
oil-cloth. if the school does not possess a table, two or three
boards may be placed on trestles, if the space at the front or the
back of the room permits, and these may be stored away when not
required. a table with folding legs, such as is shown in figures 
and , may also be used.
fig.
.—working drawing of folding table
the top of the cabinet containing the utensils or an ordinary
kitchen table closed in as a cupboard underneath, may be made to
serve. long boards, about eighteen inches wide, placed across the
tops of six or eight desks, provide good accommodation. these
should be blocked up level and should be provided with cleats at
each end, in order to prevent movement. when not in use they may
stand flat against the wall and occupy very little space. separate
boards, resting on a desk at each end, may also be placed across
the aisles. each of these will provide working space for one pupil.
tables which drop down flat when not in use may be fixed to the
walls of the school-room. as schools vary in many respects, it
is not possible to outline a plan which will suit all; but that
plan should be chosen which will best meet the requirements of the
particular school.
fig.
—folding table
fig.
—household science cabinet for rural schools
. the cupboards and cabinets to contain the utensils may take
various forms. a kitchen cabinet costing from twenty-five to
thirty-five dollars may be obtained from a furniture store, or one
may be made by a local carpenter. a large packing-case painted
brown outside and white inside (for cleanliness) is satisfactorily
used in some schools. if covered with oil-cloth, the top of this
may be used as an additional table. a few shelves placed across a
corner of the room and covered with a door or curtain may be used,
or it may be possible to devote one shelf of the school cupboard to
the storing of the utensils. it is desirable to have a combination
cupboard and table, which will contain most of the equipment,
including the stove. figure  is a working drawing of such a
cabinet, which may be made by a local carpenter or by the older
boys of the school.
the directions for making this cabinet are as follows:
obtain two boxes and cut or re-make them so that each is 
inches high when standing on end, ¼ inches across the
front inside, and  inches from front to back. these will form the
two end sections, a and b. inside the sides of these boxes nail 
inch × ⅞ inch strips, to form the slides for the
drawer. the slides come within ⅞ of an inch of the front
edge. rails may be nailed across the front. guide pieces should be
nailed to the slides, in order to keep the drawers straight. divide
section a for one drawer and cupboard. the drawers may be made out
of raisin boxes cut down to the required size. to the front of each
drawer, nail a piece of beaver board or pine a little larger than the drawer
front.
fig.
.—cabinet, showing stove in position for use
fig.
.—cabinet, with stove behind centre partition when not in
use
use any handles that may be conveniently obtained. cut two
pieces ' ½" × ½" × ⅞". space the
sections as shown, and nail these pieces firmly to the fronts of
the larger boxes, a and b, top and bottom. four end
pieces " × ½" will be required. fill in section
c, in this case, ' ½", with the pieces from the box
lids or with ordinary flooring. make a door for the cupboard from
similar material. the top is best made from good, clear, white
pine. screw battens across, and screw the whole firmly to the box
top from the inside. if more table space is required, make a
similar bench top, which can rest on top of the cabinet when not in
use. when required, it may be placed over the desks. steel or glass
shoes or wooden skids or battens should be fixed under the cabinet,
so that it can be pulled away from the stove and replaced easily.
the dimensions given are for a two-flame-burner oil-stove which is
 inches high,  inches across the front, and  inches from
front to back. the middle section, c, and the total height
of the cabinet may be enlarged or reduced to fit other sizes of
stoves.
the material required for, and the approximate cost of, such a
cabinet, labour not included, are as follows:
 boxes @ 
 raisin boxes @ 
 handles at c per doz.
 cupboard latch
or  turn button
about  sq. ft. flooring
about  sq. ft. pine for top
pieces for battens, etc.
steel shoes
figure  shows another type of equipment and
the space it occupies in the class-room when not in use.
fig.
.—space taken by equipment in class-room
the cupboard and the back of the cabinet contain the equipment
necessary for teaching twelve pupils at one time and also for
serving one hot dish at the noon lunch to twenty-four pupils. one
drawer contains linen, etc., and the other, knives, forks, and spoons.
the dimensions of the cupboard and the cabinet are shown in figures
 and , and the construction of each is such that it can be made
easily by any carpenter.
fig.
.—working drawings of cupboard
fig.
.—working drawing of cabinet.
fig.
.—cupboard with drawers and doors open, showing
equipment
figure  shows the cupboard and drawers open and the method of
storing the equipment. the shelves may be covered with white
oil-cloth or brown paper, in order to obviate the necessity for frequent scrubbing. the cupboard may
be fixed to the wall with mirror plates or small iron brackets, or
it may be screwed through the back.
fig.
.—back of cabinet with equipment in place
fig.
.—back of cabinet with stove removed
figure  shows the back of the cabinet, with
the three-flame-burner stove-oven, the one-flame-burner stove, and
other utensils in place. the folding table, previously described,
rests on the top of the cabinet. figure  shows the back of the
cabinet with the stove and oven removed. the method of storing
utensils and the construction of the cabinet are clearly shown.
fig.
.—three-flame-burner oil-stove, with kettles and
one-flame-burner oil-stove on shelf
fig.
.—household science equipment with drop-leaf table
figure  shows the three-flame-burner
oil-stove with the shelf underneath containing three kettles and
the one-flame-burner oil-stove.
another type of equipment is shown in figure . each end of the
top of this cabinet drops down when the cupboard doors are closed,
space being thus economized. the top of the table may be covered
with oil-cloth or zinc carefully tacked down on the edges.
the directions for making this cabinet are as follows:
lumber:
 pieces ¾" × " ×
yellow pine ceiling
 pieces " × " × '
yellow pine flooring
 piece " × " ×
 piece " × " × '
no.  common white pine
 piece ½" × " ×
 white pine laths
hardware:
 pairs ½" × " butt
hinges
 lb. d finishing nails
 cupboard catches
 lb. d finishing nails
 piece zinc (" × ")
¼ lb. box " brads
 pieces zinc (" × ")
¼ lb. box ¼" brads
 drawer pull
 box tacks
 ft. stopper chain
lumber
cut into the following pieces:
finished dimensions
use
top side rails
top end rail
frame posts
bottom side rail
bottom end rails
drop door
 pieces, "×"×' flooring
flooring (bottom)
 pieces, "×"×' yellow pine ceiling
ceiling (ends and side)
shelf
shelf
casing
casing
drawer front
drawer front
 pieces, "×"×' flooring
top
 pieces, "×"×' yellow pine ceiling
doors
 pieces, "×"×' flooring
swing tops
drawer slides
drawer back
drawer bottom
partitions
partitions
rule
steel square
lead-pencil
plane
saw
½ chisel and
hammer
screw-driver
i cutting and squaring stock—
cut the stock only as needed, in the following order, and square
up according to the directions previously given.
. frame; rip the " × "
× ' piece for the frame material
. bottom
. casing
. ends and sides
. doors
. shelves
. swing tops
. top
. miscellaneous pieces
ii assembling—
frame:
. check up the dimensions of the pieces squared up
for the frame.
. lay out and cut the lap joints in the top side
rails and frame posts, as shown in the drawing.
. nail the frame together.
. test the corners of the frame with a steel
try-square and brace it by nailing, temporarily, several strips
diagonally across the corners.
bottom:
. cut seven pieces of flooring ½" long for
the bottom and plane off the groove of one piece.
. turn the frame upside down and nail this piece
with the smooth edge projecting ⅞" over the front side of the
frame. nail the rest of the flooring so that each piece matches
tightly.
ends:
. for the back, cut eleven pieces of ceiling
¼" long.
. plane off the groove edge of one piece of ceiling
and nail it on the back of the frame even with the end.
. nail the rest of the ceiling on the back. be sure
that each joint matches tightly.
fig. .—frame of cabinet nailed
together
shelves:
. make four strips (¾" × ¾"
× ½") and nail two of them inside, across each end,
" and " from the bottom. these strips hold the shelves.
. from a " × " piece cut two pieces
½" long; fit and nail them in for the upper shelf.
. make the bottom shelf of two pieces, one
¼" wide and the other " wide. when these boards are
nailed in place, the shelf is narrow enough to allow the doors,
with pockets on, to close.
. make two strips; one -" × " ×
½" and the other -" × -¾" ×
½", and nail them to the top shelf for drawer guides.
top:
. cut eight pieces of flooring " long for the
top.
. plane off the groove of one piece and nail it on
the top of the frame, so that the smooth edge and the ends project
" over the front side and ends of the cabinet.
. nail the rest of the flooring on for the top,
being sure that each joint matches tightly. the last piece must
also project " over the back side.
casing:
. nail the casing, which is -¾" wide, on
the front of the cabinet.
doors:
. make each door ¾" × ⅜"
× ⅞" from five pieces of ceiling ⅞" long,
held together by cleats at the top and bottom.
. fit each door carefully, then hang them with butt
hinges. fasten a cupboard catch on each door.
drop door:
. make the drop door -" × ⅜" and
hinge it with a pair of butt hinges. put on the stopper chain and
catch.
swing tops:
the swing tops are each made from six pieces of
flooring " long cleated together.
. plane off the groove edge of one piece and match
them all together.
fig.
.—working details
. make the cleats ¾" × " × "
and nail the top to them. (see the drawing for the position of the
cleats.)
. rip off the tongue edge and plane it so that the
top is exactly " wide.
. turn the cabinet upside down on the floor and fit
the swing tops. hang them with a pair of butt hinges opposite the
ends of the cleats.
. make a t-brace with a nailed cross lap joint from
two pieces, one being -" × " × ", the other
-" × " × ½". the long edge of the t and
the leg must be bevelled -" on one side. fit and hang a t-brace
with a pair of butt hinges on each side of the swing tops.
. make two brace cleats and fasten them to the ends
of the cabinet, so that the swing tops are held level and even with
the top of the cabinet.
putting zinc on the top:
. unscrew the swing tops from the cabinet to put
the zinc on.
. place the piece of zinc, " × ", on top,
extending ½" over the edges all around.
. hold the zinc firmly in place and make a square
bend along the front edge with a hammer or mallet, bending the edge
of the zinc up under the top.
. punch a straight row of holes " apart through
the zinc and tack it on.
. bend the back edge, punch and tack in the same
manner as the front edge, but be sure the zinc fits snugly on the
top.
fig.
.—working details
. bend the ends of the zinc the same as before, but
be very careful to fold the corners neatly.
. put the zinc on the swing tops in the same
manner.
. fasten the swing tops again to the top of the
cabinet.
drawer:
the drawer front, -" × " ×
⅜", with lap ⅜" × ½" cut out on the
ends.
. nail the sides, ½" × " ×
⅝", to the lap of the front and to the ends of the
back.
. nail the bottom in between the sides ⅛"
from the lower edge. this allows the drawer to slide on the edges
of the sides.
. put the partitions in the drawer as called for by
this plan.
the racks for covers and pie tins shown in the drawings are made
from two pieces, -" × " × ", one piece -"
× " × ½" for the bottom, and two pieces of
lath " long for the sides. these racks may be placed on the doors
as shown, or may be changed to suit the equipment.
iii finishing—
. set all the nails and putty the holes.
. sandpaper the cabinet carefully.
. paint or stain and wax the outside of the
cabinet, to harmonize with the surroundings where it is to be
used.
. paint the inside with two coats of white
enamel.
fig.
.—cabinet completed
before putting on the enamel, apply a coat of
ordinary white-lead paint and allow it to dry thoroughly. if
desired, the outside of the cabinet may be finished in white
enamel, though this is somewhat more expensive than the paint or
stain recommended above.
all the household science cabinets shown have a two-fold
purpose. in the first place, they furnish storage space for the
utensils and working space for the pupils. in the second place,
they offer a most interesting manual training project for a boys'
club. the members can make any one of them, thus correlating their
practical wood-work and the domestic science of the girls and, in
this way, exhibiting the co-operative spirit of the home and the
school.
. in some cases it may be possible to use the school stove for
cooking purposes. some schools use natural gas for heating and,
where this is the case, provision for cooking may readily be made.
other schools situated on a hydro-electric line, may, as has been
done in one case, use electricity as a source of heat. at present,
however, the majority of schools may find it best to use one of the
many oil-stoves now on the market. one-, two-, or
three-flame-burner stoves may be obtained for general use. the
two-, or three-flame-burner stoves are recommended, as they are
less likely to be overturned. the one-flame-burner stove, however,
is often useful as an additional provision. a good grade of oil
should be used, and the stove should be kept scrupulously clean,
constant attention being paid to the condition of the wick. any oil
spilt on the stove when it is being filled should be carefully
wiped off before lighting. if attention is paid to these details,
the stove will burn without any perceptible odour.
. the number of the utensils and the amount of equipment depend
upon the community and the number of pupils to be considered. by
careful planning few utensils are needed. they should be as good as
the people of the neighbourhood can afford and, in general, should
be of the same character as those used in the homes of the
district. all the table-cloths, towels, dish-cloths, etc., required
should be hemmed by the pupils. articles for storing supplies may
be bought or donated. glass canisters with close lids are best, but
as substitutes, fruit jars, jelly glasses, or tin cans will serve
the purpose. it is an easy matter to secure an empty lard-bucket or
a syrup-can for flour or meal, empty coffee-cans for sugar or
starch, etc., and baking-powder or cocoa-tins for spices. each
should be plainly labelled.
several typical lists of equipment in household science are
given here. these may be modified to suit particular circumstances.
considerable expense may be saved if the pupils bring their own
individual equipment—soup-bowl, cup and saucer, plate, spoon,
knife, fork, and paper napkins. this plan is not advised unless it
is absolutely necessary, but, if followed, an effort should be made
to have the articles as uniform as possible.
the following equipment is that contained in the cabinet
illustrated on page  and is sufficient for giving organized
instruction to six pupils. if a noon lunch is provided, additional
individual equipment will be required.
 perfection blue-flame stove (two-flame)
 two-burner oven
 coal-oil can
 dish-pan
 tea-kettle
 large sauce-pan and cover
 medium sauce-pans and covers, c each
 small sauce-pans and covers, c each
 small sauce-pans and covers, c each
 pudding bake-dishes, c ea.
 muffin pans ( rings, each c)
 soap-dish
 small mixing bowls, c ea.
 pitchers, c ea.
 casseroles, c, c, c
 measuring cups, c ea.
 custard cups, c doz.
 white plates, $. doz.
 supply jars, c doz.
 vegetable brushes, c ea.
 grater
 egg-beaters, c ea.
 forks
 teaspoons
 tablespoons, $. doz.
 vegetable knives, c ea.
 case knives, $. doz.
 strainers, c ea.
 spatula
 bread knife
 can-opener
 french knife
 water pails, $. ea.
 dish-towels, c ea.
 dish-cloths, c ea
 rinsing cloths, c ea.
 yd. oil-cloth
 yards cheesecloth
the equipment included in the cabinet and cupboard shown in
figure , page , is as follows:
for six pupils
 cupboard
 pie plates
 cabinet table
 measuring cups (tin)
 three-burner oil-stove
 measuring cup (glass)
 portable oven
 double boiler
 storage tin
 baking-dishes
 dish-pans
 cake tins
 draining pans
 toasters
 scrub basins
 tea-pot
 soap-dishes
 coffee-pot
 pail
 pitcher ( quarts)
pails
"( pint)
 dippers
 bowls
 tea-kettles
 custard cups
 kneading boards
 butter crock
 rolling-pins
 covered pail ( pint)
 oil-can
 trays
 stove mitt
 grater
 dust-pan
 potato masher
 whisk
 can-opener
 scrub-brushes
 french knife
vegetable brushes
bread"
 stew pans
 egg-beaters
 sauce-pans
 dover egg-beater
 frying-pans
 wooden spoons
 strainers
 paring knives
for eight pupils
 cupboard
 portable oven
 cabinet table
 storage tin
 collapsible table
 dish-pans
 three-burner oil-stove
 draining pans
 one-burner oil-stove
 scrub basins
 soap-dishes
 baking-dishes
 pail
 cake tins
 pails
 toasters
 dippers
 tea-pot
 tea-kettles
 coffee-pot
 kneading boards
 pitchers ( quarts)
 rolling-pins
 pitcher ( quart)
 oil-can
 bowls
 stove mitt
 custard cups
 dust-pan
 butter crock
 whisk
 covered pail ( pint)
 scrub brushes
 trays
 vegetable brushes
 grater
 stew-pans
 potato masher
 sauce-pans
 can-opener
 frying-pans
french knife
 strainers
bread"
 pie plates
 egg-beaters
 measuring cups (tin)
 dover egg-beater
 measuring cup (glass)
 wooden spoons
 double boiler
 paring knives
for twelve pupils
 cupboard
 stove mitts
 cabinet table
 dust-pan
 collapsible table
 whisk
 three-burner oil-stoves
 scrub brushes
 portable oven
 vegetable brushes
 storage tin
 stew pans
 dish-pans
 sauce-pans
 draining-pans
 frying-pans
 scrub basins
 strainers
 soap-dishes
 pie plates
 pail
 measuring cups (tin)
 pails
 measuring cup (glass)
 dippers
 double boiler
 tea-kettles
 baking-dishes
 kneading boards
 cake tins
 rolling-pins
 toasters
 oil-can
 tea-pot
 coffee-pot
 potato masher
pitchers ( qt.)
 can-opener
"( qt.)
french knife
 bowls
bread"
 custard cups
 egg-beaters
 butter crock
 dover egg-beaters
 covered pail ( pt.)
 wooden spoons
 trays
 paring knives
 grater
in the equipment for twelve pupils, three one-burner oil-stoves
at $. each might be used in place of the second large stove. in
this case extra provision must be made for storing the stoves when
not in use, as the cabinet shown does not provide space for more
than one large stove. care should be taken in using the one-burner
stove to avoid upsetting it while it is in use. the equipment given
above is generous, and reductions may be made if necessary. in any
case it is not advisable that the whole equipment should be
purchased at once; only sufficient to make a beginning should be
secured, and further utensils may be added as the necessity for
their use arises.
if a hot dish is served at the noon lunch, as is most desirable,
the following will be needed in addition, in order to serve
twenty-four pupils:
 knives
 forks
 teaspoons
 tablespoons
 salt and pepper shakers
 glasses
 plates
 plates (large)
 cups and saucers
 fruit and vegetable dishes
the hectograph is a device for making copies of written work.
teachers whose schools have limited black-board space will find it
of great service. recipes and other rules for work may be copied
and distributed to the pupils, and thus kept in a permanent form.
many other uses in connection with the general work of the school
will suggest themselves.
the following are the directions for making:
soak ½ ounces of white glue in three ounces of water
until it is well softened. cook in a double boiler until the whole
mass is smooth. remove from the fire and add six ounces of
glycerine. mix well, re-heat, skim, and pour into a shallow pan or
on a slate. prick the bubbles as soon as they show. allow the
mixture to stand for twenty-four hours, and it is then ready for
use.
write the material to be copied, in hectograph ink, on a sheet
of the same size as that on which the copy is to be made. write
clearly and space carefully. wipe the hectograph with a damp cloth.
lay a sheet of unglazed paper on the hectograph, rub it carefully,
and take off at once. this removes any drops of water, but leaves
the surface moist. lay the written side of the sheet on the
hectograph and rub it carefully over its whole surface with a soft
cloth, so that every particle of the writing comes in contact with
the surface of the hectograph. leave it there for four or five
minutes. lift one corner and peel off carefully. lay a plain sheet
on the hectograph and rub as before. take off as before. if the
copy is not clear, leave the next sheet on a little longer. when
sufficient copies have been made, wash the hectograph with a wet
cloth before putting it away. keep in a cool, dry place.
the best method of approach to household science in the rural
school is through the medium of the hot noon-day lunch or the
preparation of one or two hot dishes to supplement the lunch
brought from home. owing to the fact that many pupils live far from
the school, it is impossible for them to go home for the mid-day
meal, and they are thus dependent upon lunches which they bring
with them. very frequently the pupils are allowed to eat their
lunches where and how they please, and the method chosen is
conducive neither to comfort nor to health. in fine weather they do
not wish to lose any time from their games, and so they eat their
food while playing, or they bolt it, in order that they may get to
their play more quickly. in severe weather they crowd round the
steps or the stove and do not hesitate to scatter crumbs and
crusts. in one case even a teacher has been seen holding a sandwich
in one hand and writing on the black-board with the other.
in many cases the lunch does not attract the pupil. it is often
carried, without proper wrapping, in a tin pail, and it then
absorbs the taste of the tin; again, it is often wrapped in a
newspaper and is flavoured with printer's ink; occasionally, it is
wrapped in cloth not too clean. conditions such as these are not
fair to the pupils. they come a long way to school, often over poor
roads; and it is necessary, for both their physical and their
mental development, that they should receive adequate nourishment
served as attractively as possible. many of the defects found among
school children can be traced, to a greater or less extent, to lack
of nutrition. the united states military draft shows that the number
of those physically defective is from seven to twenty per cent.
higher in rural districts than in towns and cities, and this
difference is not peculiar to that country. may we not reasonably
suppose that many of these defects are caused by mal-nutrition, and
that this mal-nutrition is in part due to the poor noon-day lunch?
as these defects hinder mental as well as physical development, the
question of proper nutrition through the medium of the school lunch
becomes an educational one.
with proper care in the selection of food, the packing of the
lunch box, and rational methods of consumption, there is no reason
why the box lunch should not be nourishing, attractive, and possess
an educational value.
it may be laid down as an axiom that every school lunch should
be supervised by the teacher and hap-hazard methods of eating the
lunch should be prohibited. those schools that are fortunate enough
to possess a large table can approximate somewhat to the best home
conditions, and have the table set in the proper manner, as shown
in lesson vi, page . the pupils should sit round the table, at
the head of which is the teacher, and the lunch may be made to
partake of the nature of a family party. if rightly managed, the
meal, even under the unusual difficulties presented in the rural
school, may offer the most favourable opportunities to inculcate
habits of cleanliness and neatness and to cultivate good manners.
the pupils will learn something about the proper selection of food
and the importance of thorough mastication. clean hands and faces
and tidy hair should be insisted upon, and individual drinking cups
should be encouraged. as a manual training exercise, each pupil may
be taught to make his own drinking cup from heavy waxed paper.
grace may be said by the older pupils in turn.
the table should be made to look as attractive as possible. the
pupils, in turn, might undertake to have the table-cloth washed at
home or, in place of a linen cloth, a covering of white oil-cloth
may be used. in some cases the school garden will be able to supply
flowers or a growing plant for a centrepiece. three or four of the
larger pupils, either boys or girls, may set the table in ten
minutes, while the others are washing their hands and faces and
tidying their hair. some such plan as this will add palatability
and cheer to the monotony of the everyday cold and often
unattractive lunch and will create a spirit of true and healthy
sociability among the pupils.
in schools that do not possess tables large enough to be used as
suggested above, each pupil should be required to set one place at
his own desk, as shown in the illustration on page . a paper
napkin may be used for a table-cloth, if a small piece of white
oil-cloth is not procurable. each pupil retains his place until all
have finished; he should then dispose of the crumbs and leave his
desk tidy. from twenty minutes to half an hour is generally found
sufficient for the meal. there should be cheerful conversation and
restrained laughter throughout the meal, and acts of courtesy and
generosity should be encouraged. at seasons when there are no
flies, and on days when the weather is favourable, it is a pleasant
change to serve lunch out-of-doors.
the lunch is provided by the home, but the teacher may give some
useful lessons in household science by talks on the contents of the
lunch box and the proper methods of packing the same, so that the
food will keep in good condition until the time for its
consumption arrives. it is the duty of the school authorities to
provide a suitable storage place for the lunch boxes. these boxes
should be kept free from dust or flies and in a place where the
food will not freeze in winter. open shelves, so often seen, are
not suitable and a properly ventilated cupboard in the school-room
should be provided.
the whole question of the box lunch presents a serious problem,
when we consider the large number of children who must depend upon
it for their noon-day meal. this meal should be so constituted as
to make it a real meal and not a makeshift. the same principles
which govern the preparation of the meal should govern the
preparation of the lunch box. it is said that the school lunch
should consist of "something starchy and something meaty, something
fat and something fibrous, something sweet and something
savoury".
with so many varieties of breads, meats, cheese, jams, etc.,
innumerable kinds of sandwiches may be made. for example, there are
brown, graham, rye, raisin, nut, and date breads, and equally many
kinds of meat. such variety makes it quite unnecessary to have an
egg sandwich or hard-boiled eggs in the lunch box each day. while
eggs are very valuable in the diet, a lunch with hard-boiled eggs
five times each week becomes monotonous, and the appetite of the
consumer flags. with skill and thought one can make little scraps
of meat or other "left-overs" into attractive sandwiches. ends of
meat, ground and mixed with salad dressing or cream, make delicious
sandwich fillings.
the bread should be cut evenly.
the thickness of the slice should vary with the
appetite of the consumer.
the crust should not be removed.
the butter should be creamed for spreading.
both slices should be buttered, in order to prevent
the absorption of the filling.
the filling should be carefully placed between the
slices.
the sandwiches should be wrapped in waxed paper, to
prevent drying.
. egg and ham:
three eggs hard boiled and chopped fine or
ground
an equal amount of chopped or boiled ham
salad dressing
mix and spread.
. raisin filling:
one cup of raisins ground or chopped
one half-cup of water
one half-cup of sugar
one tablespoonful of flour into the same quantity of
vinegar
juice and grated rind of one lemon
cook in a double boiler until thick.
. fig filling:
remove the stems and chop the figs fine.
add a small quantity of water.
cook in a double boiler until a paste is formed.
add a few drops of lemon juice.
chopped peanuts may be added.
. egg:
chop a hard-cooked egg.
mix with salad dressing or melted butter, to a
spreading consistency.
. equal parts of finely-cut nuts and grated cheese,
with salad dressing
. equal parts of grated cheese and chopped
olives
. sardines with lemon juice or a little
dressing
. chopped dates with a little cream. nuts may be
added.
. thinly sliced tomatoes (seasonal)
. sliced cucumbers
. marmalade. chopped nuts may be added.
in selecting the food the following suggestions may prove
helpful:
protein—sandwiches of fish, meat, egg,
cheese, nuts, dish of cottage cheese
for the older pupils, baked beans
carbohydrates—bread, cake, cookies,
jam, honey, dates, figs, raisins, prunes, candy
fats—butter, cream, peanut-butter
note.—when
possible, a bottle of clean sweet milk should form part of every
lunch.
cup custards of various flavours
cookies with nuts and fruits
cakes—not too rich
pies well made and with good filling
candy—plain home-made
preserves
fresh fruits
as often as possible, a surprise should be included, generally
in the form of a dessert of which the pupil is fond. a surprise
adds to the pupil's pleasure in eating and, indirectly, aids
digestion.
much of the attractiveness of a lunch depends upon the manner of
packing. we must consider the fact that the foods must be packed
together closely and must remain so packed for several hours. this
makes careful packing a necessity.
. be sure that the box is absolutely clean.
. line it with fresh paper every time it is
used.
. wrap each article of food in wax paper.
. place in the box neatly, the food that is to be
used last in the bottom of the box, unless it is easily
crushed.
. lay a neatly folded napkin on the top.
lunch box
waxed paper
paper napkin
drinking cup
knife, fork, and spoon
thermos bottle or jar for milk or other liquid
the box itself should be of odourless material, permanent, and
light in weight, admitting of safe means of ventilation. paper bags
should never be used for food containers, as it is impossible to
pack the lunch in them firmly and well and there is danger of their
being torn or of insects or flies creeping into them. boxes of
fibre, tin, basket weave, or other material, may be used. the box
will require scrubbing, and should be frequently dried and aired
well. many types of lunch boxes have compartments provided for the
various kinds of food.
waxed paper and paper napkins, or the somewhat heavier paper
towels of much the same size, are very useful for packing lunches,
and may be obtained at a low price, particularly if bought in large
quantities. an extra napkin, either of paper or cloth, should be
put in the basket, to be spread over the school desk when the lunch
is eaten. napkins can be made out of cotton crêpe at a cost
of a very few cents each. the crêpe may be bought by the yard
and should be cut into squares and fringed. such napkins have the
advantage of not needing to be ironed.
paper cups, jelly tumblers with covers which can now be bought
in several sizes, and bottles with screw tops, such as those in
which candy and other foods are sold, may all be used for packing
jellies, jams, honey, etc. the thermos bottle may be used for
carrying milk, or, if this is too expensive, a glass jar with a
tight cover may be substituted. if the thermos bottle is used, hot
drinks may also be carried.
the serving of a hot lunch or of one hot dish need be neither an
elaborate nor an expensive matter. many rural schools in the united
states, some of them working under conditions worse than any of
ours, are serving at least one hot dish to supplement the lunch
brought from home. the advantages of this plan are:
. it enables the pupils to do better work in the
afternoon.
. it adds interest to the school work and makes the
pupils more ready to go to school in bad weather.
. it gives some practical training and paves the
way toward definite instruction in household science.
. it gives a better balance to meals, and as
compared with a cold lunch it aids digestion.
. it teaches neatness.
. it gives opportunity to teach table manners.
. it strengthens the relationship between the home
and the school.
the teacher should have a meeting of the school trustees and of
the mothers of the pupils and outline the method of procedure. it
is only in this way that the co-operation of all can be secured, and
without this co-operation there can be no success. this meeting
should be addressed by the public school inspector; and after the
consent of the parents and the trustees has been secured, the
scheme may be put into operation. some thought will have to be
given to the organization, in order that the plan may work
smoothly. if properly organized, there need be little or no
interruption to the ordinary routine of the school.
the pupils, both boys and girls, should be arranged in groups,
each group taking the work in turn. even the smallest pupils should
be allowed to take part, as there are many duties which they can
perform successfully. if each group is composed of five or six
pupils, the work may be arranged as follows: two will prepare the
dish, two will get the table or the desks ready (or each pupil may
prepare his own desk), and the others will wash the dishes.
the furnishing of supplies is a problem which each teacher will
have to solve for herself, according to the conditions which exist
in the community. supplies which can be stored are best purchased
by the school trustees; while the mothers of the pupils should
furnish the perishable articles, such as milk and butter. as often
as possible, the pupils may be asked to bring various articles,
such as a potato, an apple, a carrot, an egg, etc. these may be
combined and prepared in quantities. the school garden should be
relied upon to supply many vegetables in season, thus adding
interest and life to both the garden work and the lunch. in some
districts the neighbourhood is canvassed for subscriptions in order
to provide funds to purchase supplies for the term lunches. some
schools give a concert or entertainment in order to raise funds for
this purpose, and in others all the supplies have been purchased by
the school trustees.
the pupils who are to prepare the hot dish may make the
necessary preparations before school or at recess, and they must so
time the cooking that the dish will be ready when required. they
should be allowed to leave their desks during school hours to give
it attention if necessary. in schools where this method is adopted,
it has been found that the privilege has never been abused, nor
have the other pupils been less attentive on account of it.
however, most of the recipes suggested later require little or no
attention while cooking.
at twelve o'clock the assigned pupils get the dish ready for
serving and set the table. the others wash their hands, tidy their
hair, and get their lunch boxes. all pass to their places. the
pupils who have prepared the dish may serve it, using trays to
carry each pupil's supply, or the pupils may pass in line before
the serving table and to their places, time being thus saved. when
the meal is finished, the pupils rise and bring their dishes to the
serving table and stack them with the other dishes. two remain
behind to clear up and wash the dishes, while the others go to
play. if the desks are used, each pupil is responsible for leaving
his own desk clean.
the pupils may be required to keep an account of the cost of the
food and to calculate the cost per head per day or per week. a
schedule of the market prices of food should be posted in a
conspicuous place, and the pupils may take turns in keeping these
prices up to date. a separate black-board may be used for this
purpose.
the dish chosen should be as simple as possible—a
vegetable or cream soup, cocoa, baked potatoes, baked apples, white
sauce with potatoes or other vegetables, apple sauce, rice pudding,
etc. it may be well, in some cases, to have plans made on friday
for the following week. as a rule, each day a little before or
after four o'clock, the recipe for the following day should be
discussed, the quantities worked out to suit the number of pupils, and
the supplies arranged for. the element of surprise should be made
use of occasionally, the pupils not being allowed to know the dish
until they take their places.
the following are some suggested menus in which the food brought
from home is supplemented by one hot dish. (the name of the hot
dish is printed in italics.)
. potato soup, meat sandwiches, orange,
sponge cake
. cream of tomato soup, bread and butter
sandwiches, stuffed egg, pear, oatmeal cookies
. apple cooked with bacon, bread and butter
sandwiches, gingerbread, milk
. cocoa, date sandwiches, celery, graham
crackers, apple
. stewed apples, egg sandwiches, plain cake,
prunes stuffed with cottage cheese
. custard, brown bread sandwiches, apple,
raisins, sauce, molasses cookies
. baked beans, bread and butter sandwiches,
fruit, sauce, molasses cookies
first
week
second
week
monday
potato soup
rice and milk
tuesday
cocoa
tomato soup
wednesday
coddled eggs
egg broth
thursday
creamed potatoes
chocolate custard
friday
soft custard
rice and tomato
third
week
fourth
week
monday
macaroni and cheese
rice soup
tuesday
creamed eggs
cocoa
wednesday
cheese soup
boiled rice and milk
thursday
apple sauce
soft-cooked eggs
friday
cheese
wheat pudding
first
week
second
week
monday
rice soup
macaroni and cheese
tuesday
cocoa
apple sauce
wednesday
baked apples
shirred eggs
thursday
custard
cheese soup
friday
baked eggs
apple custard
third
week
fourth
week
monday
potato soup
rice and tomato
tuesday
tapioca cream
apple custard
wednesday
cocoa
tomato soup
thursday
creamed potatoes
cracker pudding
friday
soft custard
cocoa
all the recipes given have been used with success in preparing
rural school lunches. the number that the recipe will serve is
generally stated and, where this number does not coincide with the
number of pupils in any particular school, the quantities required
may be obtained by division or multiplication. the recipes given in
the lessons on cooking may also be used in preparing the school
lunch, as each recipe states the number it will serve.
white sauce
 c. milk
½ tbsp. butter
 tbsp. flour
¼ tsp. salt
⅛ tsp. white pepper
reserve one quarter of the milk and scald
the remainder in a double boiler. mix the flour to a smooth paste
with an equal quantity of the cold milk and thin it with the
remainder. stir this gradually into the hot milk and keep stirring
until it thickens. add the butter, salt, and pepper, and cover
closely until required, stirring occasionally. this recipe makes a
sauce of medium consistency. to make a thick white sauce, use  or
 tablespoonfuls of flour to one cup of milk.
cocoa
 tbsp. ( tsp.) cocoa
 c. milk
 tbsp. ( tsp.) sugar
 c. boiling water
½ tsp. salt
scald the milk in a double boiler. mix the
cocoa, sugar, and salt, then stir in the boiling water and boil for
 minutes. add this mixture to the scalded milk. if a scum forms,
beat with a dover egg-beater for one minute. the preparation should
begin at half-past eleven, to have the cocoa ready at twelve
o'clock. (will serve eighteen.)
potato soup
qt. peeled potatoes cut in thin slices
tbsp. flour
qt. milk
⅛tsp. black pepper
tsp. salt
small onion
tsp. butter
½tsp. celery seed or a stock of
celery
before the opening of school, the potatoes
should be pared and put into cold water; and the butter, flour,
salt, and pepper should be thoroughly mixed. at eleven o'clock, the
potatoes, onion, and celery should be put on to boil gently and the
milk put into a double boiler to heat. when the vegetables are
tender, they should be strained with the cooking liquid into the
hot milk and the mixture bound with the flour. the soup should be
closely covered until required. (will serve ten.)
cream of pea soup
 can peas or  qt. fresh peas
 tbsp. flour
 pt. milk
 tsp. salt
 tbsp. butter
¼ tsp. pepper
heat the peas in their own water, or cook
them in boiling salted water until tender. put the milk to heat in
a double boiler. when the peas are tender, rub them, with the
cooking liquid, through a strainer into the scalded milk. add the
butter and flour rubbed to a smooth paste and stir until thickened.
season and cover until required. (will serve six pupils
generously.)
cream of tomato soup
 pt. or  can tomatoes
 qt. milk
tbsp. butter
sprig of parsley
tbsp. flour
¼tsp. white pepper
tsp. sugar
½ tsp. soda
 tsp. salt
cook the tomatoes slowly with the seasonings
for ten minutes and rub through a strainer. scald the milk, thicken
with the flour and butter rubbed to a paste, re-heat the tomatoes,
and add the soda, mix with the milk, and serve at once. (will serve
six pupils generously.)
cream of corn soup
 pt. cans corn
 slices onion
 pt. cold water
 qt. of thin white sauce
seasonings
the process is that used in making cream of
pea soup. when making the thin white sauce, place the onion in the
milk and leave it until the milk is scalded. then remove the onion
to the other mixture and make the sauce. this gives sufficient
onion flavour. (will serve eighteen.)
lima-bean soup
c. lima beans
tbsp. butter
qt. water
tbsp. flour
whole cloves
tbsp. minced onion
bay leaf
tbsp."carrot
tsp. salt
tbsp."celery
¼tsp. pepper
soak the beans overnight in soft water or in
hard water which has been boiled and cooled. if cold, hard water is
used, add ¼ tsp. baking-soda to  qt. of water. in the
morning, drain and put on to cook in  qt. of water. simmer until
tender. it takes  hours. cook the minced vegetables in the butter
for  minutes, being careful not to brown them. drain out the
vegetables and put them into the soup. put the flour and butter
into a pan and stir until smooth. add this mixture to the soup. add
the cloves, bay leaf, and seasonings, and simmer for  hour. rub
through a sieve. one cup of milk may be added. bring to the
simmering point and serve. (will serve eighteen.)
note.—if desired, the vegetables
may be used without browning and the cloves and bay leaf
omitted.
milk and cheese soup
c. milk
⅓c. grated cheese
tbsp. flour
salt and pepper to taste
thicken the milk with flour, cooking
thoroughly. this is best done in a double boiler, stirring
occasionally. when ready to serve, add cheese and seasoning. (will
serve six.)
cream of rice soup
tbsp. rice
½small onion
c. milk
stalks celery
 tbsp. butter
½bay leaf
salt and pepper to taste
scald the milk, add the well-washed rice,
and cook for  minutes in a closely covered double boiler. melt
the butter and cook the sliced onion and celery in it until tender,
but not brown. add these, with the bay leaf, to the contents of the
double boiler, cover, and let it stand on the back of the stove for
 minutes. strain, season with salt and pepper, re-heat, and
serve. note that the bay leaf is added and allowed to stand, to
increase the flavour, and may be omitted if desired. (will serve
six.)
rice pudding
 c. rice
 c. sugar
 c. water
 eggs
 c. milk
 tsp. salt
 c. fruit (chopped raisins) if
desired
wash the rice in a strainer placed over a
bowl of cold water, by rubbing the rice between the fingers. lift
the strainer from the bowl and change the water. repeat until the
water is clear. put the water in the upper part of a double boiler
directly over the fire, and when it boils rapidly, gradually add
the rice to it. boil rapidly for  minutes, then add the milk, to
which has been added the sugar, salt, and eggs slightly beaten.
cover, place in the lower part of the double boiler, and cook until
kernels are tender—from  minutes to  hour. if raisins are
used, add them before putting the rice in the double boiler. serve
with milk and sugar as desired. (will serve eighteen.)
rice pudding
 c. rice
 qt. milk
 c. raisins
 c. sugar
 tsp. salt
 tsp. cinnamon
prepare the rice and raisins and put them,
with the other ingredients, in a buttered pan. bake all forenoon,
stirring occasionally during the first hour. serve
with milk or cream. (will serve ten.)
cream of wheat
½ c. cream of wheat
½ tsp. salt
 c. boiling water
½ c. dates (chopped)
put the boiling water and salt in the upper
part of the double boiler directly over the heat. when boiling, add
the cereal slowly. stir constantly until the mixture thickens. add
the dates and cook for  minutes. place in the lower part of the
double boiler and cook at least  hour. serve with milk and sugar.
(will serve eighteen.)
scrambled eggs
 eggs
 tbsp. butter
 c. milk
 tsp. salt
pepper
beat the eggs until the yolks and whites are
well mixed. add the seasonings and milk. heat the frying-pan, melt
the butter in it, and turn in the egg mixture. cook slowly,
scraping the mixture from the bottom of the pan as it cooks. as
soon as a jelly-like consistency is formed, remove at once to a hot
dish or serve on toast. (will serve nine.)
creamed eggs
 hard-cooked eggs
 c. milk
 tbsp. butter
 tbsp. flour
salt and pepper
melt the butter, add the flour, and stir in
the milk gradually. cook well and season with salt and pepper. cut
hard-cooked eggs in small pieces and add them to the white sauce.
it may be served on toast. (will serve six.)
egg broth
 eggs
 c. hot milk
 tbsp. sugar
few grains salt
vanilla or nutmeg
beat the eggs and add the sugar and salt.
stir in the hot milk gradually, so that the eggs will cook
smoothly. flavour as desired. (will serve six.)
soft-cooked eggs
wash the eggs and put in a sauce-pan, cover with boiling water,
remove to the back of the stove or where the water will keep hot,
but not boil. let them stand, covered, from  to  minutes,
according to the consistency desired.
baked shirred eggs
butter small earthen cups. break an egg in each and sprinkle with a
few grains of salt and pepper and bits of butter. bake in a
moderate oven until the white is set. for shirred eggs proceed as
above, but to cook, place in a pan of hot water on the back of the
stove, until the white is set.
creamed potatoes
white sauce (medium consistency)
 tbsp. butter
 tbsp. flour
½ c. milk
salt and pepper
make a white sauce of the butter, flour,
milk, and seasonings. cut cold potatoes (about eight) into cubes or
slices and heat in the sauce. serve hot. (will serve nine.)
mashed potatoes
boil the potatoes, drain, and mash in the kettle in which they were
boiled. when free from lumps, add to each cup of mashed
potatoes:
 tsp. butter
 or more tbsp. hot milk
¼ tsp. salt
beat all together until light and creamy.
re-heat, and pile lightly, without smoothing, in a hot dish.
baked potatoes
use potatoes of medium size.
scrub thoroughly in water with a brush. place
in a pan in a hot oven. bake from  to  minutes. when done, roll
in a clean napkin and twist until the skin is broken. serve
immediately. (if no oven is available, place a wire rack on the top
of the stove. put the potatoes on this rack and cover them with a
large pan. when half cooked, turn.)
macaroni and cheese
 c. macaroni ( pieces)
 qt. boiling water
 tsp. salt
 c. white sauce (medium)
cook the macaroni in boiling salted water
until tender. drain, pour cold water over it, and drain it once
more. put the macaroni into a baking dish, sprinkling a layer of
grated cheese upon each layer of macaroni. pour in the sauce and
sprinkle the top with cheese. cook until the sauce bubbles up
through the cheese and the top is brown. to give variety,
finely-minced ham, boiled codfish, or any cold meat may be used
instead of the cheese. (will serve ten.)
cornstarch pudding
 qt. milk
½ tsp. salt
¾ c. cornstarch
¾ c. sugar
vanilla
scald the milk in a double boiler. mix the
sugar, cornstarch, and salt together. gradually add to the hot milk
and stir constantly until it thickens. cover, cook for  minutes,
add vanilla, and pour into cold, wet moulds. when set, turn out,
and serve with milk and sugar. (will serve nine.)
apple sauce
 tart apples
whole cloves (if desired)
¾ c. water
¾ c. sugar
piece of lemon rind (if
desired)
wipe, pare, quarter, and core the apples.
put the water, apples, lemon rind, and cloves into a sauce-pan.
cook covered until the apples are tender, but not broken. remove
the lemon peel and cloves. add the sugar a few minutes
before taking from the fire. the apples may be mashed or put
through a strainer. (will serve nine.)
note.—the lemon and the cloves may
be used when the apples have lost their flavour.
stewed prunes or other dried
fruit—apricots, apples, pears
¾ lb. fruit (about)
⅓ c. sugar
½ pt. of water
 or  slices lemon or
a few cloves and a piece of
cinnamon stick
wash the fruit thoroughly and soak
overnight. cook in the water in which it was soaked. cover, and
simmer until tender. when nearly cooked, add sugar and lemon juice.
the cloves and cinnamon should cook with the fruit. all flavourings
may be omitted, if desired. (will serve nine.)
soft custard
 c. milk
 eggs
 tbsp. sugar
½ tsp. vanilla
a few grains of salt
scald the milk in a double boiler. add the
sugar and salt to the eggs and beat until well mixed. stir the hot
milk slowly into the egg mixture and return to the double boiler.
cook, stirring constantly, until the spoon, when lifted from the
mixture, is coated. remove immediately from the heat, add vanilla,
and pour into a cold bowl. to avoid too rapid cooking, lift the
upper from the lower portion of the boiler occasionally. (will
serve six.)
tapioca custard pudding
 c. scalded milk
 tbsp. pearl, or minute, tapioca
 eggs slightly beaten
 tbsp. sugar
 tbsp. butter
a few grains of salt
minute tapioca requires no soaking. soak the
pearl tapioca one hour in enough cold water to cover it. drain, add
to the milk, and cook in a double boiler for  minutes. add to
remaining ingredients, pour into buttered baking-dish, and bake for
about  minutes in a slow oven. (will serve eight.)
rice and tomato
 c. cooked rice
 tbsp. butter
 tbsp. flour
 c. unstrained or  c. strained
tomato
 slice of onion minced
salt and pepper
cook the onion with the tomato until soft.
melt the butter, and add the flour, salt, and pepper. strain the
tomato, stir the liquid into the butter and flour mixture, and cook
until thick and smooth. add the rice, heat, and serve. (will serve
six.)
cracker pudding
 soda crackers
 eggs
 c. milk
 tbsp. sugar
½ tsp. salt
roll the crackers and soak them in milk.
beat the yolks and sugar well together and add to the first
mixture, with some salt. make a meringue with white of eggs, pile
lightly on top, and put in the oven till it is a golden brown.
serve hot. (will serve six.)
note.—dried bread crumbs may be
used in place of the crackers.
candied fruit peel
the candied peel of oranges, lemons,
grapefruit, and other fruits makes a good sweet which is
economical, because it utilizes materials which might otherwise be
thrown away. its preparation makes an interesting school exercise.
the skins can be kept in good condition for a long time in salt
water, which makes it possible to wait until a large supply is on
hand before candying them. they should be washed in clear water,
after removing from the salt water, boiled until tender, cut into
small pieces, and then boiled in a thick sugar syrup until they are
transparent. they should then be lifted from the syrup and allowed
to cool in such a way that the superfluous syrup will run off.
finally, they should be rolled in pulverized or granulated
sugar.
large number of recipes have been given, in order that a selection
may be made according to season, community conditions, and market
prices, and so that sufficient variety may be secured from day to
day.
attention given to this matter will be well repaid by the
improved health of the pupils, the greater interest taken in the
school by the parents, and the better afternoon work accomplished.
it has been well said: "the school lunch is not a departure from
the principle of the obligation assumed by educational authorities
toward the child, but an intensive application of the measures
adopted for the physical nurture of the child, to the end of
securing in adult years the highest efficiency of the citizen".
the rural school luncheon: department of
education, saskatchewan
the box luncheon: new york state college of
agriculture, cornell university
hints to housewives: issued by mayor
mitchell's food supply committee, new york city
home economics in village and rural schools:
kansas state agricultural college
home-made fireless cookers and their use:
farmers' bulletin, united states department of agriculture
hot lunches for rural schools: parts i and
ii, iowa state college of agriculture and mechanic arts
rural school lunches: university of idaho,
agricultural extension department
the rural school lunch: university of
illinois college of agriculture
the school luncheon: oregon agricultural
college
there is no school so unhappily situated or so poorly equipped
that it is unable to teach effectively the lessons previously
outlined in the "care of the home" and "sewing". now that a grant
in aid is provided by the department of education any rural school
may procure one of the sets of equipment for cooking suggested or
some modification thereof. as a stepping-stone to the provision of
that equipment and as a means of educating the people of the
district in regard to the advantages of teaching this branch of
household science, it may be advisable or even necessary, in some
cases, to attempt practical work, even where no equipment is
installed by the school authorities.
it should be remembered that the present position of manual
training and household science in urban schools is entirely owing
to private initiative and demonstration, by which the people were
shown how and why these subjects should be included in the
curriculum of the schools. it is reasonable to suppose that the
same results will follow if somewhat the same methods are tried in
the case of the rural schools, which form such a large part of our
educational system. two methods of giving instruction of this
character have, in the united states, been followed by successful
results.
in the first of these, the teacher spends the last thirty or
forty minutes, generally on friday afternoons, in the description
and discussion of some practical cooking problem which may be
performed in the homes of the pupils. before this plan is adopted,
it should be discussed with the pupils who are to take the work.
they should be required to promise that they will practise at home;
and the consent and co-operation of the parents should be secured,
as the success of this home work depends, in the first place, on
the willingness of the pupil to accept responsibility, and, in the
second place, on the honest and hearty co-operation of the
parents.
a meeting of the mothers should be called, in order that the
plan may be laid before them and their suggestions received. at
this meeting afternoon tea might be served. the teacher should plan
the lessons, but occasionally, particularly at festive seasons, the
pupils themselves should be allowed to decide what shall be made.
when it is possible, the food prepared at home should be brought by
the pupil to the school, in order that it may be compared with that
made by other pupils and be judged by the teacher. in other cases,
the mother might be asked to fill up a previously prepared form,
certifying to the amount and character of the work done at home by
the pupil each week.
the instructions placed on the black-board should be clear and
concise and give adequate information concerning materials,
quantities, and methods. they should be arranged in such a way as
to appeal to the eye and thus assist the memory. connected
composition should not be attempted, but the matter should be
arranged in a series of numbered steps, somewhat as follows:
recipe: boiled carrots
carrots
salt and pepper
boiling water
butter
. scrub, scrape, and rinse the carrots.
. cut them into pieces by dicing them.
. place the pieces in a sauce-pan.
. set over the fire and cover with boiling
water.
. cook until the pieces are soft at the centre
when pierced with a fork.
. serve in a hot vegetable dish.
after being thoroughly explained, these directions are placed in
a note-book, for the guidance of the pupil in her home practice. in
some cases, the directions are placed on properly punched cards, so
that at the end of the year every pupil will have a collection of
useful recipes and plans, each one of which she understands and has
worked out. in many lessons of this type demonstrations may be
given by the teacher and, if the food cannot be cooked on the
school stove, it may be taken home to be cooked by one of the
pupils.
lessons given according to this method, by which the theory is
given in school and the practice acquired at home, need not be
restricted to cookery. any of the lessons prescribed in the
curriculum for form iii, junior, may be treated in the same way.
lessons on the daily care of a bed-room, weekly sweeping, care and
cleaning of metals, washing dishes, washing clothes, ironing a
blouse and, in fact, on all subjects pertaining to the general care
and management of the home, may be given in this way.
each lesson should conclude with a carefully prepared
black-board summary, which should be neatly copied into the
note-books, to be periodically examined by the teacher. the
black-board work of many teachers leaves much to be desired, and
time spent in improving this will be well repaid. examples of
summaries of the kind referred to are to be found in the ontario
teachers' manual on household management. these instructions
may be type-written or hectographed by the teacher and given to
the pupils, thus saving the time spent in note-taking.
the second of the plans referred to is a modification of what is
known as the "crete" plan of household science, so called from the
name of the place in nebraska, u.s.a., where it was first put into
operation. by this plan, definite instruction is given in the home
kitchens of certain women in the district, under the supervision of
the educational authorities. it was adopted, at first, in
connection with the high schools of the small towns in that state
but, with certain modifications, it is suitable to our rural school
conditions.
in every community there are women who are known to be skilful
in certain lines of cookery, and the plan makes use of such women
for giving the required instruction. they become actually a part of
the staff of the school, giving instruction in household science,
and using the resources of their households as an integral part of
the school equipment.
in order to put this plan into operation, a meeting of women
interested in the school should be called and if, after the plan
has been laid before them and fully discussed, enough women are
willing to open their homes and act as instructors, then it is safe
to proceed. the subjects should be divided, and a scheme somewhat
as follows may be arranged:
mrs. a. bread and biscuits
mrs. b. pies and cakes
mrs. c. canning and preserving
mrs. d. gems and corn bread
mrs. e. desserts and salads
mrs. f. cookies and doughnuts
mrs. g. vegetables.
six has been found a convenient number for a class, though ten
is better, if the homes can accommodate that number. half-past
three is a good time for the classes to meet, as they then may be
concluded by five o'clock, thus leaving the housewife free to
prepare her evening meal. the day of the week should be chosen to
suit the convenience of the instructor. the classes may meet once a
week.
arriving at the home of the instructor at half-past three, the
pupils are seated in the most convenient room, and the lesson is
given. during this talk the pupils are given not only the recipe,
